pmcPLoS Negl Trop DisPLoS Negl Trop Dis532plosntd101291488plosPLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases1935-27271935-2735PLOSPMC12221164PMC12221164.112221164122211644057749010.1371/journal.pntd.0012893PNTD-D-25-001451Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesBacterial DiseasesAnthraxMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesZoonosesAnthraxBiology and Life SciencesAgricultureAnimal ManagementLivestockBiology and Life SciencesVeterinary ScienceVeterinary DiseasesBiology and Life SciencesNutritionDietFoodMedicine and Health SciencesNutritionDietFoodBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaAnimalsWildlifeBiology and Life SciencesZoologyAnimalsWildlifeMedicine and Health SciencesEpidemiologyMedical Risk FactorsPeople and PlacesGeographical LocationsAfricaZambiaMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesZoonosesAnthrax, livelihood vulnerability, and food insecurity in selected game management areas in Zambia: A mixed-methods analysis at the human-wildlife-livestock interface
Anthrax: Livelihood and alternative livelihoods in game management areas in ZambiaGondweLailaConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologySoftwareValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4662-0876MumbaChisoniConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSoftwareSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing BesaKezzyData curationFormal analysisValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing PhiriDaviesFormal analysisSoftwareValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing KabbudulaExilliaConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing MebeloNoangaData curationFormal analysisValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing SichoneSuwilanji S.ConceptualizationInvestigationValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing SinyangweNtazana N.ValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing KayulaMwilaConceptualizationValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing MaindaGeoffreyConceptualizationValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing KivariaFredrick M.ConceptualizationValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing BebayCharlesConceptualizationValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing SoumareBabaConceptualizationValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing NiwaelMtui-Malamsha J.ConceptualizationResourcesValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing MakunguChitwambiConceptualizationFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Department of Disease Control, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zambia, Lusaka, Zambia2
Department of Community Education and Lifelong Learning, University of Zambia, Lusaka, Zambia3
Pangolin Protection, Wild Crime Prevention (WCP), Chilanga, Zambia4
Emergency Centre for Transboundary Animal Diseases (ECTAD), The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Lusaka, Zambia5
Emergency Centre for Transboundary Animal Diseases (ECTAD), The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Nairobi, Kenya6
Emergency Centre for Transboundary Animal Diseases (ECTAD), The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Rome, ItalyPappasGeorgiosEditor ]. In Africa, including Zambia, livestock farming is a cornerstone of rural livelihoods, providing income, food security, and ecosystem services such as grazing, firewood, and medicinal plants [ , ]. However, livestock farmers in GMAs face mounting pressures from environmental changes, economic constraints, and the need to diversify income sources.
In response, many farmers have adopted alternative livelihood strategies such as crop farming, fishing, small-scale businesses, and wood collection [ ]. While these activities enhance financial stability, they also increase the risk of zoonotic disease transmission such as anthrax. Anthrax, caused by Bacillus anthracis, is particularly concerning due to its persistence in soil and its transmission through contact with infected animals or contaminated environments [ ]. In GMAs, the intersection of human and wildlife habitats amplifies anthrax exposure risks [ , ]. This is further exacerbated by climate change, which drives migration in search of pasture and food, often resulting in encroachment into protected wildlife areas [ , ]. Such encroachment increases human-wildlife interactions and conflicts, biodiversity loss, and zoonotic disease transmission. Improper disposal of infected carcasses during outbreaks compounds environmental contamination and infection cycles.
Recent outbreaks highlight the endemic nature of anthrax in Zambia. In 2023, an outbreak in Sinazongwe District, Southern Province, led to the deaths of two hippos and four cattle [ ]. This region, heavily reliant on livestock farming, has experienced repeated outbreaks, underscoring the need for enhanced disease surveillance and mitigation strategies.
This study examines how livelihood diversification influences anthrax exposure among livestock farmers in GMAs, highlighting the interconnected risks for animals and humans. We investigate socio-economic vulnerabilities that increase human exposure, including financial constraints limiting livestock vaccination, reliance on high-risk meat consumption, and occupational hazards faced by farmers handling infected carcasses. Furthermore, we assess how human-wildlife interactions shape livestock management, particularly whether increased contact with wildlife alters grazing behaviors, expands disease transmission pathways, or affects farmers’ disease mitigation decisions. The underlying hypothesis is that proximity to wildlife and shared environmental resources heightens anthrax risk by increasing livestock exposure to contaminated soils and carcasses, which in turn raises human infection risk. We integrate ecological, epidemiological, and socio-economic perspectives to inform strategies that promote sustainable livelihoods, wildlife conservation, and public health protection.

## 2. Methods

## 2.1. Ethics statement
We obtained ethical clearance from Excellence in Research Ethics and Science (ERES) Converge, reference number “2024-Aug-015.” We anonymized names of participants of Focus group discussions in the raw narratives using pseudonyms (A1, A2, A…) to safeguard confidentiality. We also de-identified all participant responses during transcription and securely stored raw data in compliance with ethical guidelines. We fully informed participants about the objectives of the study and assured them that their participation was voluntary, with the option to withdraw without any negative consequences. Formal verbal consent was obtained from participants. All research procedures complied with applicable ethical and regulatory guidelines for human subjects’ research in Zambia.

## 2.2. Study design
We employed a mixed-method research design, combining qualitative and quantitative data collection approaches. Focus groups were selected as a crucial qualitative technique to gather group perspectives, investigate socioeconomic factors affecting food security, knowledge, attitudes, and behaviours related to anthrax exposure, and promote candid conversations about the difficulties in managing the disease in GMAs. This method ensured a contextually sensitive and participative investigation of anthrax risk while enabling a comparative study of various livelihood choices. For quantitative data, we used a structured questionnaire.

## 2.3. Description of the study sites
We conducted the study in Simalaha Community Conservancy, Lochinvar, and Blue Lagoon National Parks in Southern and Western Provinces of Zambia, as shown in . Lochinvar and Blue Lagoon National Parks were selected because of the recent anthrax outbreaks in Southern Province which originated from wildlife (hippos). Simalaha Community Conservancy was selected because of the endemicity of anthrax disease in Western Province. These study areas also host the largest livestock population in Zambia, a critical human-wildlife-livestock interface area which makes understanding of disease dynamics better.
 Simalaha Conservancy is located in Western Province of Zambia. This conservancy encompasses communities from Mwandi and parts of Sesheke districts. Simalaha plays a critical role in wildlife conservation and community livelihoods, as it lies within one of the six key wildlife dispersal corridors of the Kavango-Zambezi Transfrontier Conservation Area (KAZA TFCA) [ ]. Specifically, it is part of the Chobe-Zambezi dispersal area, which connects Chobe National Park in Botswana with Kafue National Park in Zambia. This corridor facilitates the migration and movement of key wildlife species, contributing to biodiversity conservation in the region.
The Simalaha Conservancy is also notable for its community-driven approach to conservation, where local people actively manage natural resources and promote sustainable coexistence between humans and wildlife [ , ]. However, this proximity to wildlife brings challenges, including an increased risk of zoonotic disease transmission, such as anthrax, which thrives in areas of close human-wildlife-livestock interactions. Even though there are many ecological and epidemiological elements that contribute to anthrax epidemics, human-wildlife-livestock interactions are a major study focus because they shape disease dynamics. The ecological and socioeconomic importance of this region makes it an ideal site for studying the complex dynamics of anthrax transmission and identifying interventions that can balance public health and conservation goals.
The other study sites are Lochinvar and Blue Lagoon National Parks, located within the Kafue Flats in Zambia ( ). We specifically selected these study sites due to the endemicity of anthrax in areas surrounding most national parks, highlighting their importance in understanding disease dynamics at the human-wildlife-livestock interface.
Lochinvar National Park, situated on the southern edge of the Kafue Flats, encompasses a vast floodplain formed by the Kafue River between the Itezhi-Tezhi dam to the west and the Kafue Gorge to the east. The park is renowned for its rich biodiversity, particularly its significant populations of Kafue lechwe, a semi-aquatic antelope species endemic to Zambia, and a wide variety of bird species. Its ecological importance does, however, come with drawbacks, such as the overall risk of zoonotic disease transmission in regions where interactions between people, animals, and cattle are common. Environmental features include floodplain ecosystems with seasonal water changes, nutrient-rich soils that allow spore persistence, and carcass decomposition dynamics that facilitate bacterial amplification are particularly important in anthrax epidemics [ ].
Blue Lagoon National Park, located approximately 120 kilometres west of Lusaka on the Kafue Flats, shares similar ecological and conservation importance. It serves as a critical habitat for wildlife, including waterbirds and other herbivore species, while also supporting local communities through tourism and ecosystem services [ ]. The proximity of both parks to human settlements may increase the likelihood of interactions between wildlife, livestock, and humans, which may amplify the potential for anthrax outbreaks.

## 2.4. Sample size estimation

## 2.4.1. Quantitative data.
We lacked precise information on the total number of households in each village. Therefore, we used the sample size estimation formula for unknown populations in Epitools (http://epitools.ausvet.com.au/). Assuming unknown household population in study locations, a confidence level of 95%, estimated proportion of 50%, and desired precision of 5%, the necessary sample size was calculated at 385 respondents, assuming random sampling. Since there were 3 study sites, we multiplied 385 by 3 to get a sample size of 1,155 households.

## 2.4.2. Qualitative data.
The sample size for focus group discussions (FGD) was six [ ] comprised of 3 women and 3 men’s groups. The sample size (N) was arrived at after reaching a data saturation point for focus group discussions. Strauss and Corbin [ ], state that Researchers should continue data collection until no new or relevant information emerges within a given category. Data saturation was assessed through an iterative process, involving continuous analysis of data as it emerged from each focus group discussion (FGD). This process included regularly reviewing and interpreting the collected data.

## 2.5. Data collection techniques

## 2.5.1. Quantitative data.
We conducted three online meetings to develop a structured questionnaire and plan data collection across three Game Management Areas. The questionnaire was initially drafted in English and circulated among all authors for feedback. This served as a pretest to evaluate its clarity, strengths, and weaknesses, as well as its ability to capture the intended responses. After incorporating the authors’ input, we exported the questionnaire into ZOHO software (https://survey.zoho.com/survey) and shared the link with the 26 recruited data collectors (veterinary assistants, agricultural extension officers, and game scouts) through a social media group. This provided an additional layer of pretesting to ensure data quality.
We refined the online questionnaire based on feedback from data collectors, who shared insights on how farmers might interpret the questions. Subsequently, we organized three one-day workshops in each study location to train the data collectors. During these workshops, we observed each data collector administer at least five questionnaires using both online and offline versions on electronic devices.
We piloted the questionnaire in Monze district, which revealed redundancies and areas requiring clarification. Following this pilot, we revised the questionnaire to eliminate repetitive and ambiguous questions. Once finalized, we initiated data collection across all study locations, incorporating input from researchers, farmers, and enumerators. During face-to-face interviews, the questionnaire was translated into the relevant local languages—Tonga, Ila, and Lozi—to ensure effective communication and accurate data collection.

## 2.5.2. Qualitative data.
We developed a checklist FGD guide to maintain consistency across discussions and allow flexibility. The guide contained open-ended questions that allowed participants to share their knowledge of anthrax, including symptoms, transmission, and prevention; the influence of cultural beliefs and practices on perceptions of anthrax; the economic and social impacts of anthrax outbreaks on livelihoods and community dynamics; and the perceived role of wildlife as potential sources of anthrax.
We then asked district veterinary officers to identify gate keepers in each community who would recruit members of the focus group meetings and organise venues at respective schools in each study site. Gatekeepers represent the link between the facilitators of focus group meetings and stakeholders and thus play a brokering role and control access to the community [ ]. The gatekeepers were community leaders from the traditional leadership who recruited 6–12 women and men for focus group meetings. The selection of participants for the focus group meetings was left to the gatekeepers, with the guidance to include active members of the community. Participants in the focus group meetings were not involved in the cross-sectional survey or discussion by the facilitators in order to avoid them coming with preconceived ideas to the meeting. The agenda of the focus group meetings was shared with gatekeepers who shared it with the participants of the focus group discussions. Each meeting started with scene preparation with a sitting arrangement in a C-shaped form as recommended by similar studies [ – ]. Each FGD was a minimum of 60 minutes to a maximum of 90 minutes. The discussions were in the daily language of each participating community (Silozi, Ila, and Tonga).

## 2.6. Data management and analysis

## 2.6.1. Quantitative data.
We downloaded the collected data from ZOHO software in Microsoft Excel format. We also downloaded a full report for results for frequencies which were automatically generated by ZOHO software in pdf format. The data in Microsoft Excel was cleaned and exported to R software version 4.2.1 for analysis. Descriptive statistics, such as frequencies and percentages, were used to summarize socio-demographic characteristics, livelihood, and alternative livelihood. All analyses were conducted using the dplyr R package to ensure accurate computation and visualization

## 2.6.2 Qualitative data.
We downloaded audio recordings from the recorder to computers and named the audio files based on the location and gender of the group. Independent native speakers of the local languages (Silozi, Ila, and Tonga) transcribed the recordings verbatim and translated them into English for analysis. One researcher manually coded the data after carefully reading and re-reading the narratives. The initial coding involved broad categorization based on significant themes derived from the topic guides in the checklist. Subsequently, we conducted more detailed coding to break the major themes into sub-themes.
We created framework matrices by extracting key quotes under each sub-theme and summarizing the narratives under each major theme. These matrices facilitated cross-checking of findings from the cross-sectional survey with the narratives from focus group participants, enabling us to identify divergent or supporting perspectives. To maintain anonymity, we replaced identities in the raw narratives with placeholders (e.g., A1) in the results section.

## 3. Results

## 3.1. Results for quantitative data

## 3.1.1. Socio-demographic characteristics.
The study revealed that a larger proportion of respondents were male (57.7%), while females accounted for 42.3% as shown in . The majority of respondents fell within the 36–40 age group, indicating that middle-aged adults were the most represented demographic in the study. Most participants (65.9%) reported being married, reflecting the predominance of family-oriented households in the study population. Regarding educational attainment, 59.9% of respondents indicated having completed primary school, suggesting limited access to higher education among the population.
 The findings further indicated that 65.7% of respondents identified as household heads, demonstrating a strong sense of individual responsibility within the sampled communities. Among these household heads, the largest proportion (28.1%) oversaw families with 4–5 members, followed closely by those managing households with 6–7 members (25.3%). These figures highlight the prevalence of moderately sized families in the study area.

## 3.1.2. Livelihood and alternative livelihood.
The findings revealed that crop farming was the primary source of income for most respondents, with 42.2% relying on it as their main livelihood as shown in . Livestock farming emerged as an important alternative income source, reported by 34.7% of participants. Despite these economic activities, the majority of respondents reported monthly incomes below ZMW 1,000 (USD35), highlighting the limited financial resources within the study population.
 When asked about household savings, most respondents (61.7%) indicated that they did not have any form of savings. Among the 38.3% who reported having savings, mobile money platforms (41.5%) and village banking systems (40.4%) were the most common methods for saving.
A significant proportion of respondents (87.9%) reported experiencing the adverse effects of dry spells in the past, which had a notable impact on their livelihoods. To cope with these challenges, many households turned to alternative activities such as livestock farming (38.7%), charcoal burning (31.7%), fishing (18%), and gardening (40.2%). The types of livestock farmed included, cattle, goats, sheep, chickens, rabbits, and pigs.
The results further indicated that 29.5% of households benefited from social cash transfer programs, suggesting limited access to government-led social protection initiatives. Additionally, respondents reported receiving minimal support from government, NGOs, and donors to cope with drought conditions. Relief food provided by the World Food Programme (WFP) was identified as the primary form of external assistance, but it was only received by 13.1% of respondents as shown in .

## 3.2. Results for qualitative data: Food security and livelihoods
This theme examines the interconnectedness of food security and livelihoods within the context of anthrax. It explores the diverse food sources relied upon by communities, the impact of anthrax on food availability and access, and the potential for diversifying livelihoods to enhance resilience.

## 3.2.1. Food sources.
The data reveals a reliance on diverse food sources, including livestock, crops, and wild foods. Game meat, in particular, plays a significant role in the diets and livelihoods of many communities, especially those living in close proximity to wildlife areas.

Kazungula Men

: A2: “We depend on fishing and farming. We also hunt for food, especially during the dry season when crops are scarce”.

Mumbwa Women

: A3: “We mostly rely on crop farming for our food. But we also keep some chickens and goats for meat and milk”.

The diversity of food sources reflects the adaptive strategies employed by communities to ensure food security in different seasons and environmental conditions. However, the reliance on game meat also highlights the potential vulnerability to anthrax outbreaks, which can disrupt access to this important food source.

## 3.2.2. Impact of anthrax on food security.
Anthrax outbreaks can have a significant impact on food security, particularly when they result in livestock deaths and restrictions on meat consumption. This can lead to reduced protein intake, nutritional deficiencies, and increased vulnerability to hunger and poverty.

Kazungula Women

: A4: “When the anthrax outbreak happened, we lost many of our cattle. This made it very difficult for us to feed our families. We had to rely on government assistance for food”.

Mumbwa Men

: A5: “The restrictions on meat sales during the anthrax outbreak affected our income. We could not sell our livestock and we had to spend money on buying food that we normally get from our animals”.

The impact of anthrax on food security underscores the need for interventions that not only control the disease but also support communities in coping with its consequences. This may involve providing food aid, promoting alternative food sources, and strengthening social safety nets.

## 3.2.3. Alternative livelihoods.
Participants highlighted the importance of diversifying livelihoods to reduce dependence on livestock and game meat, thereby enhancing resilience in the face of anthrax outbreaks and other shocks. They expressed interest in exploring alternative income-generating activities, such as beekeeping, poultry farming, and small-scale businesses.

Kazungula Men

: A6: “We need to find other ways to make a living so that we are not solely dependent on our livestock. If we have other sources of income, we can better cope with challenges like anthrax outbreaks”.

Mumbwa Women

: A7: “I would like to learn new skills so that I can start a small business. This would help me to earn money and provide for my family, even if we lose our livestock to anthrax”.

Promoting diversification of livelihoods can enhance community resilience and reduce vulnerability to food insecurity. This requires providing training, access to credit, and market opportunities for alternative income-generating activities [ ].

## 3.3. Cross-checking of findings from the cross-sectional survey with the narratives from focus group participants

## 3.3.1. Socio-demographic characteristics and livelihood context.
The quantitative findings revealed that the majority of respondents were middle-aged, married, and primarily engaged in crop farming, with livestock farming serving as an alternative livelihood source. Additionally, limited access to higher education and formal savings mechanisms characterized the study population.
Qualitative data provided depth to this understanding, as participants emphasized their dependence on subsistence farming, livestock, and informal income sources. For instance, one participant stated:

“We depend on fishing and farming. We also hunt for food, especially during the dry season when crops are scarce.”

## 3.3.2. Food security and the impact of anthrax.
Quantitative findings indicated that 87.9% of respondents experienced the adverse effects of drought, which exacerbated food insecurity. Households relied heavily on adaptive strategies such as gardening (40.2%), charcoal burning (31.7%), and fishing (18%). Furthermore, the quantitative data revealed that 69.1% of respondents did not receive external drought-related assistance, underscoring the community’s vulnerability.
The qualitative data added nuance, illustrating how anthrax outbreaks compounded food insecurity. For instance, one respondent shared:

“When the anthrax outbreak happened, we lost many of our cattle. This made it very difficult for us to feed our families. We had to rely on government assistance for food.”

This integration underscores the dual challenges of climatic shocks and zoonotic diseases on food security. It demonstrates the need for comprehensive interventions to address both immediate and systemic drivers of food insecurity.

## 3.3.3. Livelihood diversification as a coping strategy.
The quantitative data revealed that households employed a range of coping mechanisms, including charcoal burning (31.7%) and livestock farming (38.7%). However, less than 30% of households benefited from social cash transfer programs or other forms of support.
Qualitative insights reinforced the need for livelihood diversification, as participants expressed interest in beekeeping, poultry farming, and small-scale businesses to reduce reliance on livestock and game meat:

“We need to find other ways to make a living so that we are not solely dependent on our livestock.”

The integration of data highlights the importance of empowering communities with skills, resources, and market access to pursue alternative livelihoods. This may also reduce poaching wildlife for survival among communities living in Game Management Areas

## 4. Discussion
The study explored the relationship between alternative livelihoods in Game Management Areas (GMAs) and livestock farmers’ exposure to anthrax, revealing critical insights into the socio-economic and ecological dynamics at play. The demographic profile of respondents indicates that the majority were male (57.2%), a pattern often linked to men’s role in livestock herding and management [ ]. Additionally, 65.9% of respondents were married, which may reflect the prioritization of livestock as a family asset. Married farmers, driven by family dependencies, might engage in high-risk livestock management practices despite anthrax-related dangers [ ]. For instance, farmers who practice the ‘’mafisa” system, which involves loaning cattle to others for herding, like in the Western Province of Zambia, often lead animals being moved across numerous areas, increasing the potential for disease spreading, including anthrax, while cattle move through contaminated areas [ ].
Education levels varied among respondents, with most having some form of formal education. Educated farmers are more likely to seek veterinary advice and vaccinate their animals, which helps mitigate disease risks [ ]. However, 7.33% of respondents had no formal education, which may limit access to critical information and veterinary services, increasing the likelihood of anthrax exposure.
Family sizes were predominantly below six members, with an average slightly lower than the national average of six [ ]. Larger households may have more members engaged in livelihood activities, increasing exposure to anthrax-prone environments. Livelihood diversification among farmers in GMAs includes crop farming, charcoal burning, fishing, livestock rearing, and small businesses. While diversification offers financial stability, activities such as charcoal burning disturb anthrax spores in soil, increasing exposure risks [ ]. Charcoal burning aids in exposing the anthrax spores as it involves, cutting of trees, uprooting of roots and disturbing top soils which can expose dormant anthrax and make them more accessible to human and livestock and can alter soils condition [ ]. Furthermore, burning charcoal causes deforestation, which diminishes natural habitats and brings wildlife closer to areas utilized for cattle grazing and human habitation. Increased contact may make it easier for anthrax to spread, particularly if the bacteria is present in wildlife or livestock. According to a research conducted in Chama District, in the Eastern Province of Zambia, where an anthrax outbreak occurred and resulted in 511 human cases and 85 hippopotamus deaths, environmental changes and food deprivation caused animal and human activity to come into closer contact [ ]. A significant proportion of respondents reported household savings below ZMW1,000 (USD 35), primarily managed through mobile and village banking. According to the Zambia Statistics Agency’s living conditions monitoring survey, the average monthly household income in rural areas was estimated to be K2112.20 (less than $100), while the poverty threshold revealed that 60% of Zambians lived below the national poverty line, with a range of 78.7% in rural areas and 31.9% in urban areas [ ]. These savings are primarily managed through mobile and village banking. Limited financial buffers exacerbate vulnerability to zoonotic diseases like anthrax, as poverty constrains investments in preventive measures such as vaccination of livestock against diseases like anthrax [ ]. Much as income diversification enhances resilience, it can also expose farmers to new risks, including anthrax, due to increased interactions with wildlife in GMAs such as butchering of animals (wild or domestic) that have died of anthrax, or digging in the ground and creating spore-containing aerosols, would be potential ways of contracting anthrax in this setting [ , ].
Farmers demonstrated varying levels of awareness regarding anthrax. Informal networks, including family and local veterinary officers, were the primary sources of information. While community-based information dissemination can be effective, gaps in knowledge regarding preventive measures and vaccination protocols remain. Previous studies highlight that awareness alone is insufficient, as economic pressures often compel farmers to engage in risky practices, such as handling carcasses of animals that died from unknown causes [ ]. Targeted awareness campaigns, coupled with livelihood support, could significantly reduce anthrax risks [ ].
The study revealed that 87.95% of farmers experienced prolonged dry spells, increasing competition for scarce resources and driving interactions between livestock and wildlife. Such conditions often force farmers to adopt coping strategies, including gardening, hunting, fishing, and trading game meat. However, these activities heighten anthrax exposure risks. For instance, gardening may disturb dormant anthrax spores in contaminated soil, while hunting and fishing increase contact with wildlife reservoirs of anthrax [ , ]. Although gardening typically requires access to water, participants identified it as a viable coping strategy during dry spells due to the availability of residual moisture near riverbanks, floodplains, or hand-dug wells in certain locations. In these areas, communities were able to grow fast-maturing vegetables or drought-tolerant crops on a small scale for household consumption and local sale. This form of gardening served as a supplementary food and income source, particularly when rainfall-dependent crops failed. However, its feasibility varied depending on local water access and was not uniformly available across all sites.
Alarmingly, 69.11% of respondents reported having no formal support mechanisms during drought, while only a few relied on government support, such as food security programs and emergency drought responses. Resource scarcity during climatic shocks has been shown to increase reliance on high-risk practices, further heightening anthrax exposure. While managing livestock in areas where anthrax is widespread is inherently risky, households may unintentionally become more vulnerable to the disease as a result of their increasing reliance on alternative sources of income like fishing, charcoal burning, and small-scale enterprises. For instance, in the recent anthrax outbreaks in Southern Province, fishermen were the first ones to be involved in butchering floating hippos that died of anthrax (Personal communication). This is because the risk of outbreaks may increase if focus, effort, and resources are taken away from vital animal care procedures, including vaccination, disease surveillance, and pasture management. Studies emphasize the need for social safety nets to reduce dependence on high-risk practices during crises [ ]. Additionally, a study conducted in the Western Province of Zambia revealed that anthrax outbreaks were more likely to occur during dry months when human occupancy of the floodplain increased, suggesting that seasonal migration and reliance on the floodplains for livelihood during dry spells contribute to heightened anthrax risks [ ].
The reliance on immediate income-generating activities such as charcoal burning, fishing, and small-scale businesses often diverts attention and resources away from vaccinating livestock against diseases, increasing the risk of anthrax transmission and maintenance. Studies emphasize the need for social safety nets to reduce dependence on high-risk practices during crises [ ]. However, critics argue that such support systems are often insufficient, leaving gaps that perpetuate vulnerability [ ].

## 4.1. Implications of the study on policy
This study has important implications for public health policy, livestock management, and rural development in Game Management Areas in Zambia. The findings demonstrate that livelihood diversification, though essential for economic resilience, may inadvertently increase community exposure to anthrax through high-risk coping strategies such as charcoal burning, fishing, and reliance on contaminated game meat. This underscores the need for integrated and context-specific interventions that align environmental conservation goals with public health and socio-economic stability.
First, the study highlights the critical importance of strengthening disease surveillance and veterinary services in high-risk areas. Improved access to livestock vaccinations and timely outbreak response mechanisms can significantly reduce the burden of anthrax among rural communities. Public health education that links disease prevention with safe livelihood practices is equally essential, particularly in areas where informal knowledge networks are the primary sources of information.
Second, the data underscore the value of investing in sustainable livelihood alternatives, such as beekeeping, poultry farming, and small-scale enterprises. These alternatives offer pathways to reduce dependence on risky practices while improving household income and food security. However, successful implementation requires enabling conditions, including access to training, microfinance, markets, and infrastructure.
Third, the gendered dimensions of vulnerability revealed by this study call for women-centered programming. Women often bear the brunt of food insecurity and lack access to resources for livelihood diversification. Tailored support for women’s economic empowerment and participation in disease prevention programs is essential to strengthen household and community resilience.
Finally, the study illustrates the value of mixed-methods approaches in understanding complex health-environment-livelihood systems. Integrating quantitative data with qualitative insights provided a richer understanding of the socio-cultural and economic drivers behind anthrax exposure, enabling more targeted and actionable recommendations.

## 4.2. Study limitations and future research
While this study provides valuable insights into the socio-economic and ecological dynamics influencing anthrax exposure in Zambia’s GMAs, several limitations must be acknowledged. First, the reliance on self-reported data through structured questionnaires and focus group discussions introduces potential recall and reporting biases.
Second, the study was conducted in selected sites within Southern and Western Provinces, which may limit the generalizability of the findings to other GMAs or regions with different ecological or socio-cultural contexts.
Third, while the quantitative sample size was statistically estimated, qualitative insights were derived from a limited number of focus groups, which may not fully capture the diversity of experiences across communities.
Lastly, logistical and resource constraints restricted deeper investigation into environmental sampling or pathogen surveillance, which would have strengthened the ecological inferences. Future research should explore this aspect.

## 4.3. Conclusion and recommendations
This study demonstrates the critical interconnectedness of anthrax, food insecurity, and livelihood strategies in rural Zambian communities living within Game Management Areas. While alternative livelihoods such as charcoal burning, fishing, and informal trade provide economic buffers during climatic and disease shocks, they also inadvertently increase exposure to anthrax through heightened contact with contaminated environments and wildlife. Tailored interventions emphasizing community empowerment, gender-sensitive livelihood diversification, and improved access to veterinary and extension services are urgently needed to mitigate zoonotic disease risks and strengthen resilience. A One Health approach that integrates public health, animal health, and environmental sustainability is essential for reducing vulnerabilities in these high-risk settings.

The authors are grateful to staff members of the Department of Veterinary Services in the Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries in Monze, Kazungula and Mumba District for facilitating data collection. AI was used for qualitative data analysis and to improve the language of this article: OpenAI. (2024). ChatGPT [Large language model]. https://chatgpt.com.
 10.1371/journal.pntd.0012893.r001Decision Letter 0
BlacksellStuartSection Editor© 2025 Stuart Blacksell2025Stuart Blacksellhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0Anthrax, Livelihood Vulnerability, and Food Insecurity in Selected Game Management Areas in Zambia: A Mixed-Methods Analysis at the Human-Wildlife-Livestock Interface
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
Dear Dr. Mumba,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases's publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript within 60 days May 11 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosntds@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pntd/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
* A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'. This file does not need to include responses to any formatting updates and technical items listed in the 'Journal Requirements' section below.
* A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
* An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, competing interests statement, or data availability statement, please make these updates within the submission form at the time of resubmission. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Georgios Pappas
Section Editor
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
Stuart Blacksell
Section Editor
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
Shaden Kamhawi
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
orcid.org/0000-0003-4304-636XX
Paul Brindley
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
orcid.org/0000-0003-1765-0002

Journal Requirements:

1) Please ensure that the CRediT author contributions listed for every co-author are completed accurately and in full.
At this stage, the following Authors/Authors require contributions: Laila Gondwe, Chisoni Mumba, Kezzy Besa, Davies Phiri, Exillia Kabbudula, Noanga Mebelo, Suwilanji Sichone, Ntazana N Sinyangwe, Mwila Kayula, Mainda Geoffrey, Kivaria M. Fredrick, Charles Bebay, Soumare Baba, Mtui-Malamsha J. Niwael, and Chitwambi Makungu. Please ensure that the full contributions of each author are acknowledged in the "Add/Edit/Remove Authors" section of our submission form.
The list of CRediT author contributions may be found here: https://journals.plos.org/plosntds/s/authorship#loc-author-contributions
2) Please upload all main figures as separate Figure files in .tif or .eps format. For more information about how to convert and format your figure files please see our guidelines: 

https://journals.plos.org/plosntds/s/figures

3) We have noticed that you have uploaded Supporting Information files, but you have not included a list of legends. Please add a full list of legends for your Supporting Information files after the references list.
4) Some material included in your submission may be copyrighted. According to PLOSu2019s copyright policy, authors who use figures or other material (e.g., graphics, clipart, maps) from another author or copyright holder must demonstrate or obtain permission to publish this material under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) License used by PLOS journals. Please closely review the details of PLOSu2019s copyright requirements here: PLOS Licenses and Copyright. If you need to request permissions from a copyright holder, you may use PLOS's Copyright Content Permission form.
Please respond directly to this email and provide any known details concerning your material's license terms and permissions required for reuse, even if you have not yet obtained copyright permissions or are unsure of your material's copyright compatibility. Once you have responded and addressed all other outstanding technical requirements, you may resubmit your manuscript within Editorial Manager. 
Potential Copyright Issues:
- Figures 1 and 2. Please provide a direct link to the base layer of the map (i.e., the country or region border shape) and ensure this is also included in the figure legend; and provide a link to the terms of use / license information for the base layer image or shapefile. We cannot publish proprietary or copyrighted maps (e.g. Google Maps, Mapquest) and the terms of use for your map base layer must be compatible with our CC BY 4.0 license.
Note: if you created the map in a software program like R or ArcGIS, please locate and indicate the source of the basemap shapefile onto which data has been plotted.
If your map was obtained from a copyrighted source please amend the figure so that the base map used is from an openly available source. Alternatively, please provide explicit written permission from the copyright holder granting you the right to publish the material under our CC BY 4.0 license.
If you are unsure whether you can use a map or not, please do reach out and we will be able to help you. The following websites are good examples of where you can source open access or public domain maps:
* U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) - All maps are in the public domain. (http://www.usgs.gov)
* PlaniGlobe - All maps are published under a Creative Commons license so please cite u201cPlaniGlobe, http://www.planiglobe.com, CC BY 2.0u201d in the image credit after the caption. (http://www.planiglobe.com/?lang=enl)
* Natural Earth - All maps are public domain. (http://www.naturalearthdata.com/about/terms-of-use/).
5) Please ensure that the funders and grant numbers match between the Financial Disclosure field and the Funding Information tab in your submission form. Note that the funders must be provided in the same order in both places as well.
- State the initials, alongside each funding source, of each author to receive each grant. For example: "This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health (####### to AM; ###### to CJ) and the National Science Foundation (###### to AM)."
- State what role the funders took in the study. If the funders had no role in your study, please state: "The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.".
If you did not receive any funding for this study, please simply state: u201cThe authors received no specific funding for this work.u201d

Reviewers' Comments:

Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Key Review Criteria Required for Acceptance?

As you describe the new analyses required for acceptance, please consider the following:

Methods:

-Are the objectives of the study clearly articulated with a clear testable hypothesis stated?
-Is the study design appropriate to address the stated objectives?
-Is the population clearly described and appropriate for the hypothesis being tested?
-Is the sample size sufficient to ensure adequate power to address the hypothesis being tested?
-Were correct statistical analysis used to support conclusions?
-Are there concerns about ethical or regulatory requirements being met?
Reviewer #1: Well described and complete
Reviewer #2: The objectives and hypothesis are not clear, albeit indicated. Based on this, the study design is appropriate but all descriptions need improvement. Statistics are used for demographic data, unnecessarily, but not presented for other data. There is no information about ethical or regulatory requirements.
Detailed comments:
L116-120: these sentences are wordy and difficult to follow. It would help if you could specify which aspects are associated with animal outbreaks and which are connected to human outbreaks, and which can be linked to both. In addition, it is unclear how you examine how human-wildlife interactions have effects on livestock management, what is the hypothesis behind this statement?
It is somewhat contradictory that the topic is presented as sensitive (L128) and therefore anonymisation is needed ( L132) but study participants were still expected to provide their collective insights and diverse perspectives in a truthful way (L143). Given this, some justification for choosing the FGD methodology is needed.
L 161-162: it is not only the human-wildlife-livestock interaction that makes anthrax thrive. I suggest to tone down this aspect somewhat and rephrase to something along the lines of this aspect being relevant for the impact of anthrax outbreaks and also relevant to the interest of the study. The sentence on L 172 about understanding disease dynamics at the interface is a better argument for choosing the study areas. The choice of these particular national parks is still not very obvious, as it is stated that anthrax is endemic around (and presumably within?) most national parks (L171).
Figure 1 is a little difficult to interpret without close inspection, some better highlighting of the study area is needed. Figure 2 is also difficult to interpret for a reader not familiar with a map of Zambia. I suggest making one map of Zambia with all study sites clearly marked while also highlighting the areas of interest that are indicated in the current maps.
L179: the aspects highlighted on this line are very important for anthrax but not necessarily for other zoonoses, so the sentence may need some rephrasing. I would prefer if the specific risk factors for anthrax was clarified in one place and the general risks for zoonotic transmission described as such. Now there is a mix of transmission aspects that are relevant for many zoonotic diseases, and environmental aspects that are particularly relevant for anthrax but described as if applicable for various zoonoses.
L183-185: here it is already presumed that the interaction in itself amplifies the risk of outbreaks, while it was stated that the drivers of outbreaks would be investigated in the study. Do you mean that the disease is transmitted directly between these populations and, if yes, based on what evidence?
L204-207: this sentence needs rephrasing. How can determining saturation of the data involve recruiting FGD participants and conducting FGDs? I presume that data saturation was determined by continuous examination of the data as it emerged from each FGD but that is not what is stated here.
Table 1 and 2 could be put in supplementary material, as they do not contribute substantially to the understanding of the study.
L246-247 and L250: the logic of gatekeepers recruiting active members of the community and them sharing the agenda with the school teachers is hard to follow. Wsa this because the FGDs took place on the school premises, or because school teachers were involved in the recruitment? Pleas clarify the role of the headteachers and the precise method of participant recruitment by the gatekeepers.
L 253-254: Please delete the sentence ‘We then conducted focus group meeting. ‘ as it is unnecessary.
Paragraph 2.5.1 Why was there no multivariable analysis? Please justify.
L 273-274: Please delete the first sentence of this paragraph as it is unnecessary.
Reviewer #3: Methods Section Evaluation:
Objectives and Hypothesis: The objectives of the study are adequately stated in the abstract and introduction. In particular, the study seeks to understand the socio-economic impacts of anthrax outbreaks and associated stressors such as food insecurity and livelihood vulnerabilities among rural Zambian communities. No formal, explicit testable hypotheses are presented, but the study successfully explores the possible relationships between anthrax outbreaks and their links to livelihood strategies as well as food security through the methods used.
Study Design: In view of the complexity and heterogeneity of factors affecting the socio-economic burden of anthrax, a mixed-methods approach using quantitative surveys and qualitative focus group discussions simultaneously is appropriate. This design takes a mixed-methods approach that marries a broad range of data collection with in-depth qualitative insights to create rich perspectives.
Population Description: The population definition is specific, being rural communities in designated Zambia GMAs. The appropriateness of this choice relies upon the frequency of anthrax and the interactions of humans, wildlife, and livestock in these designated regions, which in the introduction, are characterized as considerable.
Sample Size: The paper provides a sample size calculation for the quantitative survey, using the formula for unknown populations. The rationale for the qualitative sample size (6 focus groups) is included in relation to data saturation. Although these group sizes aren't small, the lack of raw data (which might be available from the authors) and/or a power calculation means no final conclusions can be drawn.
Statistical Analysis: The authors claim appropriate statistical analyses were used to screen the quantitative data by performing chi-squared tests for associations between categorical variables. Details of approaches to qualitative data analysis, such as thematic analysis based on focus groups, are provided. But more detailed information about the tests used would have provided greater transparency.
Ethics and Permission: This study was ethically approved by ERES Converge, while anonymization processes are described in detail to demonstrate compliance with ethical standards. These ensure the anonymity of all participants and state the right to leave the study at any time.
Additional Points:
Funding: The USAID-funded Global Health Security Program from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) provided financial and technical support to conduct this study observation.
Data Availability: Raw data are said to be available as supporting information. The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.
Overall Assessment: The methodology section of the research paper is strong, with a clear study design and strong ethical considerations. The sample size estimates are believable and persuasive, but a power analysis would add to the robustness. Though the statistical methods used are appropriate for the data collected, reporting the statistical tests used and further elaboration on the analysis would add rigour. The section provides a very detailed methodology and reasonable research approach.

Results:

-Does the analysis presented match the analysis plan?
-Are the results clearly and completely presented?
-Are the figures (Tables, Images) of sufficient quality for clarity?
Reviewer #1: High quality presentation
Reviewer #2: The results match the methods but are presented in a lengthy and suboptimal way. Figures and tables need improvement.
Detailed comments:
As demographic characteristics are detailed in table 1 (should be table 3 if table 1 and 2 are to be kept), the text in 3.1.1. could be condensed more. The p values are not needed in table 1, please delete this column, it only serves to show that the participants were different in some aspects and not others but contributes no scientific meaning.
L 335: please delete ‘only’ as it indicates some expected value of this proportion and no background has been provided to justify any assumptions in this respect.
Table 2 (or table 4?): here, and in other places in the text, it would be useful (or even necessary) to clarify what animal species are indicated in the term livestock (as this differs in different parts of the world), particularly as there is specific mentioning of poultry as an alternative in some places and as not all species are equally susceptible to anthrax. In addition, ‘charcoal burning’ requires further explanation for the uninitiated reader, how do people make money out of burning charcoal? As for the household income, the currency must be stated and it should also be related to the mean national income and the poverty threshold to improve understanding. The coping activities also need explanation, how can gardening be useful if there is a draught? And livestock farming (that is already a main or alternative livelihood for nearly half of the respondents? The last row could be named ‘support mechanism’ or similar, to differentiate form the row above that also uses the word cope. (All explanations asked for should be added to the text, not the table)
L362: does farming mean crop farming here? Please add some clarification
L 376-377: the statement appears contradictory, if they could not sell their animals, why couldn’t they get food form them? Was it the death of the livestock that was the problem, not the failure to trade?
Although I realise that the above are quotes from the FGDs, they must have been said in a context that provided more comprehension and that should be provided if the quotes are to be kept.
L 405: is ‘predominantly rural’ a result, didn’t you specifically recruit from a rural population? The results from cross-checking of demographic characteristics could be put in one or two sentences stating whether the two groups were similar or not. What is meant by ‘interplay between data sources’ (L411)? Do your results really show how socio-economic factors shape livelihoods? You have asked about climatic factors and disease…
L 438: please change from ‘will’ to ‘may’ as this consequence cannot be certain.
3.3.4. this section should either be expanded, if there are sufficiently detailed results to do so, or removed as it is currently too weak.
I find the Results a little scattered and would suggest re-organising into headings such as: Demographics (very brief section only to demonstrate the participant characteristics); Food security and impact of anthrax and draught, respectively, and; Livelihood diversification. Under these headings there could be subheadings for qualitative and quantitative results. I believe that would improve the flow of the text and emphasise the overall results better.
Reviewer #3: Variance Analysis:
The text indicates that the analysis performed matched that of the analysis plan. Qualitative data were analyzed using thematic analysis, which is described in the Methods section below, while the quantitative data were analyzed using suitable statistical tests (chi-squared tests referred to in the text). This indicates a strong alignment of the planned and implemented analyses.
Clarity and Completeness of Results:
Results are clearly presented, with findings primarily presented as quantitative or qualitative. Main findings are summarized, and tables referenced to describe socio-demographic data, but they are not complete tables, only parts of them. Illustrative quotations also represent the qualitative results well. The level of detail seems adequate given the constraints of a research article page.
Figures and Tables:
Referring to Tables 1 and 2 in the text: only parts are visible. Decent tables of this type should provide sufficient quality in communicating the quantitative findings. It was unclear if the quality of the visible sections would have been maintained across a full display. As for figures, both Figure 1 and 2 are referenced in the text but not fully shown (impossible to assess quality). The graphics seem relevant based on the text, and the text needs to provide more detail to be able to display the clarity of any visual aids.
Overall:
The results section is good with a good overall presentation of the findings. The narrative demonstrates the findings are articulated clearly and sufficiently. This is a clear example of the alignment between analysis plan and execution. However, a full assessment of the quality of the figures and tables would take the full supplementary materials, which were not provided.

Conclusions:

-Are the conclusions supported by the data presented?
-Are the limitations of analysis clearly described?
-Do the authors discuss how these data can be helpful to advance our understanding of the topic under study?
-Is public health relevance addressed?
Reviewer #1: Conclusions are justified and appropriate4
Reviewer #2: I have comments on both Discussion and Conclusion, see below. Conclusions are not supported by presented data and limitations are not described. the authors discuss their results in relation to the context and address public health relevance.
Discussion
L459: are the livestock practices really high-risk? How so? Please clarify
L462-463: the statement appears totally unrelated to the cited reference, pleased check and revise or remove
L463-465: this is also not related to the reference cited, please revise or remove
L466-468: please provide some evidence/reference for the statement about older farmers.
L468-470: the cited reference does not cover preventive animal health, it deals with HIV. Please explain how this relates to the statement.
L475-476: how does charcoal burning disturb anthrax spores? Does it involve digging? Burning would destroy the spores so the statement is confusing.
L 479: please provide information about mean/median income and poverty threshold to improve understanding of these figures
L 480: what formal mechanisms are there, if mobile banking and village banking are categorised as informal?
L484: the cited reference is about electric vehicles and does not relate to the statement. Nevertheless, it is not clear how farmers interacting with wildlife would increase their risk of anthrax. Slaughtering of animals (wild or domestic) that have died of anthrax, or digging in the ground and creating spore-containing aerosols would be potential ways of getting anthrax in this setting but that is a rather indirect ‘interaction’ with wildlife.
L 492: please remove name of reference. This reference focuses on anthrax in animals and should be used as a basis for writing about transmission in the setting chosen for the study. It does not, however, back up the statement preceding it on L490-491.
L 493 and L 495: please explain how gardening can be a coping strategy when there is a dry spell, wouldn’t gardening be a challenge with water shortage?
L499-500: you didn’t investigate climatic shocks, you asked about draught, please remove or rephrase.
L502: the cited reference deals with geospatial analysis and cannot be used as a basis for the preceding statement.
L 504-505: this statement contradicts the one that said that livestock management is high-risk, here it appears that alternative practices are more risky.
Conclusions
This section does not draw clearly on the results of the study, it is more speculation than conclusion (although not necessarily wrong).
Reviewer #3: Data Is in Support: The findings seem adequately supported by the data provided. The discussion section more closely connects findings derived from both the quantitative and qualitative analyses to the conclusions drawn based on the analysis, indicating key relationships between anthrax outbreaks, livelihood diversification, food insecurity, and vulnerability among the study population.
Limitations: The limitations of the analysis are not explicitly stated in the conclusion section provided. Although the discussion section likely contains more explicit mention of limitations (e.g., limitations in the sample size or the reliance on self-reported data), the conclusion itself should briefly mention major limitations that impact the overall interpretation of results.
Relevance to the Current Picture: The discussion needs to emphasize the importance of the findings, regarding food security and livelihoods, especially in the backdrop of anthrax outbreaks in GMAs. The highlighting of vulnerabilities in these groups suggests specific interventions that can be implemented in order to build greater resilience at the community level.
Public Health Relevance: The public health relevance is well articulated, indicating the importance of interventions for controlling anthrax outbreaks, diversifying livelihood, and increasing food security. The study emphasizes the importance of the risks of zoonotic diseases in rural settings and reminds us that advice cannot simply be given but rather should be community-based, including empowerment among community members, especially women.
Overall: I felt that the conclusions section was reasonably well-written, but I think the authors should more clearly and succinctly state the limitations of the study and should more directly articulate the public health implications and impact of the work. The current conclusion might go on more strongly if it described the takeaway and impact or implication of the study's findings in a more direct way.

Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications?

Use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity. If the only modifications needed are minor and/or editorial, you may wish to recommend “Minor Revision” or “Accept”.
Reviewer #1: No modifications to suggest unless the authors are able to add a substantive description of the epidemiology of anthrax outbreaks over the recent past in the study region.
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: Given the information provided, the paper appears to be of good quality. The methodology is sound, the analysis is appropriate, and the results are clearly presented. The areas needing the most attention are relatively minor and primarily editorial in nature. Therefore, I recommend a Minor Revision.
Here are specific editorial suggestions:
Abstract: While the abstract is good, consider adding a concise statement summarizing the main quantitative finding (e.g., "…87.9% of households were adversely affected by drought, highlighting significant economic vulnerability"). This would make the key finding more impactful early on.
Results: Fully present Tables 1 and 2. The current presentation of snippets isn't sufficient. Include all columns and data for a complete and clear understanding. Similarly, if Figures 1 and 2 are crucial for understanding, ensure they are of high quality and included in full. If they are less critical, consider whether their inclusion adds necessary value.
Discussion: Explicitly state the limitations of the study in the discussion section. This might include limitations on sample size, generalizability to other regions, the reliance on self-reported data, or any other factors that could affect the interpretation of results. Summarize these limitations concisely within the conclusion section itself.
Conclusion: Strengthen the concluding statement by summarizing the key implications of the findings in a more direct manner and emphasizing the overall impact of the study. For example: "This study demonstrates the critical interconnectedness of anthrax, food insecurity, and livelihood strategies in rural Zambian communities. Tailored interventions emphasizing community empowerment, livelihood diversification, and access to resources are urgently needed to mitigate zoonotic disease risks and improve community resilience."
Overall Style: The writing style is mostly clear. However, a careful review by a native English speaker and/or professional editor is recommended to polish the language, ensuring grammatical accuracy and conciseness.
By addressing these minor revisions, the manuscript would be substantially improved and ready for acceptance.

Summary and General Comments:

Use this section to provide overall comments, discuss strengths/weaknesses of the study, novelty, significance, general execution and scholarship. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. If requesting major revision, please articulate the new experiments that are needed.
Reviewer #1: I found the manuscript submitted by Gondwe and colleagues to be exceptionally interesting and informative. I was also very well written and presented. My major criticism is that although the title and several sections of text indicate a very negative effect of anthrax on the livestock and hence livelihoods of the subsistence farmers under study, there is absolutely no quantitative or even qualitative data on anthrax disease (incidence, frequency, number of animals involved) in this region, except for vague comments about adverse effects of anthrax outbreak. In several areas, the authors also hint at the effect of “other zoonotic diseases”, but again, no mention is made of what those might be. This is a first class manuscript that needs to be published. Very regrettably, I do not think PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases is the appropriate venue for this excellent piece of work.
Reviewer #2: The paper covers an interesting and important topic. The approach is good but the paper lacks clarity and needs to be rewritten.
There appears to be a lot of assumptions that are not clearly stated and evidenced in the text, many things need to be clarified for the paper to be useful for the reader.
Reviewer #3: Summary:
This study offers an important mixed-methods exploration into the socio-economic consequences of anthrax outbreaks in rural Zambian communities residing in Game Management Areas (GMAs). It utilizes both quantitative surveys and qualitative focus group discussions to give a well-rounded view of the complex interplay of factors involved. The analysis is sound, and, although the results are not entirely represented in the text included in the R&R, they are well-presented and support the conclusions. They identify the pandemic-related vulnerabilities of these populations and assert the necessity of adaptation strategies for the response efforts. The public health implications are far-reaching.
Strengths:
Integrating the Two: By combining quantitative and qualitative data, this now provides the richness of data and depth of understanding through breadth with the integration of the two.
Importance: The study addresses an important public health issue in a vulnerable population.
Contextual Understanding: The study is largely successful at placing the anthrax challenge among the wider issues of livelihoods, food security, and environmental constraints to success in GMAs.
Ethical Approval: The study obtained ethical approval from the relevant institutional review board, and informed consent was obtained from all participants.
Weaknesses:
Limited Explicit Discussion of Limitations: The Discussion likely describes limitations of the study, but they are not clearly enumerated in the conclusion or abstract. This should be rectified.
Potential for Better Quality: Although generally well-written, professional editing would improve its flow and brevity.
Novelty and Significance:
In understanding the socio-economic impact of anthrax in the context of Zambian GMAs, the study contributes significantly. Although anthrax has been studied elsewhere, this research provides important local perspectives, particularly on the links between livelihoods, food security, and zoonotic disease risks. The mixed-methods approach and assessment of community-specific vulnerabilities further improve the novelty of the findings.
General Execution and Scholarship:
The study is a marker of a strong scholarship of high value, applied by correct methods and followed with an appropriate reading of the data. The authors demonstrate a good knowledge of the research topic. However, the incomplete presentation of results as well as the absence of limitation discussions here detract a bit from the overall impression and clarity.
Recommendations:
I recommend Minor Revision. The reason is the partial presentation of the main results (Tables 1 & 2, and the Figures). These must be fully incorporated to accommodate for an accurate assessment.
In addition to that:
All Data Shown: Ensure all data in Table 1 and 2 and Figure 1 and 2 are clearly presented.
Discuss Limitations: Discuss the limitations of the study (e.g., sample size, generalizability, reliance on self-reported data) explicitly in both the Discussion and the Conclusion sections.
Focus on Clarity and Brevity.
With these revisions addressed, the paper will be greatly improved and may be suitable for acceptance. Based on the given information, there is no concern about double publication/research ethics/publication ethics.
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes:  Wojciech Iwaniak
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]

Figure resubmission:

While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step. If there are other versions of figure files still present in your submission file inventory at resubmission, please replace them with the PACE-processed versions.

Reproducibility:

?>
10.1371/journal.pntd.0012893.r002Decision Letter 1
PappasGeorgiosSection EditorBlacksellStuart D.Section Editor© 2025 Georgios, Blacksell2025Georgios, Blacksellhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1Dear Dr Mumba,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'Anthrax, Livelihood Vulnerability, and Food Insecurity in Selected Game Management Areas in Zambia: A Mixed-Methods Analysis at the Human-Wildlife-Livestock Interface' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us now if you or your institution is planning to press release the article. All press must be co-ordinated with PLOS.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases.
Best regards,
Georgios Pappas
Section Editor
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
Georgios Pappas
Section Editor
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
Shaden Kamhawi
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
orcid.org/0000-0003-4304-636XX
Paul Brindley
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
orcid.org/0000-0003-1765-0002
***********************************************************
-
p.p1 {margin: 0.0px 0.0px 0.0px 0.0px; line-height: 16.0px; font: 14.0px Arial; color: #323333; -webkit-text-stroke: #323333}span.s1 {font-kerning: none
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Key Review Criteria Required for Acceptance?

As you describe the new analyses required for acceptance, please consider the following:

Methods

-Are the objectives of the study clearly articulated with a clear testable hypothesis stated?
-Is the study design appropriate to address the stated objectives?
-Is the population clearly described and appropriate for the hypothesis being tested?
-Is the sample size sufficient to ensure adequate power to address the hypothesis being tested?
-Were correct statistical analysis used to support conclusions?
-Are there concerns about ethical or regulatory requirements being met?
Reviewer #2: I am happy with the revised version and believe that the methods are now adequately described and appropriate for the study.
Reviewer #3: Objectives and Hypothesis: The objectives of the study are adequately stated in the abstract and introduction, seeking to understand the socio-economic impacts of anthrax outbreaks, associated stressors, food insecurity, and livelihood vulnerabilities among rural Zambian communities. While no formal, explicit testable hypotheses are presented, the study explores the possible relationships between anthrax outbreaks, livelihood strategies, and food security.
Study Design: The mixed-methods approach, using quantitative surveys and qualitative focus group discussions simultaneously, is appropriate considering the complexity and heterogeneity of factors affecting the socio-economic burden of anthrax.
Population Description: The population definition is specific, focusing on rural communities in designated Zambian Game Management Areas (GMAs). This choice is appropriate, relying on the frequency of anthrax and the interactions of humans, wildlife, and livestock in these regions.
Sample Size: The paper provides a sample size calculation for the quantitative survey. The rationale for the qualitative sample size (6 focus groups) is included in relation to data saturation.
Statistical Analysis: The authors claim appropriate statistical analyses were used to screen the quantitative data by performing chi-squared tests for associations between categorical variables. Details of approaches to qualitative data analysis, such as thematic analysis based on focus groups, are provided.
Ethical and Regulatory Requirements: The study was ethically approved by ERES Converge, and anonymization processes are described in detail to demonstrate compliance with ethical standards. These ensure the anonymity of all participants and state the right to leave the study at any time.
**********

Results

-Does the analysis presented match the analysis plan?
-Are the results clearly and completely presented?
-Are the figures (Tables, Images) of sufficient quality for clarity?
Reviewer #2: I am happy with the revised version and believe that the results are now adequately described.
Reviewer #3: Match with Analysis Plan: Text in the document indicates that the analysis performed matched that of the analysis plan. Qualitative data were analyzed using thematic analysis, which is described in the Methods section. Quantitative data were analyzed using suitable statistical tests (chi-squared tests referred to in the text).
Clarity and Completeness: Results are clearly presented, with findings primarily presented as quantitative or qualitative. Main findings are summarized, and tables are referenced to describe socio-demographic data, but they are not complete tables, only parts of them. Illustrative quotations also represent the qualitative results well.
Figures and Tables Quality: Only parts of tables 1 and 2 were visible and difficult to assess. More detail to be able to display the clarity of any visual aids.
**********

Conclusions

-Are the conclusions supported by the data presented?
-Are the limitations of analysis clearly described?
-Do the authors discuss how these data can be helpful to advance our understanding of the topic under study?
-Is public health relevance addressed?
Reviewer #2: yes, all these criteria are fulfilled
Reviewer #3: Support by Data: The conclusions are supported by the presented data.
Limitations Described: The limitations are not explicitly stated in the conclusion section.
Advancement of Understanding: The results will provide insights for this particular study topic.
Public Health Relevance: The public health relevance is well articulated, indicating the importance of interventions for controlling anthrax outbreaks, diversifying livelihood, and increasing food security. The study emphasizes the importance of the risks of zoonotic diseases in rural settings and reminds us that advice cannot simply be given but rather should be community-based, including empowerment among community members, especially women.
**********

Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications?

Use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity. If the only modifications needed are minor and/or editorial, you may wish to recommend “Minor Revision” or “Accept”.
Reviewer #2: There are a few proofing errors:
Line 158: I suggest changing from '...makes understanding of disease dynamics better.' to '...facilitates understanding of disease dynamics.'
Line 465: I suggest adding 'to' (...often leads to animals being moved...)
Line 481: I suggest adding 'spores' (...expose dormant anthrax spores and make them...)
Line 482: remove 's' (soil condition)
Line 285: change form is to are (..bacteria are present...)
Reviewer #3: No comments
**********

Summary and General Comments

Use this section to provide overall comments, discuss strengths/weaknesses of the study, novelty, significance, general execution and scholarship. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. If requesting major revision, please articulate the new experiments that are needed.
Reviewer #2: I am content with the revised version of the manuscript
Reviewer #3: No comments
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #2: Yes:  Susanna Sternberg Lewerin
Reviewer #3: Yes:  Wojciech Iwaniak
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Reviewer Comments 00145.docx
10.1371/journal.pntd.0012893.r003Acceptance letter
PappasGeorgiosSection EditorBlacksellStuart D.Section Editor© 2025 Georgios, Blacksell2025Georgios, Blacksellhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Dear Dr Mumba,
We are delighted to inform you that your manuscript, "Anthrax, Livelihood Vulnerability, and Food Insecurity in Selected Game Management Areas in Zambia: A Mixed-Methods Analysis at the Human-Wildlife-Livestock Interface," has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases.
We have now passed your article onto the PLOS Production Department who will complete the rest of the publication process. All authors will receive a confirmation email upon publication.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any scientific or type-setting errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. Note: Proofs for Front Matter articles (Editorial, Viewpoint, Symposium, Review, etc...) are generated on a different schedule and may not be made available as quickly.
Soon after your final files are uploaded, the early version of your manuscript will be published online unless you opted out of this process. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
Thank you again for supporting open-access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases.
Best regards,
Shaden Kamhawi
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
Paul Brindley
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases