pmcBr J SociolBr J Sociol379blackwellopenBJOSThe British Journal of Sociology0007-13151468-4446pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleWiley Open Access CollectionPMC12412080PMC12412080.112412080124120804023505510.1111/1468-4446.13217BJOS132171Original ArticleOriginal ArticleDecolonizing the Global: Contested Cosmopolitanisms in Global Queer Activism
JungMinwoo mjung@luc.edu

1

Department of Sociology
Loyola University Chicago
Chicago
Illinois
USA

*
Correspondence: Minwoo Jung
(mjung@luc.edu)
15420259202576449629410.1111/bjos.v76.4790799
1922025
0782024
1042025
050920250609202506092025© 2025 The Author(s). The British Journal of Sociology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of London School of Economics and Political Science.https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.

## ABSTRACT
In the last decade, the “decolonial turn” has gained prominence across academic disciplines, challenging inherent Eurocentric knowledge paradigms. Extending these conversations, this paper critically investigates the notion of “the global” from a decolonial perspective. Decolonial scholars criticize the mainstream conceptualization of cosmopolitanism for its Eurocentrism and advocate for alternative forms of cosmopolitanism. This paper builds on this decolonial scholarship and examines how various local actors make sense of and give meaning to the contested category of “the global” in understanding, articulating, and addressing their visions for social change. Drawing from ethnographic research on queer activism in South Korea, it identifies the coexistence and contestation between two forms of cosmopolitanism—metrocentric and provincial—and suggests that we understand non‐Western activists as producers of anticolonial thought from below. By doing so, this paper contributes to critical scholarship on globalization, cosmopolitanism, and decolonial thought.

Asiadecolonial sociologyglobalizationLGBTQ movementsqueer activismpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyessource-schema-version-number2.0cover-dateSeptember 2025details-of-publishers-convertorConverter:WILEY_ML3GV2_TO_JATSPMC version:6.6.2 mode:remove_FC converted:05.09.20251

## Introduction
Over the past decade, the “decolonial turn” has gained prominence across various academic fields (Grosfoguel  ). Decolonial scholars have critiqued predominant Eurocentric paradigms in knowledge production, highlighting how the “coloniality of power” (Quijano  ) shapes our understanding of social relations, processes, and mechanisms. This critique exposes “metrocentric” scholarship (Go  ), where Eurocentric perspectives are presented as “global designs” (Mignolo  ), marginalizing, and silencing non‐Western epistemologies. In response, these scholars have proposed decolonial visions such as “Southern theory” (Connell  ), “epistemologies of the south” (Santos  ), “border thinking” (Mignolo  ), “pluriversal politics” (Escobar  ), “connected sociologies” (Bhambra  ), and “relational thought” (Go  ). Calls for decolonial sociology have also emerged (Meghji  ), particularly in the study of race and ethnicity (Go  ; Magubane  ; Meghji  ), migration (Bashi  ), gender (Connell  ), and sexuality (Patil  ). These efforts challenge widely accepted sociological concepts rooted in metrocentric paradigms, such as “assimilation” (Itzigsohn  ) and “diffusion” (Edwards  ), and critique the Eurocentrism embedded in conceptualizations of “modernity” (Bhambra  ), “the political” (Chakrabarty  ), and “the social” (Go  ).
Building on these conversations, this article problematizes the Eurocentric notion of “the global” from a decolonial perspective. While “the global” has often been conceptualized through the lens of the global North/metropole (Connell  ), this article explores how the category is constructed across diverse geographic and cultural contexts. How do local actors interpret and imbue “the global” with meaning as they understand, articulate, and address their local issues and concerns from the ground? Drawing on ethnographic research on queer activism in contemporary South Korea (hereafter Korea)—where “the global” has emerged as a contested category of opportunity, intervention, and criticism since the 1990s—I examine how queer activists engage in global organizing. As opportunities for interaction with global human rights regimes and actors increase, Korean queer activists grapple with the complexities of engaging with “the global” as a supranational realm, navigating entrenched colonial power dynamics, and forging alternative forms of global engagement. I argue that local activists' multifaceted articulations of “the global”—as a category of practice (Brubaker  )—expose the contested nature of cosmopolitanism as a sociological category of analysis. This article highlights the tension between differing forms of cosmopolitanism and contends that these tensions reveal new visions of anticolonial thought from below. In doing so, this article contributes to critical scholarship on globalization, cosmopolitanism, and decolonial thought.

2

## Decolonizing Cosmopolitanism
To understand how the category of “the global” becomes contested and meaningful, I draw on the well‐established scholarship on cosmopolitanism, which explores how people imagine, articulate, and enact “the global.” The notion of cosmopolitanism has been explored by many scholars in light of understanding the expanding horizons of membership and citizenship amid globalization. Go ( , 210) defines cosmopolitanism as “a membership in and identification with a world community that transcends locality,” based on the “identity of humanity.” Some scholars emphasize how such a globalized sense of belonging has been embraced in the everyday lives of ordinary people living in a globalized world. They have developed concepts such as “banal cosmopolitanism” (Beck  ), “ordinary cosmopolitanism” (Lamont and Aksartova  ), and “vernacular cosmopolitanism” (Werbner  ). They pay attention to how contemporary life has become integrated into global processes as more people engage in trade, work, love, marriage, and research on a transnational scale (Beck  ). Even those whose lives are firmly rooted in the national context also engage in a “cosmopolitan imagination” through their identification and classification in relation to migrants and racialized others (Lamont and Aksartova  ).
Decolonial scholars have criticized the elitist and Eurocentric assumptions inherent in mainstream discussions on cosmopolitanism, which falsely present themselves as universal. For instance, Bhambra ( ) criticizes Beck's notion of cosmopolitanism, asserting that he takes Europe as the origin of modernity, which is subsequently globalized, and this becomes the empirical foundation of his Eurocentric theorization of cosmopolitanism. Furthermore, Bhambra ( ) critically argues that the dominant form of cosmopolitanism in contemporary Europe, found in the discourses of “cosmopolitan Europe” and “European identity” celebrating its “multiculturalism,” “diversity,” and “inclusion,” often pronounced and supported by white male European scholars, largely erases Europe's colonial past and postcolonial present. In doing so, they promote what she calls “neocolonial cosmopolitanism,” which “legitimizes neocolonial policies within and outside Europe” (Bhambra  , 189). Go ( , 209) also criticizes the pervasive presentism in discussions of cosmopolitanism and suggests that we must understand “how colonialism's historical and institutional dynamics, contradictions, or fissures might have invoked strands of cosmopolitan thinking.”
Taking the empire and colonialism seriously in the construction of cosmopolitanism, decolonial scholars advocate for alternative forms of cosmopolitanism, such as “critical cosmopolitanism” (Mignolo  ), “provincialized cosmopolitanism” (Bhambra  ), and “postcolonial cosmopolitanism” (Go  ). Mignolo ( , 741) understands cosmopolitanism as “emerging from the various spatial and historical locations of the colonial difference.” He traces the different historical modes of “cosmopolitanism from global designs,” particularly in relation to European and American colonialisms, and how they served the power of the North Atlantic. This opens up the possibility of a “critical cosmopolitanism” that seriously considers the coloniality of power. Echoing the call for “provincializing Europe” (Chakrabarty  ), Bhambra ( , 34) uses the notion of “provincialized cosmopolitanism,” which is “sensitive to the voices of non‐Western others and flattens the hierarchies of knowledge implicit in ‘global cosmopolitanism’.” She suggests that we examine “how people have thought and acted beyond the local” (Pollock et al.  , 586) in different places and across time. Such alternative visions of cosmopolitanism are often drawn from the lives and thoughts of decolonial thinkers such as WEB Du Bois (Itzigsohn and Brown  ) and Stuart Hall (Hammer  ), or anticolonial revolutionaries such as Frantz Fanon (White  ). For instance, Go ( , 204) situates Fanon as a revolutionary thinker of what he calls a “postcolonial cosmopolitanism,” which “aimed to negate colonialism's contradictions and thus realize the ideals that Europe had proclaimed but failed to realize.”
This article joins this burgeoning decolonial scholarship and explores how local actors relate their actions, identities, and visions to the category of “the global.” While mainstream sociological theorizing has long imagined “the global” as an extension of the global North/metropole (Connell  ), critical scholars contend that the concept of “the global” does not solely originate from Euro‐American metropoles, nor is it simply transferred to the rest of the world. For instance, Edwards ( ) problematizes the Eurocentric notion of “global diffusion” in mainstream sociology literature on globalization, which presumes the Eurocentric origin of norms, practices, and institutions, as well as the unidirectional flow from the global metropole to the periphery. Similarly, Waites ( ) criticizes the Eurocentric model of the “boomerang effect” in global human rights scholarship, which does not consider the various local and indigenous articulations and manifestations of human rights beyond the one‐directional model of the boomerang pattern from the West to the rest. I examine how social actors deploy and mobilize “the global”—as a “category of practice” (Brubaker  )—to make sense of their actions, and how this intersects with and enriches existing scholarship on cosmopolitanism—as a category of analysis—which theorizes the relationship between people's imaginations, actions, and interactions with “the global.” Drawing on Escobar's ( ) concept of pluriversal politics, which acknowledges the dialectics of multiple epistemic traditions for critical knowledge production, I examine how different forms of cosmopolitanism arise, coexist, and compete with each other. Particularly, I look at the tension between metrocentric cosmopolitanism, which showcases the enduring “coloniality of power” (Quijano  ) in contemporary global interactions, and provincial cosmopolitanism, which demonstrates the emerging strategies of “delinking” (Mignolo  ) from such coloniality of power, as well as “anticolonial solidarity” forged through connected struggles (Go  ).
I focus on how the category of “the global” is constructed in queer activism in non‐Western contexts. In the past two decades, supranational organizations such as the United Nations (UN) and the European Union have increasingly provided new opportunities for non‐Western queer activists to address their suffering based on sexual orientation and gender identities. In other words, “the global” has become a crucial venue for non‐Western queer activists to raise consciousness and even mobilize campaigns for legal change (Chua  ; Jung  ; Lakkimsetti  ). At the same time, queer activists in non‐Western regions face the challenge of how supranational organizations like the UN serve as “the regime of global coloniality” imposed by the US empire and other global powers (Grosfoguel  , 220). Moreover, the increasing reliance on international human rights norms, transnational linkages, and foreign funding has backfired for queer activists in non‐Western contexts, where the repressive state accuses queer activism and its entanglements with “the global” as Western intervention (Chua  ; Currier  ). Under these complex conditions, queer activists engage with and utilize the category of “the global” in contested ways, creating fertile ground for theorizing various forms of cosmopolitanism. Following Go ( , 282), I consider non‐Western queer activists, through their “writings, political pamphlets, speeches, art, or through the chants,” as producers—rather than consumers—of “anticolonial thought from below” in contemporary times, as they wrestle with the complex structures of the global coloniality of power.
In the next section, I discuss the particular context of queer activism in contemporary Korea, wherein differential pursuits towards “the global” arise.

3

## Contested Cosmopolitanisms in Korean Queer Activism
Queer activism in Korea serves as a particularly useful case for exploring contested forms of cosmopolitanism. Like their counterparts in other non‐Western countries, Korean queer activists have been increasingly exposed to “the global” within the context of larger trends in globalization and the rise of international actors such as the UN, its specialized agencies, and international NGOs. Korea's democratic transition in 1987 marked the beginning of a period of rapid economic and cultural globalization and new opportunities for civil society and social movements (Y. Lee  ). For instance, the first Korean LGBTQ rights organization was formed in 1993, and other community‐based and activist groups were established throughout the 1990s and 2000s (Bong  ). In the midst of democratic consolidation during the two liberal administrations that held office from 1998 to 2007, the Korean government actively attempted to adhere to globalizing human rights norms, inclusive of LGBTQ rights. During this period, numerous human rights policy measures were adopted, with a prime example being the establishment of the National Human Rights Commission in 2001 to conduct research assessing the human rights of marginalized groups, including LGBTQ people (Jeong et al.  ). These state efforts to promote global human rights norms created a conducive environment for queer activism to engage with “the global.” Such state efforts to promote global human rights were discontinued during the following conservative regimes that held power from 2008 to 2017, during which the financial and institutional challenges against LGBTQ groups escalated. In this context, some queer activists continued to engage with the global human rights regime, such as the UN, in an attempt to turn the increased explicit human rights violations based on gender and sexuality into a new political opportunity. In these efforts, some activists found “the global” still a relevant and viable category to pressure the government, while others found it meaningless, questionable, or hierarchical, and even sought alternative ways to engage with “the global.”
To address the question of contestation over the geographic and cultural category of “the global,” I draw on my multi‐year ethnographic research on queer activism in Korea. For a larger project on the global and regional construction of LGBTQ rights politics in Asia, I conducted ethnographic fieldwork in Korea from 2015 to 2019, spanning 10 months, during which I attended public events (e.g., pride parades, protests, rallies, press conferences) and organizational events of various LGBTQ organizations (e.g., membership meetings, board meetings, education sessions, community gatherings). These observations provided rich opportunities for me to obtain grounded knowledge of the varying and contested approaches to “the global” that emerged in organizational and everyday settings among queer activists. As a Korean‐born and ‐raised, US‐trained queer scholar fluent in both Korean and English, I also volunteered for various tasks, particularly those involving global aspects, such as translating English documents into Korean and vice versa, as well as interpreting for international communication, meetings, and gatherings. I paid particular attention to how the terms “international,” “global,” and “transnational” were being used and assigned meanings. In addition, I conducted semi‐structured interviews with 70 Korean activists involved in queer activism. Most of them (57 out of 70) held positions of leadership or were at least full‐ or part‐time staff members of various LGBTQ organizations. I asked the interviewees about the overall history, structure, tasks, resources, and strategies of their organizations, as well as their global connections, involvement in global organizing, and their understandings of “the global.” I conducted follow‐up interviews with 10 key informants during my subsequent visits and maintained informal follow‐up conversations with them through messaging apps and international phone calls after the fieldwork. In the analysis, I have anonymized the names of the organizations and interviewees.
In the following sections, I showcase how Korean queer activists imagine, articulate, and enact the category of “the global,” and how they attempt to make their “transboundary experiences” (Hammer  ) meaningful in their activism in contested ways.

4

## Metrocentric Cosmopolitanism
Articulating a postcolonial critique of sociology, Go ( ) calls sociology's longstanding orientalism, Eurocentric universalism, and imperial repression together as metrocentrism. Drawing from Go's notion of metrocentrism, I refer to the form of cosmopolitanism that recognizes the legitimacy and universal power of global human rights norms, institutions, and mechanisms as metrocentric cosmopolitanism. Metrocentric cosmopolitanism empowers local efforts to deploy international human rights declarations, covenants, treaties, conventions, and foreign aid to persuade and pressure domestic governments. Local actors with significant global knowledge, expertise, and networks often adopt this form of cosmopolitanism, viewing “the global” as a supranational public sphere that exists between nation‐states, with the UN at its core. In this global arena, supposedly European‐originated cultural templates—such as human rights—are introduced, demanded as universal, and then adopted globally, following the diffusion model or the “boomerang pattern” (Edwards  ; Waites  ). Metrocentric cosmopolitanism is primarily embraced and practiced by activists, community leaders, and NGO members who possess this particular understanding of “the global.” They act as “knowledge brokers,” mediating and translating ideas from the global arena (Merry  ) in the hope of bringing about crucial social transformation.
Metrocentric cosmopolitanism can be found in the global organizing work of a group of queer activists involved in what they call “international solidarity (kukche yŏndae)” at the Rainbow Coalition and SOGI Justice. The Rainbow Coalition is the largest nationwide coalition of Korean LGBTQ groups, first established in 2008 in response to the conservative backlash against the proposal of an LGBTQ‐inclusive anti‐discrimination bill (Jeong et al.  ). Since the establishment of the Coalition, it has largely focused on the domestic issue of anti‐discrimination legislation. It was in the early 2010s when “the global” surfaced as a meaningful category for Korean queer activism through the notion of “international solidarity.” In 2011, several openly lesbian and gay human rights lawyers and researchers formed a legal policy and advocacy group specializing in LGBTQ rights issues called SOGI Justice (hereafter Justice). Justice soon became one of the core groups in Korean queer activism, providing pro bono legal services and filing lawsuits on cases relating to various LGBTQ rights issues and organizations. Justice activists soon began to seek references and resources from the global human rights regime to address LGBTQ rights violations in “the global” arena, attempting to trigger “the boomerang effect” (Waites  ) to pressure the Korean government.
In articulating their understandings of “the global,” most Justice and other like‐minded activists emphasized the universal validity of global human rights norms. The global human rights discourse, exemplified by the UN's Universal Declaration and Covenants on Human Rights, is often referred to as a “global standard,” implying the self‐evident worldwide validity of such standards. The use of the aforementioned acronym SOGI (Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity) as part of the group's name is another example. SOGI was introduced through the adoption of the Yogyakarta Principles on the Application of International Human Rights Law in Relation to Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity in 2006, and it has been increasingly adopted by UN agencies and global LGBTQ advocacy groups, even replacing the identity‐based terms “LGBT,” “LGBTI,” or “LGBTQ” since the 2010s. Justice spearheaded the adoption and introduction of the term SOGI in the Korean context, indicative of its strong inclination towards the “global standard.” Given this understanding of “the global,” Justice activists considered the appeal to global human rights norms, particularly through the UN processes and mechanisms, as an essential tactic in their efforts to compel the government to recognize LGBTQ rights. Hanni, a founding member of Justice, described these global norms as fundamentally useful tools for queer activism: “They're like a pair of scissors lying on the table. Some don't even know they exist, while others make good use of them. It's all about how to utilize them properly and intelligently.” Embracing metrocentric cosmopolitanism, Justice and other queer activists have mediated and translated these “global standards” into the Korean context through three main strategies.
First, leveraging their English language proficiency and legal expertise, these activists have translated and disseminated global human rights documents to make them accessible to the Korean activist and queer communities. These translated documents include the Yogyakarta Principles and various other official statements regarding LGBTQ rights by UN bodies, agencies, and experts. In 2014, Justice also initiated the publication of annual Korean LGBTQ human rights reports, modeled upon the LGBTQ rights annual review by the European region of the International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans, and Intersex Association (ILGA). Justice's annual report has been released in both Korean and English every May 17 to commemorate the International Day against Homophobia, Transphobia, and Biphobia (IDAHOT), which further underscores their strong orientation toward “the global.”
Second, Justice activists have organized public forums and informal meetings that bring together Korean queer activists with UN human rights officials, officers from foreign (usually Western) embassies, and representatives of global human rights NGOs. Since its establishment, Justice has hosted public forums and activist strategy workshops on topics such as same‐sex marriage, trans and intersex rights, and UN human rights mechanisms. Invited international speakers at these events have included Evan Wolfson, a prominent figure in the American marriage equality movement, and Vitit Muntarbhorn, the first UN Independent Expert on SOGI. These meetings were typically arranged individually, leveraging the global networks of a few key activists. On one such occasion in early 2016, Randy Berry, the first US Special Envoy for the Human Rights of LGBT Persons, visited Asia. Woohyun, a gay law student, utilized his informal connections with insider allies at the US Embassy in Seoul to help coordinate a series of closed‐door meetings between a few Korean queer organizations and Berry during his brief visit to Seoul. Haerin, a leading lesbian activist of Justice, explained that these meetings were not only intended to update the foreign visitors on the status of LGBTQ rights in Korea but also to raise awareness of LGBTQ issues in local media outlets, which were attracted by the presence of such high‐profile global figures.
Third, Justice activists have been actively engaged in global lobbying efforts to persuade UN authorities, experts, and foreign diplomats to exert pressure on the Korean government. Justice lawyers and other like‐minded queer activists established the International Solidarity team within the Rainbow Coalition in 2014, with the initial purpose of monitoring the UN Human Rights Committee's periodic review of Korea's compliance with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). Following the submission of the Korean government's report, Rainbow Coalition, in collaboration with 82 other Korean human rights organizations, compiled and submitted a joint NGO report that offered a critical response to the government's report. The International Solidarity team drafted the sections of the report related to LGBTQ rights and actively participated in on‐site lobbying efforts in Geneva, representing Korean civil society. Dongwoo, a long‐time gay activist, accompanied Haerin to Geneva in 2015, where they arranged numerous meetings with the UN Human Rights Committee, delivered oral statements at NGO briefings, observed the Korean government's review session, and publicized their efforts on social media. These global lobbying efforts often highlighted the Korean government's failure to adhere to global human rights norms on LGBTQ rights, potentially subjecting the government to censure from the global community. As Haerin explained, “It's all about naming and shaming, discrediting and embarrassing the government on the global stage.”
When their global organizing efforts don't work, Justice activists often tend to attribute the issue to the state's incapacity or lack of accountability, rather than the global system per se. The universal rationality of the UN’s global human rights system, on which Justice activists heavily rely, is usually contrasted with what Haerin described as “the irrationality of the government.” She discussed at length the Korean government's failure to meet “the global standard,” concluding that “it is not normal governance, as the top officials do not fully agree on the universal imperative of anti‐discrimination.” Echoing this sentiment, Dongwoo recalled his lobbying effort in Geneva and vehemently criticized Korean government officials: “The government should be the one to educate people and promote global human rights norms; however, it does nothing at all, even within the global arena. All that government officials do is just complain, without making any substantial efforts.” From the perspective of metrocentric cosmopolitanism, the challenges of global organizing are ultimately attributable to the domestic government, which fails to follow the universal global norms, while such universality remains unquestioned. However, other queer activists challenge this taken‐for‐granted universality of global norms, based on a very different understanding of “the global,” which is explored in the next section.

5

## Delinking From Metrocentric Cosmopolitanism
In his proposal of a decolonial epistemology, Mignolo ( , 275) employs the notion of “delinking” as a way to “not accept the options available,” such as major Western macro‐narratives of development. By delinking, Mignolo continues, “we become epistemically disobedient and… dwell and think in the borders of local histories confronting global designs.” (Mignolo  , 277) I draw on Mignolo's notion of delinking to explain how some Korean queer activists realize that the global human rights system is neither universal nor relevant to their activism. Delinking from metrocentric cosmopolitanism is practiced by a mixed group of local actors—some with previous involvement in metrocentric cosmopolitanism through various global organizing work, and others without direct engagement or experience but with critical observations from their organizations and beyond. With growing questions and frustrations over the legitimacy and universal power of global organizing work, these local actors gradually arrive at an understanding that it is not just their domestic government, but also “the global” itself that is part of the structural problem, embedded in complex power dynamics involving the US empire and other global powers. Recognizing “the global” as a system of coloniality of power, they start to take caution and disconnect from these colonial power dynamics, challenging the presumed universality of the global human rights system.
The metrocentric cosmopolitanism embraced by Justice activists has promoted the potential utility of global organizing work; at the same time, it has generated broad suspicion and skepticism of such work among a larger group of Korean queer activists. Concerned about the efficacy, relevance, and legitimacy of global organizing work, particularly through the UN, these activists have developed a cautious, reserved, and distanced attitude towards “the global,” including global knowledge, expertise, and networks. They realize that “the global” often represents the political interests of Euro‐American powers rather than those of local queer communities. This becomes evident in three ways of delinking from metrocentric cosmopolitanism.
First, many Korean queer activists have expressed reservations about UN‐oriented global organizing, which requires a particular kind of global expertise and credentials. Several consider Justice activists' focus on UN human rights mechanisms to be elitist, bureaucratic, and “too professional.” For instance, Minji, a queer woman activist, shared her observation that “People these days are so into the UN mechanism thing, aren't they? They're so obsessed with the UN and sharing our situation on the global stage.” She continued, “The UN‐related work is all important, but I don't see it as my pursuit or something worth prioritizing.” She added that global organizing has been primarily led by the “so‐called experts,” referring to the small group of lawyers and “highly‐educated activists” who established Justice. This has left behind many queer activists who do not possess the same level of expertise in the UN system or international human rights law, nor English proficiency. Addressing this gap, Hyein, a prominent lesbian activist, raised concerns about Justice's advocacy work being primarily “institutionalized” in nature, which redirects the focus of queer activism away from other urgent political issues. She noted, “The term ‘international solidarity’ has already become a professionalized and elitist activity in and of itself, and I'm not interested in that kind of international solidarity.” Indeed, the “institutionalized” form of global organizing has not gained widespread support or prioritization among most queer activists and organizations. This sentiment is epitomized in what Sungyeol, a prominent HIV/AIDS activist, often grumbled whenever the issue of global organizing came up: “That's the lawyers' job, not ours!”
Second, many Korean queer activists, including those who were once active in UN‐oriented global organizing work, became demoralized and questioned the efficacy and relevance of such efforts, particularly in terms of global networks. Woohyun, the enthusiastic law student who became involved in global organizing alongside Justice lawyers, described in detail a sense of detachment from the very meetings he himself helped arrange between the US LGBT rights diplomat and local queer activist groups. He noted, “All we could hear was, ‘We did this and that in the US.’ I couldn't stop thinking that these meetings are barely meaningful. … He [the American diplomat] didn't have much to offer in terms of community organizing or whatever issues we face here.” Woohyun's doubts about the relevance of global organizing grew when he attended an activist workshop on same‐sex marriage with the American marriage equality advocate Evan Wolfson. Sighing deeply, he said, “As for our relationship with the so‐called ‘the global,’ I can't really get a grasp of what that is.” He described often feeling lost and confused because the global human rights norms, institutions, and agents that he believed to be viable and universally relevant political tools turned out to be something “over there,” in the US or Europe, completely distant from the grounded reality that he and his activist colleagues were experiencing. He reckoned that expert‐led global organizing, in which he was involved, could be effective in other political and cultural contexts, but in Korea, “the global” remains such a confusing, unreachable, and unrelatable category.
Third, most Korean queer activists, therefore, tended to distance and dissociate themselves from global institutions and agents who they see as representatives of the US empire and other global powers. This distancing is nowhere more evident than in many queer activists' fraught relationship with Western embassies in Korea. Since the early 2010s, Western embassies in Seoul have begun to invite Korean queer activists to luncheon and social networking events as part of their celebration of Pride Month. However, the general sentiments among most Korean queer activists have been, according to Sungjong, a queer youth activist, “What do they want from us?” Seconding this sentiment, Woohyun also noted his observation of other activists who share the “widespread suspicion about foreign embassies that they invite us occasionally to feed us to no meaningful effect.” The underlying doubt has transformed into concerns as these Western embassies began to expand their presence by participating in the annual Seoul Pride (Seoul Queer Culture Festival) since 2014. Some even delivered congratulatory remarks at the opening ceremony of the Pride events. Many activists expressed serious concerns regarding the Western embassies' participation in local queer events, describing them as “paternalistic,” “intrusive,” and “overbearing.” Sungkyu, a full‐time staff member at a reputable LGBTQ rights organization, made a point regarding the vertical and hierarchical relationship between Western embassies and local queer organizations: “For them, our human rights situation is just another piece of political information.” He recognized that the so‐called “human rights diplomacy” of Western embassies was not designed to promote universal values of human rights but was, in fact, inseparable from their “political and diplomatic interests.” He carefully concluded, “I sometimes think it's a form of imperialism.”
By developing reservations, suspicions, and concerns regarding the efficacy, relevance, and legitimacy of global organizing work, whether through the UN or the involvement of Western embassies, a group of Korean queer activists demonstrates their delinking from “the global.” On the surface, it may seem like nothing has significantly changed; some may not have altogether retreated from their routine tasks of global organizing work and may still be seen as engaging in metrocentric cosmopolitanism. However, delinking here emerges as a crack or a ripple in the once‐perfect imagery of “the global” they used to believe in. They no longer view global knowledge, expertise, and networks as universally applicable or as useful as they once believed under the influence of metrocentric universalism. Instead, they recognize “the global” as a realm of complex power dynamics, accessible only to those with a specific form of expertise. Even then, “the global” remains an elusive concept, often revealing itself as a representation of the political interests of Western powers. Through this delinking, these activists practice what Mignolo ( ) called “epistemic disobedience,” collectively choosing not to seek recognition or solutions from the UN human rights system or the US government. It represents a determination to break away from the enduring neocolonial relationship inherent in the UN system, which is part of the global coloniality of power. Simultaneously, delinking from metrocentric cosmopolitanism opens up new possibilities for local activists to explore alternative visions of “the global,” as discussed in the following section.

6

## Provincial Cosmopolitanism
In his project of “provincializing Europe,” Chakrabarty ( ) makes it clear that the goal of the project is not simply to reject Eurocentric categories. In order to “think through the experiences of political modernity in non‐Western nations,” he suggests that we must explore how Eurocentric thought, which is deeply ingrained in our own thinking, is “at once both indispensable and inadequate.” (Chakrabarty  , 16) Hence, it has to “be renewed from and for the margins.” Drawing from Chakrabarty's project of “provincializing,” I use the notion of provincial cosmopolitanism to refer to the newly emerging form of cosmopolitanism that not only rejects or delinks from the metrocentric notion of “the global” but also seeks counter‐hegemonic resources, strategies, and alliances by re‐envisioning “the global.” In provincial cosmopolitanism, “the global” is understood as a counter‐hegemonic transnational realm wherein local actors connect with actors grounded in other locales through a shared sense of struggles. In contrast to the metrocentric understanding of “the global,” which is often seen as a privileged supranational realm reserved only for UN officials, ambassadors, legal experts, and other powerful actors, provincial cosmopolitanism emphasizes how “the global” can be reimagined and reenacted by local actors “from and for the margins” (Chakrabarty  , 16). Provincial cosmopolitanism emerges from local activists, NGO workers, and community members who explore concrete alternative actions and relationships after delinking from metrocentric cosmopolitanism. They are often empowered by tapping into transnational networks with other activists and community members rooted in countries beyond the powerful West—whose struggles are provincial but connected through the global coloniality of power.
Provincial cosmopolitanism can be found among a group of Korean queer activists who grapple with the fundamental limits of UN‐oriented and expert‐driven global organizing and have begun to seek out alternative global connections and resources beyond such efforts. Moonbyul, a long‐time lesbian activist, expressed discomfort in looking to the West as the only role model, as if they are universal: “I have issues with the idea that ‘Since same‐sex marriage has become legalized in the US, we should follow the path,’ for instance. I find it awkward that someone would bring up issues only because the US or some other European countries discuss them without considering our own context.” Instead, she suggested that Korean queer activism should consider paving a new pathway for itself: “I really hope to develop alternative ways of thinking about and doing activism that are specific to Korea and Asia.” It is important to note that, in this proposal, the new pathway for activism does not reject “the global” altogether and retract to ethno‐nationalism; rather, it places Korea in the context of another kind of “the global”: the critical regional framework of “Asia” as an expansive imagined territory. Similarly, Hyein, another prominent lesbian activist of an established LGBTQ organization, expressed her growing interest in an alternative global arena as opposed to UN‐oriented and expert‐driven global organizing, and shared her hopes for “richer opportunities for international solidarity from below,” in understanding better “how queer people live their lives and fight for their rights in various contexts and locales” and how to learn from each other.
Indeed, economic and cultural globalization has not only offered political opportunities for Korean queer activists via the UN system and mechanisms, but it has also opened up new doors by expanding transnational activist networks and linkages, particularly on a regional scale. As discussed above, most leading Korean LGBTQ rights organizations have been increasingly contacted, visited by, and interacted with UN officials, foreign diplomats, and global human rights experts in the past two decades. At the same time, they have been contacted, visited by, and interacted with local queer activists from other countries, particularly within and across Asia, including China, Japan, Taiwan, and Hong Kong. In return, they have been invited to and visited other parts of the region, both in groups and as individuals, for activist forums, workshops, pride events, and other queer gatherings. These increasing contacts, visits, and interactions have redirected many Korean queer activists, who had concerns about UN‐oriented global organizing, toward another kind of “the global,” based on the region they are situated in, wherein shared historical, geopolitical, and cultural contexts and struggles connect locally‐grounded and “provincial” actors together as transnational partners. By reimagining “the global” as a transnational realm constructed through connected struggles and reciprocity among activists and marginalized groups scattered across the region, and through the framework of critical regionalism, they are building an emerging sense of “membership in and identification with a world community that transcends locality” (Go  , 210). In doing so, they are developing provincial cosmopolitan visions that fundamentally challenge metrocentric cosmopolitanism and its universalist assumptions, as evident in three aspects of Korean queer activists' counter‐hegemonic global organizing.
First, some of the Korean queer activists have emphasized historical and cultural resonance over legal expertise in global organizing. Unlike their distanciation from UN authorities or foreign diplomats, these activists consider queer activists from around Asia as relatable allies and equal partners, not only due to geographic proximity but also due to shared historical and cultural contexts and challenges. In 2007, Sisters, a queer feminist organization, launched a multi‐year initiative called “Project Asia” that involved researching and visiting feminist and lesbian groups in Taiwan, Hong Kong, Malaysia, and the Philippines. In its first year, the project focused on “unlearning Asia from the Western perspective,” and in the next two years, it concentrated on building and empowering a queer feminist coalition across Asia, which culminated in a three‐day workshop in 2009 attended by activists from various Asian countries. Through “Project Asia,” Moonbyul, a longtime activist of Sisters, recalled that feminist, queer, and lesbian activists found “shared paths” and “shared challenges” in feminist and lesbian activism across Asia, such as a surge in anti‐feminist and anti‐queer religious fundamentalism and conservative backlash. The Sisters activists were able to better understand their struggles and efforts, not as separate from “the global,” but instead, they situated them within the larger historical and geopolitical context of the region, such as the long‐running legacies of authoritarianism associated with unfinished tasks of democracy after politico‐judicial decolonization. “Project Asia” was reinvigorated in 2015 when Sisters activists visited Taiwan to attend the first Asian queer chorus festival; since then, they have continued their search for “methods of doing activism relevant to Asia,” in Moonbyul's words.
Second, Korean queer activists have cultivated casual and informal ties with queer activists grounded in other parts of Asia, which has made “the global” a more accessible and tangible category for them. UN‐oriented and expert‐led global organizing largely focuses on formal and professional ties with high‐profile international figures and often excludes lay queer activists from participation. In contrast, a wide range of queer activists and community members have found their ways to engage in a different kind of “the global.” The aforementioned Asian queer chorus festival illustrates how provincial cosmopolitanism builds on casual and informal ties. In 2015, two Korean queer choirs, one affiliated with Sisters and the other with Brothers (a gay men's human rights group), participated in the inaugural Asian queer chorus festival in Taipei. This experience inspired Sisters and Brothers to co‐organize a second festival in 2017. About 200 participants from China, Taiwan, Singapore, Hong Kong, and Korea converged in Seoul. At a press conference on the second day, Hwasa, a queer activist and chorus member of Sisters, stated in English, “It's not easy to live a life as part of the queer community [here in Korea], and the situation is similar in other Asian countries.” Raising her voice, she went on, “We will not stand still to be defeated by despair and suffering. Instead, we will sing in unison, hand in hand, of dignity, equality, love, and peace!” After the press conference, the queer participants from across Asia marched through the streets chanting in English, “Hand in hand, we sing! We sing equality!” The three‐day festival culminated in a sold‐out concert, during which all of the choirs took to the stage to sing songs with translations projected onto screens in English and Korean. A Korean gay chorister later recalled, “We learned so much from the festival. It reaffirmed the virtue of singing together to transcend national, cultural, and linguistic barriers.” Through this event, a wide range of queer activists and community members from all around Asia could reconnect and build camaraderie, friendship, and an expanded sense of community—of provincial cosmopolitanism.
Third, as they reimagine “the global,” Korean queer activists have pursued equal and reciprocal relationships with other Asian queer activists to challenge the colonial power dynamics inherent in metrocentric cosmopolitanism. Because of the hierarchical relationship between local queer organizations and powerful global actors in global organizing, these global actors—such as UN agencies, foreign embassies, and international NGOs—are often dismissed as “external authorities” representing the political interests of the West, as noted by Hyein. This has garnered controversy over foreign funding among queer activists, although such funding opportunities have been structurally limited due to Korea's economic prosperity. In contrast, queer activists from other parts of Asia are usually welcomed, appreciated, and recognized as meaningful reference points and role models without bearing the political weight of colonialism. This contrast became particularly apparent during the opening ceremony of the 2017 Seoul Pride, where several guest speakers were invited on stage to deliver celebratory remarks. The representatives of fifteen Euro‐American embassies mainly extolled the progress of LGBTQ rights in the West (e.g., same‐sex marriage) and expressed their hope that Korea would follow suit. Not surprisingly, their condescending manner failed to endear them to local activists or the local participants of Seoul Pride. It was followed by members of queer activist groups from Taiwan and Japan, who presented themselves as equals to Korean activists and spoke of shared challenges and hopes in the region. For instance, instead of boasting about the historic constitutional decision to support marriage equality for the first time in Asia, queer activists from Taiwan emphasized the rising anti‐queer religious forces across the region and declared that, in English, “We, East Asian LGBTQ communities, should unite to fight for equality!” Three months later, Taiwanese activists extended invitations to several Korean and Japanese activists for a regional activist workshop focusing on “LGBTQ Movements and Conservative Power in East Asia,” aiming to delve deeper into these shared challenges and explore strategies to overcome them. A Korean queer activist recalled, “The workshop inspired me to envision the future direction of our activism by connecting the dots… across Asia.”
The newly emerging sense of provincial cosmopolitanism among Korean queer activists is increasingly rooted in the critical regional framework of “Asia,” providing counter‐hegemonic visions for global organizing. For instance, same‐sex marriage has long been considered a quintessential “Western queer agenda”; as a result, it received relatively marginal attention within Korean queer activism. However, the constitutional decision to legalize same‐sex marriage in Taiwan in 2017, along with subsequent legal implementations, brought this issue back to the forefront. This shift not only changed the perception of the marriage equality movement as solely Western but also demonstrated that it can be just as distinctly Asian. Taiwan's marriage equality movement and its legal accomplishments offered a more historically grounded, politically relevant, and culturally resonant context upon which Korean queer activists could reflect, draw inspiration, and seek consultation when coordinating contextualized political actions in pursuit of marriage equality. Through the framework of critical regionalism, “Asia” has evolved into a new foundation for reimagining and reenvisioning “the global” for Korean queer activists and beyond, highlighting the rise of provincial cosmopolitanism that fosters a sense of political community transcending ethno‐national consciousness.

7

## Conclusion
How do local actors make sense of and make use of the category of “the global”? How is the Eurocentric idea of cosmopolitanism adopted, challenged, and reconstructed in non‐Western contexts? Building and extending decolonial scholarship, I examined how “the global” emerges as a contested category for various local actors, resulting in different understandings of what “the global” means and how it becomes meaningful. By doing so, this article attempted to decolonize the Eurocentric category of “the global” as a battleground for contesting visions and strategies for social change. This article makes three contributions—empirical, theoretical, and methodological—to the critical scholarship on globalization, cosmopolitanism, and decolonial thought.
First, this article empirically examined how “the global” has become a multiple and contested category, rather than a singular and universal one, in a transnational world. Drawing on ethnographic research on Korean queer activism and their global organizing work, I showcased how marginalized communities in the non‐West not simply understand “the global” as the supranational public sphere between nation‐states through UN‐oriented and expert‐driven organizing but also realize “the global” as a system of “coloniality of power” (Quijano  ), which represents the political interests of Euro‐American powers rather than queer communities of the non‐West. This results in their “delinking” (Mignolo  ) from such metrocentric cosmopolitanism. However, this does not lead to a mere rejection of “the global” and a retreat to ethno‐national consciousness. Instead, encounters with metrocentric cosmopolitanism and the realization of its inherent contradictions have been “generative of alternative cosmopolitan visions” (Go  , 221); they learn to reimagine and reenact a different kind of “the global” with marginalized activists and communities from other neighboring countries, as they share connected histories and struggles—the transnational and decolonial vision that I called provincial cosmopolitanism, coming “from and for the margins” (Chakrabarty  , 16). My empirical findings suggest that differential forms of cosmopolitanism—and people's understandings of “the global”—are neither monolithic nor static, but rather critical vantage points that can shift within various social relations. Future research could explore the political, social, and cultural conditions that lead people to adopt one form of cosmopolitanism over others, as well as how and why people might engage in seemingly contradictory practices of cosmopolitanism. For example, could the multiple global crises of our time—such as climate change, wars, and genocides—lead to a return to metrocentric cosmopolitanism or foster the further development of provincial cosmopolitanism?
Second, this article theoretically advances the critical understanding of cosmopolitanism from a decolonial perspective. I build upon existing critiques of Eurocentric cosmopolitanism regarding the erasure of empire and colonialism and the reproduction of neocolonial power dynamics in such scholarship (Bhambra  ; Go  ; Mignolo  ). Their proposal of alternative visions of cosmopolitanism, however, still largely remains set in the Western context, unintentionally limiting the discussion of cosmopolitanism to the global metropole. This article shifts our attention from the global metropole to a non‐Western context with complex histories of colonialism and globalization and theorizes the coexistence and contestation between two forms of cosmopolitanism—metrocentric and provincial. By doing so, I emphasize the importance of taking the non‐West seriously (Connell  ), particularly in the decolonial theorization of cosmopolitanism because non‐Western contexts can and do provide rich theoretical opportunities for us to rethink and reconfigure Eurocentric categories. Future research could pay closer attention to the critical positionality of (East) Asia within the global coloniality of power, investigating how provincial cosmopolitanism and broader “anticolonial solidarity” (Go  ) emerge—and face challenges and repercussions—among different communities, across diverse political agendas, and throughout various parts of the region. How do these solidarities draw upon the “decolonial relationality” (Patil  ) of the past and present, and how do the intersectional dynamics of race, gender, sexuality, and religion shape such endeavors? How might provincial cosmopolitanism, as conceived and exercised in an advanced economy and a “sub‐empire” (J. K. Lee  ) like South Korea compare to that emerging from other parts of Asia, such as China, India, Vietnam, or Thailand? How would provincial cosmopolitanism build on the framework of critical regionalism while also going beyond region‐based territorial and cultural imaginations? These questions would deepen the theoretical conversation on decolonizing Eurocentric categories beyond the confines of Western experiences.
Lastly, this article advocates for the methodological importance of examining political activism to better understand decolonial and anticolonial thought. Existing scholarship tends to focus on the historical legacies of prominent thinkers such as Du Bois, Fanon, and Hall in search of critical and alternative visions of cosmopolitanism (Go  ; Hammer  ; Itzigsohn and Brown  ; White  ). I concur with Go's ( ) updated suggestion that decolonial and anticolonial thought emerges from different global geographies and social locations beyond Western academia. If an anticolonial approach is fundamental to understanding anticolonial action (White  ), and anticolonial thought cannot be separated from anticolonial action (Hammer  ), it is then equally important that we pay due attention to how political activism becomes a part of decolonial politics (Waites  ), as well as decolonial knowledge production. By situating non‐Western queer activists as critical agents dealing with the complex colonial power dynamics in relation to “the global,” I suggest that we must learn from their visions, struggles, and actions to better understand decolonial and anticolonial thought in our contemporary times. Within the uneven global knowledge economy (Connell  ), Western scholarship has often inflicted epistemic violence on marginalized communities in the non‐West, including queer communities, by exploiting, sensationalizing, appropriating, distorting, and erasing their voices, experiences, and perspectives—all while presenting itself as radical and progressive (Atshan  ; Jung  ). My research calls for more qualitative and ethnographic studies that recognize non‐Western actors, including queer activists, not as fetishized objects of inquiry, but as rightful subjects of knowledge production whose critical insights deserve thoughtful attention and reflexive engagement.

## Acknowledgements
An earlier version of this paper was first drafted in 2017 and has since undergone numerous revisions. I am grateful to all those who read and offered generous feedback on its many iterations throughout this long journey. The paper was reworked and rewritten with a new theoretical framework in 2023, shaped by my encounter with the Queer Korea controversy and my engagement with the Decolonizing Korean Studies Collective (DKSC). I am especially thankful to Korean queer activists and members of DKSC, whose insights and commitments deeply inspired this new direction. While this paper does not fully capture the significant developments in Korean queer activism or the progress of critical regionalism after 2019—following the completion of my fieldwork—I hope it can serve as a small entry point for continued conversations and collaborations with queer activists in South Korea and across global Asia.

## Data Availability Statement
Research data are not shared.