3815pheelsevierThe Science of the Total EnvironmentSci Total EnvironPMC1022480710224807102248073724774410.1016/j.scitotenv.2023.164437Dependence analysis of social contact behaviors under the impacts of COVID-19 based on a copula approach
DingHongxiang ZhangJunyi FengTao LiuRui aSchool of Transportation, Southeast University, 2 Southeast University Road, Jiangning District, Nanjing 211189, ChinabMobilities and Urban Policy Lab, Graduate School of Advanced Science and Engineering, Hiroshima University, 1-5-1 Kagamiyama, Higashihiroshima 739-8529, JapancUrban and Data Science Lab, Graduate School of Advanced Science and Engineering, Hiroshima University, 1-5-1 Kagamiyama, Higashihiroshima 739-8529, Japan⁎Corresponding author.
28520238921644371644373052023© 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.

## Abstract
The spread of the SARS-CoV-2 virus during the COVID-19 pandemic was intricately linked with contact between people, but many of the policies designed to encourage safe contact behaviors were unsuccessful. One reason was that the determinants of social contact decisions have not been thoroughly investigated using scientifically sound methodologies. To fill this gap, a unique survey was designed which sought data on social contact behaviors and their determinants. Second, a copula-based behavior model was developed to jointly represent the choices of contact modes (including direct and indirect contact) and the number of contacted persons. The survey was conducted in six countries from March to May 2021 and collected valid responses from >7000 people. A comparison of five key copula functions found that the Frank function outperformed the others. The results of a Frank-based model showed that indirect contacts were significantly and positively associated with the number of contacted persons. Then the influence of various determinants, including activity attributes (e.g., frequency and travel distance), protective measures, safety level of activity settings, and psychological factors related to activity participation and risk perception, were extensively analyzed. In particular, the various heterogeneous influences in different social contact settings were examined. The findings provide scientific evidence for policymakers to promote safe social distancing, even for the post-pandemic era.
Keywords: COVID-19, Pandemic, Social contact behavior, Indirect contact, Activity participation, Copula

## Graphical abstract
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 Jan 8; Revised 2023 May 21; Accepted 2023 May 22; Issue date 2023 Sep 20.

1.

## Introduction
One of the main channels of virus transmission is through coming into contact with other people when participating in activities or travelling (e.g., ; ; ; ; ; ; ). To contain the spread of COVID-19, various non-pharmaceutical interventions have been implemented. For example, strict lockdowns ( ; ; ; ) dramatically reduced the reproduction number ( ; ; ; ). Physical distancing measures and infection prevention measures (e.g., wearing a mask) were also effective in controlling the spread of the virus ( ; ; ; ; ). However, the negative impacts of these measures on economic activities and people's daily lives also need to be addressed ( ; ; ; ; ; ).
Social contacts include direct and indirect contacts between people. During lockdowns, people changed how they interacted with each other and participated in activities, generally adopting behaviors to avoid virus transmission ( ; ; ; ; ) and to mitigate the negative impacts on mental health (e.g., ; ). However, relying on people to change their social contact behaviors was not always successful, as shown by the repeated peaks of new infection cases. Thus, it is necessary to develop a better understanding of social contact patterns and provide more reliable data for assessing policy options. Aggregated together, the results may offer valuable insights into ways to improve the total environment. For example, policies may target how people socialize, and thereby reduce the number of trips and carbon emissions. However, there are still gaps in our knowledge regarding social contact behavior and associated factors. We identified the following three major research gaps:
[1]Many studies have investigated close contacts, in part because of the popular 1 m or 2 m distancing rule recommended by WHO, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and medical authorities of other countries. Studies in the early stages of the pandemic showed that the maximum transmission distance of SARS-CoV-2 aerosol might be as much as 4 m (e.g., ), with subsequent studies confirming that even the 2 m rule is inadequate for protecting people, especially in an indoor environment (e.g., ). In other words, indirect social contacts may also transmit the virus. However, existing studies have not investigated these indirect social contacts.
[2]Existing studies have investigated the average number of contact persons during the COVID-19 pandemic, but have neglected to analyze types of social contact modes, such as physical (or direct) and non-physical (or indirect) contacts. More importantly, no study has examined the association between social contact modes and the number of contacted persons, not to mention the heterogeneities of social contacts across activity settings.
[3]Most studies have used regression-type models which are unable to capture behavioral mechanisms. Concerning the two key social contact behaviors (i.e., choice of contact modes and number of contacted persons), no relevant modeling effort has been made. In other words, the dependence between the two contact behaviors has been ignored.
This study aims to address the above research gaps using the following framework.
(1)A questionnaire survey was conducted from March to May 2021 in Australia, Canada, Japan, New Zealand, U.S.A., and U.K., from which valid answers were collected from >7000 respondents. The data was pooled to derive cross-country results.
(2)Social contact mode choices and the number of contacted persons were jointly represented by building a copula-based model which combined a multinomial logit model and an ordered logit model, allowing utility-based behavioral decision-making mechanisms to be reflected.
(3)The influence of seven key activities (work/study, shopping, eating out, physical exercise, attending parties, cultural leisure, and medical activities) were simultaneously incorporated into the utility functions of the two contact behaviors. By doing so, the observed heterogeneities of the influences of activity settings could be compared.
(4)In addition to individual attributes, this study also investigated the influence of objective and subjective factors related to social contact settings and risk-related psychological factors (e.g., reliability of risk information, risk perceptions), as well as triggers for behavioral changes (e.g., from government and workplaces).
The rest of this study is structured as follows. briefly summarizes the findings of previous studies related to social contacts. describes the survey design and data, while describes the features of the key variables. explains the copula-based model used in this study, presents the results, and discusses the main findings of the study. concludes with a brief summary and future research directions.

2.

## Literature review
To position the current study in the literature, this section presents a broad literature review and identifies the key research gaps.
2.1.

## Lack of attention given to indirect social contacts
As noted by WHO, 
the SARS-CoV-2 virus spread between people mainly in three ways: (1) through close contact with each other (e.g., conversational distance); (2) in poorly ventilated and/or crowded indoor settings; and (3) when touching eyes, nose, or mouth after touching surfaces or objects that have been contaminated with the virus. Thus, both direct and indirect social contacts could potentially spread the virus. However, following the definition for previous respiratory diseases ( ; ; ), many studies only focused on skin-to-skin touching and face-to-face conversation ( ; ; ; ; ). Other studies ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ) mainly cite the definition given by the POLYMOD (Improving Public Health Policy in Europe through Modeling and Economic Evaluation of Interventions for the Control of Infectious Diseases) ( ; ), which uses the mean number of contacted persons. However, the SARS-CoV-2 virus can travel more than six feet in aerosol form ( ), and infect people through their indirect contact with virus-infected surfaces ( ; ; ). Hence, focusing only on close or direct contacts are insufficient and biased; it is also necessary to consider indirect contacts. implemented one of the few studies investigating people's indirect contact with others, but due to the unavailability of data, they only used the contact time and ignored the number of contacted persons.
In summary, most previous studies only focus on close contact (skin-to-skin touch or face-to-face conversation) behaviors, and neglect individuals' indirect contacts which could also transmit the SARS-CoV-2 virus [Research gap 1].

2.2.

## Lack of attention given to joint social contact decisions
After government restrictions were gradually lifted, social contacts increased in many countries but have not yet returned to pre-pandemic levels ( ; ; ). For instance, used social contact data collected from March 1–20, 2020 in Shanghai, Shenzhen, Changsha, and data from May 7–15, 2020 in Wuhan (about one month after the lockdown was lifted) to compare changes in contact patterns across the pre-pandemic, lockdown and post-lockdown periods. The mean number of contacts increased by 5 % to 17 % after lockdowns in these cities. Although intracity mobility has rebounded to pre-pandemic levels, the number of contacts are at one-seventh to one-third of pre-pandemic levels.
Some studies have investigated the mean number of contacts in relation to demographic attributes (e.g., age, gender, household size, occupation) and contact settings (household/home, workplace, school, community, leisure activity, transport, shopping). For example, conducted a survey on social contacts and collected mobility data from Google and Apple in Germany from April to June 2020, to investigate changes in the mean number of social contacts over time, using the age-specific social contact matrices of direct social contacts. Respondents were asked about the age and sex of their social contacts, the duration they spent with each contact, and the contact setting (household, school, work, transport). In their results, most of the social contacts occurred in the household. After lockdown measures were relaxed, people's mobility behavior went back to pre-pandemic levels almost instantly, but the number of contacts remained low, probably because people were reducing close contacts outside of their home and deliberately maintaining social distances. conducted a social contact survey in Greece from March 31 to April 7, 2020, during the lockdown. They collected information about people's social contacts approximately two months before the lockdown and during the lockdown. They found that daily contacts declined by 86.9 % during the lockdown. The decrease in contacts during the lockdown was most obvious in the household, but other measures such as the school closures may have led to an increase in leisure contact or a decline in work contact. People tended to contact peers when doing leisure activities, but not so much for other contact settings before the lockdown. collected individuals' social contact data in the South West Shewa Zone (SWSZ) of Ethiopia from November 2019 to December 2019 when schools were open as usual. They then explored the impact of socio-demographic factors and mixing patterns on COVID-19 at three spatial scales: remote settlements, rural villages, and urban neighborhoods. For each spatial scale, there were three contact settings: households, schools, and the general community. Their results show that the mean number of social contacts (excluding school contacts) was higher in both urban neighborhoods and remote settlements, but lower in rural villages, especially for people over 60. Nevertheless, the mean number of social contacts in school did not show obvious differences across the three spatial scales. For the mixing patterns, people below 30 years (especially between 10 and 19 years) were more likely to contact their peers in the general community across the three spatial scales. compared a random individual's average number of contacts per day from January to May 2020 in Ontario, Canada, using the mean value of contacts in POLYMOD survey data before the pandemic to explore age-specific daily contact mixing patterns in the workplace, household, school, and community settings. They found an obvious reduction in the average contact rate (for all contact settings) after control measures were imposed, but contacts in households increased by 13 % after school closure, 45 % after additional physical distancing measures were introduced, and 51 % after non-essential businesses were closed. used data from the CoMix multi-country social contact survey, started in March 2020 and conducted in 19 European countries, which includes information about people's social contacts at home, work, school, leisure activities, and other places ( ), as well as POLYMOD data in Italy, to investigate the impact of tiered restrictions on social contacts between December 2020 and April 2021. They summarized the differences in the mean number of contacts by waves for CoMix and POLYMOD, from the perspective of age, gender, and household size, and analyzed the difference in the mean number of contacts by age for different contact settings. Their results show that non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) significantly reduced the number of contacts across age groups and contact settings. Elderly people aged over 60 had fewer contacts and a lower decrease in contacts than other age groups. Household contacts did not show obvious differences across the regions in response to different levels of non-pharmaceutical interventions, but other contacts (such as leisure contacts) were more likely to be affected by the strictness of interventions, especially among the younger people. used online social contact survey data, obtained from 304 employees in three U.S. companies between April to June 2020, to analyze the changes in daily contacts among their workforces. In their study, contacts were classified into different modes: conversation only (54 %); physical contact only (12 %); and both conversation and physical contact (34 %). The descriptive analysis showed that most contacts of employees occurred at home (64 %), followed by shopping contacts (14 %). Most daily contacts lasted for >4 h (38 %). The longer contacts occurred at the respondent's home, while shorter contacts occurred outside. More than 60 % of the daily contacts were repeated contacts over days.
In summary, previous studies only investigated the number of social contacts (especially only average values) as an indicator of social contact behaviors, and apart from , there is no study on social contact mode choices. Some studies have explored the changes in the number of social contacts for different contact settings, but they tend to group shopping and leisure settings into “other”, probably leading to seriously biased findings [Research gap 2].

2.3.

## Lack of modeling approaches which account for social contact behaviors
To model social contact behaviors, existing studies have mainly focused on the number of contacted persons, using regression models for their analyses.
 estimated a generalized additive mixed regression model to investigate factors affecting changes in average daily contacts by country and by contact settings (e.g., at home, at work). The data came from a repeated cross-sectional survey implemented in 21 European countries between March 2020 and March 2022, where a zero-inflated Poisson distribution was assumed. The influence of age, household size, gender, risk perception, and measures taken against COVID-19 were quantified.
 applied a Poisson regression model to investigate factors influencing the number of social contacts. Data about the number of social contacts in different contact settings was collected in Luxembourg during the lockdown (from March 25 to May 1) and after the lockdown (from June 12 to June 25), and the influence of age, nationality, and the survey period were examined. To overcome the shortcomings of the Poisson regression model, which allows for overdispersion (i.e., modeling of data exhibiting more variance), estimated a negative binomial regression model using data from social contact surveys in Wuhan and Shanghai, China, from February 1–10, 2020, to investigate changes in people's social contacts. The baseline was defined as the number of people's contacts before the pandemic. Gender, age, occupation, and household size were examined. Similarly, also applied a negative binomial regression model to analyze the number of daily contacts in the U.S.A. between March 22 and September 26, 2020. Age, education, ethnicity, household size, residential location, and gender were incorporated in the analysis. used a negative binomial regression model to evaluate the number of social contacts from April to May 2020 in Minnesota, U.S.A., and included age, gender, race/ethnicity, region, and other demographic characteristics as explanatory variables. Using data collected in Milan, Italy between July 2020 and March 2021, also estimated a negative binomial regression model with the number of daily contacts, but under different levels of restrictions.
In summary, the previous social contact modeling methods are mainly based on regression models. As a result, the dependence between the number of social contacts and contact mode choices have been ignored. Furthermore, existing modeling analyses only focus on the effects of demographic characteristics, without fully considering the impact of psychological factors [Research gap 3].

2.4.

## Positioning the current study in the literature
To fill these three research gaps, this study built a copula-based integrated social contact decision-making model. In the model, both social contact mode choices and the number of contacted persons were jointly represented, addressing Research gap 2. Seven activity settings (work/study, shopping, eating out, physical exercise, parties, cultural leisure, and medical activities) were also incorporated in the model, with an emphasis on leisure-related activities. All possible contact modes, i.e., only physical contact (OPC), only non-physical contact (ONPC), both physical and non-physical contact (PCNPC), and no contact, were included in the choice set, to address Research gap 1. OPC refers to direct physical contact or close conversation, which corresponds to the close contact in existing studies, as well as indirect physical contact with a virus-infected surface. This captures the virus transmission as well as people's behaviors for avoiding COVID-19. The copula approach not only accommodates the potential dependence between the two social contact behaviors, but also the decision-making mechanisms with respect to each behavior, including key psychological factors. This distinguishes the current study from existing studies and addresses Research gap 3.

3.

## Survey and data
3.1.

## Survey design
A retrospective questionnaire survey was designed based on the life-oriented approach ( ), where social contact behaviors during the COVID-19 pandemic were investigated with respect to seven representative social contact settings, i.e., work/study, shopping at supermarket/shopping mall, eating out at restaurants, physical exercise at indoor places (e.g., gym), parties at indoor public places (e.g., bar), cultural leisure (e.g., visiting cinema, concert hall, etc.), and medical activities (e.g., see a doctor, purchase medicine). The survey also investigated four types of social contact modes and the number of contacted persons. The four contact modes were: (1) no contact (NC); (2) only physical contact (OPC) (e.g., having a face-to-face conversation, skin-to-skin touching, or other indirect physical contact); (3) only non-physical (or indirect) contact (ONPC) (e.g., in the physical presence of another person but without face to face conversation, skin-to-skin touching or other indirect physical contacts); and (4) both physical and non-physical contact (PCNPC). The number of contacted persons was measured using an ordinal scale: (1) 1–2 persons, (2) 3–4 persons, (3) 5–6 persons, (4) 7–9 persons, and (5) ten persons or more. In the case of no contact, the number was reported as zero. Note that contacts between household members were excluded from this survey.
The survey further investigated potential determinants of social contact behaviors, including factors related to social contact settings and risk-related psychological factors, triggers for behavioral changes, and socio-demographic attributes. For social contact settings, both objective and subjective factors were incorporated into the modeling analysis. Objective factors included activity frequency, distance from home to activity destination, travel party, and protective measures taken (wearing a mask, disinfecting hands). Subjective factors included respondents' perceptions of contact situations at activity locations (i.e., closed spaces with poor ventilation, crowded places, and close-contact settings); perceived safety levels; protective capacities (or efficacy) (e.g., ) of respondents themselves and their household members; and attitudes toward the necessity of and punishment related to activities. Regarding risk-related psychological factors, this study focused on the reliability of risk information, risk perceptions at different spatial scales, and the willingness of changing the duration/timing of activity participation. Triggers for behavioral changes (e.g., ) were measured in terms of rules set by governments, organizations or workplaces, and the number of infected cases.

3.2.

## Survey implementation and samples
The survey was conducted online in six countries (Australia, Canada, Japan, New Zealand, U.K., and U.S.A.) from March to May 2021. These countries were selected because it was thought that the quality of data which could be collected from these countries was high. To roughly reflect the representativeness of their populations, the distribution of age, gender and regions surveyed almost matched that of the whole population, based on official statistics of these countries. 
A major international online survey company was contracted to recruit samples from registered respondents in each country. Due to budget limitations, the minimal sample size for each country was 1000. The budget limitation also forced us to focus on five English-speaking countries and the authors' country of residence (Japan), to avoid extra translation costs. This resulted in a total of 7265 valid samples, with >1100 for each country: Australia (1125), Canada (1176), Japan (1169), New Zealand (1193), U.K. (1305) and U.S.A. (1297). The differences between the samples and the actual populations are within two percentage points for all countries. 
shows the differences across regions in each country.
 shows the distributions of individual attributes by country/region. The share of males (49.0 %) was slightly lower females (51.0 %), which matched the shares for the whole population (males: 49.3 %, females: 50.7 %). People aged 30–60 years accounted for the biggest share (49.6 %). The share of old people (aged 60 or above) (29.6 %) was higher than that of young people (younger than 30 or below) (20.8 %). Company employees/self-employed people had the biggest share (39.4 %), followed by other unemployed/retired (24.6 %). About one-third had a bachelor-level qualification (32.9 %), followed by a college/vocational qualification (22.5 %), and high school or senior high school (19.8 %).
 
3.3.

## Data screening
To better understand social contact decisions, data without out-of-home activities were excluded. This left the following samples: 3963 for work/study (51.8 % out of all the 7265 respondents); 7245 for shopping (99.7 %); 4562 for eating out (62.8 %); 3518 for physical exercise (48.4 %); 3044 for parties (41.9 %); 3025 for cultural leisure (41.6 %); and 5670 for medical activities (78.0 %). Only 0.3 % of respondents did not go shopping, while the largest shares of people stopped cultural leisure and parties. People may have stopped some out-of-home activities to protect themselves from being infected ( ).
As shown in 
, males performed more daily activities than females during the COVID-19 pandemic, except in the categories of shopping and medical activities. People aged 20–29 participated in more activities, especially parties (28.1 %) and cultural leisure (28.3 %), than other age groups. More than half of respondents lived in a household with three members or below, while about one-third lived in a two-member household. More than half of the respondents were married. The educational qualification with the largest share was undergraduate/bachelor (32.4 % to 36.7 %), followed by college or vocational school. About 60 % of respondents' income levels were between 35,000 USD and 149,999 USD.
 

4.

## Features of key variables
4.1.

## Dependent variables: social contact behaviors
As shown in 
, >60 % of respondents had some contact with others in all contact settings. People who attended parties had the largest contact share (75.7 %), while shopping involved the smallest share at 62.3 %. As noted above, the four contact mode options were: (1) no contact (NC); (2) only physical contact (OPC); (3) only non-physical (or indirect) contact (ONPC); and (4) both physical and non-physical contact (PCNPC). Among the three modes with contact, ONPC accounted for the largest share in all settings (for example, the shares for shopping and eating out were >37.0 %). Even PCNPC included indirect contact (ranging between 11.5 % for shopping and 25.7 % for work/study), so indirect contacts should not be ignored. The smaller shares of OPC than ONPC at all settings suggest that people were trying to avoid close contact as much as possible, but among these settings, parties, cultural leisure, and medical activities had the largest shares of close contact. Interestingly, the distribution of shares across contact modes during parties were similar to those during medical activities.
 indicates that work/study, parties, and cultural leisure involved a larger number of contacts (at least 5 persons: 29.2 %–40.3 %) than in other settings. Among these, work/study should be regarded as the riskiest setting for pandemic control policymaking. Shopping, eating out and medical activities showed the largest share of 1–2 persons. The shares of 3–4 persons varied slightly across settings (shopping 11.9 % – eating out 20.6 %), compared to shares of 1–2 persons (work/study 16.9 % – medical activities 43.8 %).
 Regarding the relationship between social contact modes and the number of contacted persons, it was found that the largest number of contacted persons (i.e., at least 5 persons) was observed under both physical and non-physical contact modes (i.e., PCNPC) at all settings ( 
). Thus, mixed contact modes were associated with larger numbers of contact persons. Compared with the non-physical contact mode (ONPC), the physical contact mode (OPC) had a higher share of the largest number of contacted persons (i.e., at least 5 persons). This is consistent with the observation that the ONPC mode was more likely to be linked with 1–2 persons than OPC and PCNPC. For the medium number of contacts (i.e., 3–4 persons), its largest shares were not necessarily associated with either PCNPC or OPC.
 
4.2.

## Explanatory variables
4.2.1.

## Factors related to activity participation

1)Perceptions of 3Cs at activity locations

The data for respondents who perceived their daily activity locations to be closed spaces with poor ventilation, crowded places, or places with close contact (i.e., 3Cs) was further analyzed. Pooling data from all settings, it was found that the share of respondents who perceived closed places was 18.5 %, crowded places was 30.0 %, and close-contact settings was 34.7 %. This suggests that people were willing to visit places without 3Cs, especially those who had a low tolerance to poor ventilation during the COVID-19 pandemic. Among the seven contact settings, five had the highest share of places with close contact, while shopping, cultural leisure, and parties were perceived to be crowded places. People suffered more from poor ventilation during work/study and parties than in other settings. For details, please refer to Fig. S1 of the Supplementary Information.
2)Perceived safety during activity participation
Only about half of respondents perceived participation in activities to be safe for themselves and their companions. Medical activities were perceived to be the safest, followed by work/study. In general, respondents perceived safety levels during parties and cultural leisure as being lowest for themselves, while they perceived shopping and eating out as having the lowest safety level for their companions. For details, please refer to Fig. S2 of the Supplementary Information.
3)Protective measures taken during activity participation
Meanwhile, based on the pooled data for all contact settings, the shares of wearing a mask and disinfecting hands were found to be about 60 %. Among all settings, the shares of these measures were highest for shopping and medical activities. This may be due to the high frequency of shopping and concerns about infection risks at hospitals. As expected, the share of people reporting protective measures when participating in parties was the lowest, but this was not significantly different from physical exercise and cultural leisure. It was also surprising that the shares for eating out were much lower than those for work/study, even though eating out is usually riskier in terms of infection. For details, please refer to Fig. S3 of the Supplementary Information.
4)Self-efficacy and others' efficacy
In all contact settings, respondents' belief in other people's capacity to protect others, including respondents, (i.e., others' efficacy) was higher (shares of “high” and “very high”) than their belief in their own capacity to protect themselves (i.e., self-efficacy). Respondents reported the highest capacity to protect themselves during shopping and medical activities, while reporting that other people's capacity to protect others, including respondents, during medical activities was the highest. Being aware of higher infection risks during parties and cultural leisure activities, the perceived self-efficacy and others' efficacy were lower than in other contact settings. For details, please refer to Fig. S4 of the Supplementary Information.
5)Attitudes toward necessity and punishment related to activity participation
An analysis was conducted about people's attitudes toward whether they thought that performing a certain activity was necessary during the pandemic, even at the risk of infection, and whether it should be punished or not. In total, the shares of respondents who saw the activity as a necessity and supported punishment were both larger than 40 % (“somewhat agree” and “totally agree”), which was more than the unsupported shares. The activity seen as a necessity by the largest share of respondents was work/study (very close to 50 %), while the proportion of respondents who thought it was punishable was <40 %. The activity seen as a necessity by the second largest share was medical activities, while only about 32 % of respondents supported punishment for medical activities. Meanwhile, >52 % supported punishment for attending parties, while only 37 % thought it was a necessity. But the activity with the smallest number who saw it as a necessity did not necessarily correspond with the largest group who saw it as punishable, as can be seen by the example of eating out. For details, please refer to Fig. S5 of the Supplementary Information.
6)Activity attributes
Even during the COVID-19 pandemic, about 60 % of respondents had to work/study on a daily or almost daily basis. Regarding frequency, going shopping once or twice a week accounted for the largest share (55.7 %). For parties, cultural leisure, medical activities, and eating out, the most common response was less than once a month. For physical exercise, the most popular frequencies were less than once a month and once or twice a week. For details, please refer to Fig. S6 of the Supplementary Information.
In terms of travel distance, medical activities had almost equal shares of shorter distances (<2 km) and longer distances (5 km or longer). Meanwhile, culture leisure and work/study had longer travel distances (5 km or longer). The travel distances for shopping and physical exercise were similarly shorter than 2 km. Respondents participating in cultural leisure had longer distances than shorter distances. Eating out and attending parties showed similar distance distributions. For details, please refer to Fig. S7 of the Supplementary Information.
Regarding co-participation with others (including friends but not household members), the largest share was attending a party (33.7 %), followed by cultural leisure, while the shares for shopping and medical activities were the lowest. Eating out and physical exercise showed similar shares (about 20 %). For details, please refer to Fig. S8 of the Supplementary Information.

4.2.2.

## Risk-related psychological factors

1)Risk perception and reliability of information

The share of people who perceived a higher risk in crowded trains and buses were between 60 % and 70 % (“somewhat agree” and “strongly agree”), which was much higher than those who perceived a higher risk in the region of residence (>40 %) and country of residence (between 30 % and 40 %). Thus, people's perceptions of risk appear to go down as the spatial scale increases; however, the shares of “disagree” and “agree” were almost equal at the level of region of residence, while the “disagree” shares were larger than the “agree” shares at the level of country of residence. With regards to different settings, for medical activities, shopping, and work/study, the shares of higher risk in crowded public transport were higher, while the differences across the settings were not so remarkable. Regarding the reliability of information (provided by the local government), >65 % of respondents trusted the information, and only about 10 % didn't trust it. However, the assessment of reliability of information was similar for the respective contact settings. For details, please refer to Fig. S9 of the Supplementary Information.
2)Triggers for behavioral changes
With regard to triggers for behavioral changes, >60 % of respondents answered that they changed their behaviors in response to multiple triggers, irrespective of social contact settings. In contrast, <15 % of respondents did not respond to these triggers. Among the three triggers investigated in the survey, the number of people who were triggered by formal rules set by the government was much higher than those triggered by rules from the workplace/organization and the number of infected cases. This was probably because many of the government's rules were mandatory. The government's rules and the number of infected cases had larger impacts on the behavioral changes of people who went shopping and to medical activities during the pandemic. The rules from the workplace/organization/affiliation affected behavioral changes related to work/study. The share of respondents who changed their behavior for leisure activities (eating out, physical exercise, attending parties, cultural leisure) was not as large as the shares for mandatory/maintenance activities (work/study, shopping, medical activities). For details, please refer to Fig. S10 of the Supplementary Information.
3)Willingness to change the duration/timing for activity participation
>70 % of people were willing to change the duration of activities (“somewhat agree” and “agree”). Those who said that they did not agree to change the duration made up about 10 %. Among the seven contact settings, the willingness to change duration was higher for medical activities and shopping, while the other settings had similar levels of willingness to change. For details, please refer to Fig. S11 of the Supplementary Information.

5.

## Integrated copula-based social contact decision modeling
As the above discussion shows, the types of social contact (e.g., physical or non-physical) and the number of contacted persons seem to be related to each other. It is therefore worth exploring how to model these two decision variables together in order to develop a better understanding about people's decisions about social contacts. Taking the features of the two variables into consideration, the choices of social contact modes were represented by a multinomial logit model, while the number of contacted persons was based on an ordered logit model. The joint modeling was done using a copula approach.
5.1.

## Modeling of social contact mode choices
Let n (n = 1, 2, …, N) be the index for individuals, v (v = 1, 2, …, V) be the index for explanatory variables and i (i = 1, 2, …, I) be the index for social contact modes. To incorporate the heterogeneity of social contact decisions across activity settings for the same person, α
g is a parameter introduced to capture the magnitude of influence of explanatory variables across activity settings (g = 1,2, …, G). Thus, α
g can be called a sensitivity parameter. Let h
nig indicate the utility of individual n who chooses contact mode i for activity setting g.
(1)hnig=∑vαgβivxniv+εnigHere, x
niv is the explanatory variable for mode i, β
iv is the corresponding parameter to be estimated, and ε
nig is the random error term following an independent and identical Gumbel distribution. Based on the random utility maximization principle, individual n chooses alternative i only when the utility of alternative i is larger than that of other alternatives:
(2)hnig>maxi≠jhnjgThen, Eqs. , can be rewritten as:
(3)∑vαgβivxniv>maxi≠jhnjg−εnigLet r
nig be a dummy variable indicating whether individual n chooses contact mode i (r
nig = 1) or not (r
nig = 0) for activity setting g. It is equal to 1 only if the Eq. is true, otherwise it is zero.
If we define:
(4)φig=maxi≠jhnjg−εnigthen the implied marginal distribution of (i.e., choice probability) can be formed as follows:
(5)F∑vαgβivxniv=Pφig<∑vαgβivxniv=exp∑vαgβivxniv∑jexp∑vαgβjvxnjv,j=1,2,…,J,g=1,2,…,G
5.2.

## Number of contacted persons
In this study, the number of contacted persons was measured using an ordinal scale. Thus, an ordered logit model was selected to explain the number of people who the person came into contact with, while performing an activity. Let k (k = 1, 2, …, K) be the index for the number of contacted persons and be the number of contacted persons corresponding to contact mode i for activity setting g. is observed only if r
nig is equal to 1. The underlying propensity of the number of contacted persons with respect to contact mode i is shown as follows:
(6)snig∗=∑vαgγvzniv+ηnig,snig=kifτk−1<snig∗<τkwhere is the explanatory variable for the number of contacted persons, and is the unknown parameter. represents an error term with a Gumbel distribution. ( ) indicate the thresholds of . Let be the cumulative distribution function of a standard logistic distribution. Then the marginal distribution of is formed as follows.
(7)Gτk−∑vαgγvzniv=expτk−∑vαgγvzniv1+expτk−∑vαgγvznivThe probability that the number of contacted persons is k is written as follows.
(8)Psnig=k=Pηkg<τk−∑vαgγvzniv−Pηkg<τk−1−∑vαgγvzniv=Gτk−∑vαgγvzniv−Gτk−1−∑vαgγvznivIn Eq. , because follows the ordering condition ( ), is equal to 0 and is equal to 1.

5.3.

## Joint copula model of social contact
Here, the relationship between the contact mode choices and the number of contacted persons means that the above two error terms (ε
nig and η
nig) are not independent. In other words, they should follow a joint distribution (or a bivariate distribution). It is not easy to estimate models with a joint distribution. To overcome this difficulty, the copula approach has been widely applied, which uses marginal distributions and dependence parameters to represent the joint distribution ( ; ; ; ; ; ). In other words, with the copula approach, it is not necessary to directly estimate the joint distribution, which makes the estimation task much easier. Moreover, compared with other multivariate correlation methods (e.g., Pearson, Kendall's tau, Spearman's rho), copulas can obtain nonlinear central dependence and tail dependence in both symmetric and asymmetric forms ( ; ). Because of the flexibility of choosing marginal distributions, the copula-based approach allows complex dependence structures between discrete variables ( ; ; ), continuous variables ( ; ; ; ), and ordered variables ( ; ; ). Only the copula approach allows such combinations with different types of marginal distributions ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).
To the best of our knowledge, it is the first time that the copula approach has been applied to research on social contacts. Drawing on previous studies ( ; ; ), the joint representation of social contact mode choices and the number of contacted persons is described below.
According to Sklar's theorem ( ), any joint distribution of multiple variables can be represented in terms of a unique copula function, in which the continuous marginal probability distribution of each variable is uniform over the interval [0,1]. For the bivariate case in this study:
(9)Cθu1gu2g=PU1g<u1gU2g<u2gHere, is a copula function, is the dependence parameter vector of copula, and are uniformly distributed random variables with support contained in [0,1]. In this study, the copula approach is applied to generate a joint multivariate distribution function with given marginals of contact modes and the number of contacted persons, where and . The joint distribution of random variables and can be expressed as:
(10)CθF∑vαgβivxnivGτk−∑vαgγvzniv=PU1g<F∑vαgβivxnivU2g<Gτk−∑vαgγvzniv=PF−1U1g<∑vαgβivxnivF−1U2g<τk−∑vαgγvzniv=Pφig<∑vαgβivxnivηkg<τk−∑vαgγvznivwhere is the inverse univariate cumulative distribution function.
Let “CM
g = i” be the indication of “ =1” for each contact mode (i = 1,2,3,4 represents the choice of “no contact”, “ONPC”, “OPC”, “PCNPC”, respectively). If individual n has no contact with others, the number of persons contacted by him/her is zero. Because there are three ordered alternatives of the number of contacted persons, two thresholds are included in the model (k = 1, 2, 3). Then the bivariate joint probability of social contact decisions is expressed as follows:
(11)PCMg=isnig=k=F∑vαgβivxnivifCMg=1Pφig<∑vαgβivxnivηkg<τ1−∑vαgγvznivifCMg=i,i=2,3,4;snig=1Pφig<∑vαgβivxnivτ1−∑vαgγvzniv<ηkg<τ2−∑vαgγvznivPφig<∑vαgβivxnivηkg>τ2−∑vαgγvznivifCMg=i,i=2,3,4;snig=2ifCMg=i,i=2,3,4;snig=3=F∑vαgβivxnivifCMg=1CθF∑vαgβivxnivGτ1−∑vαgγvznivifCMg=i,i=2,3,4;snig=1Pφig<∑vαgβivxnivηkg<τ2−∑vαgγvzniv−Pφig<∑vαgβivxnivηkg<τ1−∑vαgγvznivPφig<∑vαgβivxniv−Pφig<∑vαgβivxnivηkg<τ2−∑vαgγvznivifCMg=i,i=2,3,4;snig=2ifCMg=i,i=2,3,4;snig=3=F∑vαgβivxnivifCMg=1CθF∑vαgβivxnivGτ1−∑vαgγvznivifCMg=i,i=2,3,4;snig=1CθF∑vαgβivxnivGτ2−∑vαgγvzniv−CθF∑vαgβivxnivGτ1−∑vαgγvznivF∑vαgβivxniv−CθF∑vαgβivxnivGτ2−∑vαgγvznivifCMg=i,i=2,3,4;snig=2ifCMg=i,i=2,3,4;snig=3There is no general agreement about which copula approach should be used for a specific research target ( ; ; ). Generally speaking, if people are more likely to have contact in normal times regardless of the kind of contact mode, it is reasonable to speculate that they would contact more people. Thus, these types of contact decisions would be positively dependent. For such situations, adopting Gumbel, Clayton, or Joe copulas is suitable. However, such positive associations may not always be observed in the context of COVID-19, because people may want to reduce the number of contact persons to avoid infection. To accommodate such possibilities, copulas allowing for negative dependence between these two types of contact decisions should also be an option. Therefore, to find the most suitable model, five major copulas functions (FGM, Frank, Gumbel, Clayton, and Joe) were estimated and then compared with a model assuming independence between the two social contact decision variables. These copulas are introduced below.
5.3.1.

## FGM copula
The FGM (Farlie–Gumbel–Morgenstern) copula was proposed by and further discussed by and . In the FGM copula function, the dependence parameter must range between [−1,1], and the correlation between variables is independent when . The FGM copula allows either negative or positive dependence for the correlation between the uniform marginals of u
1g and u
2g, with the assumptions of asymptotic independence and radial symmetry in dependence structure. In this bivariate case, the FGM copula is formed as:
(12)Cθu1gu2g=u1gu2g1+θ1−u1g1−u2g
5.3.2.

## Frank copula
The Frank copula, proposed by , is the only comprehensive Archimedean copula approach allowing for both positive and negative dependence. It imposes the assumption of asymptotic independence and is suitable for strong central dependence with weak tail dependence. The of Frank copula has the threshold value of , but the Frank copula shows an independent structure when . The Frank copula function for the bivariate case is defined as:
(13)Cθu1gu2g=−1θln1+e−θu1g−1e−θu2g−1e−θ−1
5.3.3.

## Gumbel copula
The Gumbel copula (also called the Gumbel–Hougaard copula) was proposed by . The Gumbel copula is an Archimedean copula suitable for cases with strong right-tail dependence (strong correlation at high values) and weak left-tail dependence (weak correlation at low values). The dependence parameter of the Gumbel copula must be [1, ), and the structure is independent when . The function of Gumbel copula for the bivariate case is given as:
(14)Cθu1gu2g=exp−−lnu1gθ+−lnu2gθ1/θ
5.3.4.

## Clayton copula
The Clayton copula is an Archimedean copula proposed by , which only indicates asymmetric positive dependence ( ). It can achieve the Fréchet upper bound when . The dependence parameter of the Clayton copula should be larger than 0 and show independence when . The Clayton copula is suitable for strong left-tail dependence and weak right-tail dependence. The form of the Clayton copula for the bivariate case is expressed as:
(15)Cθu1gu2g=u1g−θ+u2g−θ−1−1/θ
5.3.5.

## Joe copula
The Joe copula ( ; ) is another copula function which only accounts for positive dependence. As in the case of the Gumbel copula, the dependence parameter of the Joe copula should satisfy the restricted condition of , and indicates dependence when . The Joe copula cannot achieve the Fréchet lower bound but achieves the Fréchet upper bound when . Some scholars think the Joe copula is more like the reverse of the Clayton copula than the Gumbel copula ( ). The Joe copula function for the bivariate case is formed as:
(16)Cθu1gu2g=1−1−u1gθ+1−u2gθ−1−u1gθ1−u2gθ1/θ

5.4.

## Estimation and goodness of fit
In this study, the copula-based integrated model of social contact decisions was estimated using the maximum likelihood method, where the log-likelihood function is expressed as follows:
(17)LL=∑N∑I∑K∑GMnikglnPCMg=isnig=k(18)Mnikg=1rnig=1×1snig=kwhere, is an indicator of choice result (1 or 0), which is decided by the function 1[.], is equal to 1 only when individual n chooses i and k simultaneously for contact setting g; otherwise, it is 0.
R programming language and the R package “maklik” ( ) were used to evaluate the maximal value of the log-likelihood function. In this study, Newton-Raphson maximization was applied for the unconstrained optimization problems of Frank copula and independent copula. The Nelder-Mead maximization was applied for the optimization problems of FGM copula, Clayton copula, Joe copula and Gumbel copula, because there were some constraints for their dependence parameters of .
To compare the goodness-of-fit for different copula models, the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) and Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) were used. The BIC can control the complexity of the model and avoid overfitting ( ). The lower the BIC value, the higher the goodness-of-fit.

6.

## Results
Six models were estimated ( 
), including the model assuming independence between social contact mode choices and the number of contacted persons, where the “no contact” mode was chosen as the reference for the MNL-based contact mode choice model.
 6.1.

## Choosing the best copula model
The results of the AIC and BIC suggested that the Frank copula-based model generated the smallest values, suggesting it was the best model. This model also outperformed the independence model. The other copula models performed more poorly than the independence model, suggesting that they did not represent social contact decisions well. As shown in the range of dependence parameters in , the Frank copula accommodated the largest range of dependence parameters; this reflects the theoretical foundation that supports the use of the Frank copula for capturing people's joint decisions on social contact modes and the number of contacted persons.
The Frank-based modeling estimation results in 
show that the dependence parameter is statistically significant for the ONPC mode and the number of contacted persons (estimated value: 1.06, t-test against 0: 3.80). The positive dependence parameter implies that the higher the probability of having only non-physical contacts with others, the more the number of contacted persons during activity participation. In other words, because an individual chooses to keep away from physical contact with others, contacting more people becomes less risky, and consequently, he/she contacts more people. The lack of significance of the dependence parameters for OPC and PCNPC may suggest that once an individual decides to have physical contacts with others, he/she is less likely to care about the number of contacted persons during activity participation. Allowing different dependence parameters with respect to different contact modes makes the representation of the above heterogeneous responses possible.
 
6.2.

## Factors related to contact settings
6.2.1.

## Activity frequency
People tended to have physical contact (fully or partially, i.e., mixed with non-physical contact) when performing activities with high frequency. The number of persons they came into contact with increased with the increase in frequency.

6.2.2.

## Travel distance
The travel distance between home and destination showed a positive influence on both social contact mode choices and the number of contacted persons, indicating that if people went to a distant place, they were more likely to have contacts with others in all possible contact forms (OPC, ONPC, and PCNPC) and to contact more people.

6.2.3.

## Participating in activities with acquaintances
If an individual performed an activity together with his/her acquaintances, he/she was more likely to have all kinds of social contacts with others and contact more people.

6.2.4.

## Protective measures
Wearing a mask did not prompt people to have contact with strangers. Conversely, if people had already disinfected their hands before/during/after performing an activity (e.g., shopping, eating out, parties), they did not mind contacting others in a physical or non-physical way. However, although people did not mind participating in activities with the physical presence of others after disinfecting their hands, they still tended to contact fewer persons.

6.2.5.

## Protective capability and perceived safety
The following aspects were analyzed: self-efficacy (an individual's belief in his/her capability to protect him/herself from the infection); the efficacy of others (an individual's belief in other persons' capabilities to protect themselves from the infection); self-safety (whether an individual thinks he/she is safe from the infection when performing an activity); and household members' safety (whether an individual thinks his/her household members are safe from the infection when performing an activity).
The results found that if people thought they were highly capable of protecting themselves from the COVID-19 virus, they tended to contact more people. People reduced their social contact with others in cases of only non-physical contacts and only physical contacts: i.e., people with higher self-efficacy did not prefer to have contact with others under these two contact modes. If people could not avoid both physical and non-physical contacts (e.g., in the case of work/study and parties), they did not mind contacting more people (under the condition of high self-efficacy, e.g., being able to take sufficient protective measures). On the contrary, if people believed that other people were capable of taking protective measures, they did not mind making social contact even when physical and non-physical contact could not be avoided, but they still consciously reduced the number of contacts.
Regarding perceptions of risk from infection, when people thought that they or their household members were safe when performing daily activities, they were more likely to have social contact with others in different modes. However, if people thought that their household members were safer, then the number of contacted persons would decrease. This indicates that for the safety of household members, individuals would not try to contact more people when performing daily activities.

6.2.6.

## Perception of 3Cs in activity locations
Regarding the 3Cs (i.e., closed spaces with poor ventilation, crowded places, close contacts), when activity venues had closed spaces with poor ventilation, people were more likely to contact fewer persons (parameter: −0.10, t value: −2.44) to reduce the probability of being infected by others. Unexpectedly, the results suggest that even for indoor activity venues which were crowded and involved close contact, people would not avoid contacting others and would not reduce the number of social contacts.

6.2.7.

## Necessity and punishment
The perception of the necessity of an activity, or whether doing a certain activity should be punished or not, had significant effects on people's social contact behaviors. People were more likely to have social contact with others in all contact modes, and to contact more people, when they thought that performing daily activities (e.g., work/study, shopping, medical activities) was necessary, even with a high risk of infection. Conversely, if people thought that performing daily activities during the pandemic should be punished (e.g., gathering in a concert), the number of people they contacted went down, and they were prone to make no contact with others.

6.3.

## Risk-related psychological factors
6.3.1.

## Reliability of information
The more reliable the information provided by the local government, the higher the probability they would have contact with others. However, this phenomenon was not confirmed with respect to the number of contacted persons. Although people trusted government information, they tended not to take the risk of infection by contacting more people.

6.3.2.

## Risk perception at different spatial scales
The impacts of risk perception on people's social contact behaviors showed spatial differences. To be specific, when people perceived a higher risk of infection in their country of residence, they reduced the number of contacted persons and the social contacts through the modes of ONPC and PCNPC. If people's risk perception about public transport increased, they would reduce social contacts through the modes of OPC and PCNPC and the number of contacted persons for daily activities. Conversely, social contact behaviors were positively associated with the risk perception in the region of residence (province/prefecture/state); although they perceived that the risk was increasing in their region of residence, people had more contact with others.

6.3.3.

## Triggers of behavior changes
When people stated that they were more likely to change their behaviors because of formal governmental rules, they tended to make no contact with others and decreased the number of contacted persons. Meanwhile, people tended to reduce the number of contacted persons if they attached more importance to the number of infection cases. However, those people who were affected by the formal rules from their workplaces/organizations/affiliations tended to have both non-physical and physical contact, and to contact more people.

6.3.4.

## Willingness of changing the duration/timing of activity participation
The modeling results showed that if people agreed to change the duration/timing (or activity schedule) of activities, despite the inconvenience, they will reduce the probability of contact through the modes of OPC and PCNPC.

6.4.

## Individual attributes
Males were more likely than females to have social contact with others through ONPC and OPC, and were also prone to contact more people. For PCNPC, gender did not matter. Older people were less likely to contact others through all contact modes, compared with no contact. However, age did not influence the number of contacted persons. People with higher education qualifications and income were more likely to contact others, and to contact more people.
Married people were more likely to have social contact with others, probably because they had to perform more maintenance/mandatory (e.g., shopping, work) activities to support their family. On the other hand, married people tended to contact fewer people. Household size did not matter to people's contact mode choices, but affected the number of contacted persons.

6.5.

## Heterogeneous influences across activity settings
All of the above observations were heterogeneous across activity settings, because all the activity-specific sensitivity parameters (except the work/study setting) were statistically significant against both 0 and 1. The t-test against 0 tested whether the obtained sensitivity was meaningful or not, and the t-test against 1 tested whether the obtained sensitivity was the same as that of the reference activity (shopping) or not. All sensitivity parameters were positive, while the sensitivity for work/study was statistically indifferent from that for shopping. The sensitivity parameters for other activity settings were all smaller than 1, indicating that individuals' social contact behaviors for these activities were less sensitive (in terms of influencing magnitudes) to those significant factors identified in the modeling analysis, relative to shopping. This phenomenon was especially obvious for eating out (0.69) and medical activities (0.42).

7.

## Discussion
7.1.

## Key findings
First, five types of copula functions, including FGM, Gumbel, Joe, Clayton, and Frank, were estimated and compared with a model without dependence on the two social contact behaviors. It was empirically confirmed that the Frank copula outperformed the other copulas, while the theoretical features of the Frank copula also supported this empirical observation. As for the dependence related to social contacts, indirect contacts were estimated to be dependent on the number of contacted persons. Given that existing studies have neglected the role of indirect contact in COVID-19 transmission, the above finding is especially important for designing more effective pandemic policies.
Second, the frequency of activity participation was positively associated with more physical contacts and having contacts with more people while performing an activity. Various social contacts were observed at places far from home, while the presence of acquaintances increased the number of social contacts in all modes, as well as the number of contacted persons.
Third, individual attributes significantly affected social contact behaviors. People increased the probability of having social contacts with others, contacted more people, and tried to perform activities in spaces with poor ventilation. Unexpectedly, however, crowded places with close contact did not encourage people to manage social contacts in a safer manner (safer contact mode and contact fewer persons).
Fourth, various influences of psychological factors on social contact were found. People struggled between performing necessary activities and worrying about being punished. Trust in the government's infection guidance led to more contact in all modes, but did not affect the number of contacted persons. This may be due to the fact that people in these countries have been willing to live with the virus. Hence, people were willing to have social contact with others if they trusted the infection information from the local government (e.g., the Omicron variant has a low fatality rate). People's risk perceptions at different spatial scales, with the highest perception of risk within public transport vehicles, had inconsistent influences on the choice of social contact modes and the number of contacted persons. This observation seems to be in line with the high rate of infections even under strict restrictions, which brings difficulties into pandemic policymaking.
Fifth, government rules were more effective at encouraging safer social contacts than the rules from workplaces/organizations/affiliations, especially for the contact mode PCNPC. Higher willingness of changing the duration/timing for activity participation was positively associated with safer social contacts.
Sixth, all of the above observations showed sensitivity to the specific social contact settings in terms of the magnitudes of the effects, in the sense that the parameters supporting the above observations varied significantly across different settings.

7.2.

## Links to the literature
Over the long pandemic period, people may have experienced psychological fatigue from following social distancing measures ( ; ). Due to such fatigue, people may become less concerned about exposure to the virus through social contacts when participating in highly frequent activities (e.g., shopping, work/study). As a result, people may be more likely to have OPC/PCNPC contacts, potentially leading to more and more infections.
Having social contacts with others and contacting more people probably happened because during the pandemic, many activity venues near people's homes were closed ( ). Consequently, people had to visit activity venues far from their homes, making them hubs for social contacts with many people. If people are perform daily activities with acquaintances, excluding work/study, those activities naturally encourage people to have communications with others; people are more likely to have more social contacts around them ( ; ).
Unsafe places (e.g., poor in-door ventilation and crowded places) indicate that although people can choose to go to locations without a crowd, it is difficult for individuals to avoid social contact when they have to do daily activities in crowded places or places with close contact (e.g., work/study, shopping, medical activities) ( ; ). Wearing a mask and disinfecting hands discouraged contact with more people, indicating that people may have already consciously reduced their social contact when realizing the necessity of wearing masks to keep themselves safe during the pandemic ( ; ). Disinfecting hands did not necessarily encourage people to avoid unsafe contact. This finding was in line with , who showed that disinfection measures do not lead to a higher probability of using public transport.
It seems that most people had a clear understanding of the balance between necessity and punishment (or responsibility) when performing activities, which indirectly indicated the effectiveness of government policy measures and guidance on COVID-19 ( ; ). If people trusted the local government's infection information (e.g., the Omicron variant has a low fatality rate), they were likely to have social contact with others ( ; ). This is probably due to the fact that people in these countries have been willing to live with the virus. On the other hand, inconsistent influences of risk perception on social contact behaviors, and captured at different spatial scales, is probably because a perception of high risk at the national level makes people realize how serious the risks are, while the perception of high risk at specific locations (e.g., in public transport vehicles) reveals that the risk of infection is increasing near their daily action spaces. Thus, people feel they need to reduce social contact immediately ( ), while the risks in residential areas are not treated as a threat to their daily lives. This observation seems consistent with the high level of infections even under strict restrictions, which makes pandemic policymaking more complex.
Governmental interventions seem more effective than other types in encouraging behavioral changes toward safer contacts. This may be because governmental interventions are usually mandatory ( ; ), and as a result, they are more likely to become a direct trigger for reducing social contacts among people. Even though workplaces/schools can ask their members to follow pandemic control rules, the request usually leads to the adoption of protective measures, rather than directly reducing work/study contacts ( ; ), and even in such cases, people do not need to follow the request outside their workplaces/schools. On the other hand, voluntary behavioral changes related to activity duration and timing appeared to be useful, as was also found by the LASTING (Life-oriented Activity-Space-Timing) approach ( ).
Social contact decisions are not the same across individuals. Males usually have more social opportunities (e.g., working contacts or eating out after work) than females ( ; ). But for activity settings with more participants (e.g., parties, and cultural leisure), both males and females had ONPC and OPC simultaneously, leading to a slight gender difference for the contact mode PCNPC ( ). Older people recognized the higher infection risk (infection rate and severity of illness) for their age group. As a result, on the one hand, they consciously tried to avoid contact with others for daily activities as far as possible ( ; ). On the other hand, if such contacts cannot be avoided, they cannot reduce the number of people they come into contact with. Married people may be more worried about household members' infections through out-of-home social contacts, and so decrease the number of social contacts ( ). If people lived in larger households, they were prone to contact more people during daily activities. This observation is intuitively understandable because larger households have more opportunities to perform maintenance/leisure activities (e.g., shopping, gathering) together with their members, resulting in more contacts with people during activities ( ; ; ).

7.3.

## Policy implications
7.3.1.

## Management of settings and spaces
Different settings involve activities with different frequencies of participation. Infection control policies at locations with high frequency activity participation (e.g., workplace, school, shopping venue) should pay more attention to people's fatigue from distancing measures. Closing venues of daily activities (e.g., restaurants, sport gyms) near people's homes can reduce social contact, but may also encourage people to travel farther to locations seek services, which may attract more people, leading to higher infection risks. Thus, locations with similar infection risks should be protected using similar measures. The same type of locations may have different contact environments, depending on their spatial features (e.g., size and layout of space, openness, and ventilation). Pandemic control policies should therefore also be sensitive to such spatial features. Pandemic-sensitive management of locations and spaces will also improve people's comfort when in activity settings and transport vehicles in the post-pandemic era.

7.3.2.

## Seamless pandemic policymaking
Previous studies mainly focused on close contacts and ignored the roles of indirect contacts (i.e., non-physical contacts) in spreading the virus. As revealed in this study, the choice of contact modes and the number of persons contacted are not independent of each other. This suggests that pandemic policies should pay close attention to all types of social contacts. Because people usually carry out activities at different locations over the course of the day, a strict measure taken at location A may not guarantee that the person will not be infected at location B, if the same anti-infection measure is not strictly implemented at location B. In this regard, given that the virus may be transmitted through transporting people from one place to another ( ), pandemic policies should be implemented in both activity settings and transport vehicles/facilities.

7.3.3.

## Context-dependent pandemic policymaking
The effects of non-mandatory pandemic policies differ across contact settings. A certain face-to-face distance (e.g., 1 m–2 m) may be effective for work/study without talking, but it may not be effective for face-to-face meetings involving loud or frequent verbal communication. Physical distancing measures may be implemented more effectively in hospitals than in shops. To maintain the same level of infection control in different contact settings, the types and intensity of pandemic policies should be adjusted more carefully. The influences of various factors on social contact behaviors in different contact settings revealed in this study further suggest that pandemic control policies should be carefully designed in response to changing contexts. In this regard, technology-supported scientific monitoring of people's behaviors, anti-infection measures in activity-travel environments, and the resulting context-sensitive warnings, should be implemented in a seamless manner ( ).

7.3.4.

## Risk communication for behavioral change
Different people may perceive infection risks differently, as well as differ in their attitudes about the necessity of an activity for their daily life. Furthermore, they may have different views about whether people should be punished for participating in certain activities. Risk communication should take these heterogeneous responses into consideration to encourage pandemic-sensitive behavioral changes (e.g., ). Adults may obey physical distancing rules, but small children may not, meaning that small children should be trained to avoid unsafe contacts. Individualized communications are also crucial to better respond to other risks, such as natural disasters and air pollution.

7.3.5.

## Inclusive policymaking
Extra efforts are needed to protect people with high risks of infection (e.g., elderly people, essential workers). Elderly and ill people need to maintain their medical care, even during a pandemic. It is crucial to investigate how to guarantee their medical care without being infected. In this regard, remote medical services, which were promoted during the pandemic in some areas, should be promoted even in normal times. Essential workers (e.g., medical staff, transport and logistics workers, workers of collecting wastes) have to maintain their jobs to support other people's lives. They should be protected, not only in terms of protective tools and equipment, but also in terms of sufficient financial support from governments and employers. Marginalized groups are at particular risk of unemployment (e.g., ), partially due to the restrictions of social contact. To address these issues, inclusive policymaking should be strengthened.

7.4.

## Limitations and future challenges
The survey used in this study only covered “average” situations during the COVID-19 pandemic, ignoring variations in decisions about social contacts and the factors influencing them. However, it is very difficult to capture the influence of changing social distancing policies on contact behaviors over time and across countries. In the future, therefore, it is worth conducting a panel survey to capture the effects of social-distancing fatigue, even though panel surveys are costly and time-consuming. Another way to improve the investigation of social contacts would be by conducting an activity-travel diary survey, though this will increase the answering burden on respondents. Finally, this study pooled data collected from six countries in order to derive general findings. In the future, it may be worth exploring how the findings from this study varies across countries.

8.

## Conclusions
In this study, a unique social contact survey concerning seven contact settings (work/study, shopping, eating out, physical exercise, parties, cultural leisure, and medical activities) was conducted in six different countries from March to May 2021. More than 7000 respondents provided valid answers. A copula approach was used to capture the dependence between social contact mode choices and the number of contacted persons, which were represented by a multinomial logit model and an ordered logit model, respectively. The effects of various factors affecting these social contact behaviors were investigated.
It was found that the Frank copula outperformed other copula functions. Both positive and negative dependence parameters were obtained, indicating that different types of contact modes were associated in different ways with the number of persons contacted. This implies that more flexible dependence structures are needed to represent multi-faceted social contact decisions. Indirect contact led to being in contact with more people during the pandemic, revealing the importance of indirect contact in social contact decisions. It was also found that risk-related psychological factors, especially the risk perceptions at different spatial scales, influenced social contact behaviors. Not only individual attributes (e.g., gender), but activity attributes (e.g., frequency) also had a significant impact on these behaviors during the pandemic. The influence of factors was not homogeneous across contact settings (especially related to leisure activities). All these findings suggest that pandemic policymaking should be customized according to different types of people and contact settings. The policymaking process should also be carefully managed and monitored to enhance the effects of policies over time.
In this study, both survey and modeling approaches had unique and attractive features. The social contact survey implemented in this study differed from existing social contact surveys in several ways: (1) leisure activities were broken into more detailed categories; (2) psychological factors were investigated with respect to different social contact settings; and (3) altruism was captured by asking respondents about their perceptions of their household members' capacity for managing social contacts under risky environments. The copula modeling approach is a flexible and logical choice to capture the dependence between social contact mode choices and the number of contacted persons. In particular, it has the potential to represent more complicated social contact decisions with even larger dimensions.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Hongxiang Ding: Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Junyi Zhang: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Software, Supervision, Validation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Tao Feng: Investigation, Methodology, Supervision, Validation, Writing – review & editing. Rui Liu: Data curation, Formal analysis.

## Declaration of competing interest
We declare that we have no financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations that can inappropriately influence our work, there is no professional or other personal interest of any nature or kind in any product, service and/or company that could be construed as influencing the position presented in, or the review of, the manuscript entitled.

## Acknowledgment
This research was financially supported by the RISTEX of Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST) for the project titled “Overcoming Vulnerability and Restoring Social Justice in Community and Re-designing Cities by Introducing Social Distancing” (No. JPMJRX20J6) and Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research (B), Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) (No. 18KT0007).

Editor: Shuqing Zhao

## Footnotes
1https://www.who.int/news-room/questions-and-answers/item/coronavirus-disease-covid-19-how-is-it-transmitted (accessed on December 15, 2022)
2Australian Bureau of Statistics: https://www.abs.gov.au/ (2020); U.S. Census Bureau: https://www.census.gov/ (2020); Stats NZ: https://www.stats.govt.nz/ (2018); Statistics Canada: https://www.statcan.gc.ca/en/start (2020); Office for National Statistics - GOV.UK: https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/office-for-national-statistics (2020); Statistics Bureau of Japan: https://www.stat.go.jp/english/ (2020)
Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2023.164437.

Appendix A.

## Supplementary data

Additional Figures
Image 1

## Data availability
Data will be made available on request.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
Additional Figures
Image 1

## Data Availability Statement
Data will be made available on request.