Environ Health Perspect253envhperEnvironmental Health Perspectives0091-67651552-9924American Chemical SocietyPMC1519242PMC1519242.115192421519242874701410.1289/ehp.9510311021Research ArticleContraband in the stratosphere.
ChaseV1219951031213313411021104011219952807200604092018pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightyespmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articleyespmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes
 
SDheres of Influence 
 
CONnrN 
 
in the Stratos 
 
With the 1 January 1996 deadline for ceas- 
ing production of chlorofluorocarbons 
(CFCs) in the industrialized world rapidly 
approaching, those who would make 
money nefariously have found a new way 
to breach the law. They are smuggling 
what some estimate to be huge quantities 
of these compounds, used primarily as 
refrigerants in air conditioners and refriger- 
ators, into the United States. 
 
Production of CFCs is being phased 
out because they damage the earth's 
stratospheric ozone layer, which prevents 
much of the sun's ultraviolet light from 
reaching the earth. Degradation of this 
layer can cause an increase in skin cancer 
and a reduction of crop yields. Some scien- 
tists believe a severe enough decrease could 
lead to the elimination of many species. 
The Largest Hole 
 
The phaseout of CFCs, and its conse- 
quences, had its genesis in the 1970s when 
scientific evidence began to mount that 
these compounds were damaging the 
earth's ozone layer. As CFCs escape from 
junked or faulty compressors and hoses, or 
when used as solvents, they rise to the 
stratosphere. There they are transformed 
by ultraviolet radiation into chlorine 
atoms, which play a role in catalytic ozone 
depletion. 
 
Scientists estimate that since the late 
1950s, the ozone layer over Europe and 
North America has decreased by 10%. And 
just last September the United Nations 
World Meteorological Organization 
announced that the largest hole ever mea- 
sured in the earth's ozone layer-a 3.86 
million square mile gap-existed over 
Antarctica. Figures also showed that this 
year, the typical springtime decline in 
ozone levels over the Southern Hemisphere 
was 10% greater than the previous year. 
 
In an attempt to halt such depletion, 
an international accord known as the 
Montreal Protocol was adopted in 1987. 
Calling for a 50% phaseout of CFCs by 
1998, the protocol has been ratified by 
more than 140 countries. As part of the 
 
original protocol, an agreement was made 
to continue to meet every few years to 
review the rapidly evolving science relative 
to ozone depletion. 
 
When a second meeting was held in 
London during 1990, clouds were darken- 
ing on the ozone horizon. In response, the 
phaseout was accelerated to 100% by the 
year 2000. As negative ozone figures kept 
coming in, that figure too was amended in 
Copenhagen in 1992, when developed 
countries agreed to eliminate the produc- 
tion of CFCs as of 1 January 1996, except 
for a few essential uses. Developing coun- 
tries received a 10-year extension. The 
"essential" exceptions allow for the produc- 
tion of CFCs for use as propellants in 
aerosol sprays for use by asthmatics, and for 
the use of small quantities in laboratories. 
Taxed into Oblivion? 
 
To accelerate the switch to new equipment 
that can use alternative refrigerants, the 
United States levied a hefty, annually grad- 
uated excise tax on all new and imported 
CFCs, beginning in 1990. The tax does 
not apply to CFCs that are recovered and 
recycled in the United States, since it is 
presumed they have already been taxed. 
 
During its first year of implementation, 
the tax was set at $1.37 per pound of CFC. 
The tax has risen rapidly to $5.35 per 
pound this year and will continue to rise 
an additional $0.45 per year. And while 
the jury is out as to the effectiveness of the 
tax in speeding the transition, there is little 
doubt that it has created a large profit mar- 
gin for those selling contraband product. 
 
With a 30-pound tank of CFC on the 
legitimate market currently selling for 
$250, the tax accounts for over half of the 
price. Smugglers selling CFCs at or near 
the market price can pocket what would 
otherwise go into the government's coffers, 
in addition to the normal profit. Because 
equipment built to operate with CFCs can- 
not use the new refrigerants being intro- 
duced, a substantial market for CFCs will 
remain for some time to come. And, as the 
supply of CFCs decreases and the tax 
 
increases, the 
situation will 
look all the more 
 
attractive to those inter- 
ested in skirting the law. 
 
Operation Cool Breeze 
 
Three agencies have authority 
 
over CFC distribution: the Customs 
Service, the EPA, and the Internal Revenue 
Service. Each has introduced measures to 
counter the increasingly lucrative black 
market. A Customs Service task force by 
the name of "Operation Cool Breeze" has 
resulted in the prosecution of four criminal 
CFC smuggling cases in the United States, 
each of which was brought to court this 
year in Miami, Florida. 
 
Miami has become the focus of this 
operation because "it is a convenient loca- 
tion for this sort of trade," says Thomas 
Watts-FitzGerald, chief of the 
Environmental Enforcement Section of the 
U.S. Attorney's Office in Miami. "We are 
a major port and a major trading hub for 
the Central, Latin, and South American 
markets." 
 
Yet not all of the contraband involved 
in the cases prosecuted in Miami have 
come in through that port. Some of the 
CFCs flowed into the United States 
through New York and Newark, New 
Jersey, as well. These cases ended up in 
southern Florida's venue because the CFCs 
had subsequently been shipped there under 
pretense of being routed to another coun- 
try, when it fact they were diverted into the 
U.S. market. 
 
The largest case prosecuted to date was 
that of Irma Henneberg of Fort 
Lauderdale, Florida, who was found guilty 
in August of 34 charges relating to falsely 
manifested cargo. The intent was to con- 
ceal the smuggling of almost 4,000 tons of 
CFCs, with a retail value of $52 million, 
and an associated tax loss of some $32 mil- 
lion. But Keith Prager, assistant special 
agent in charge with the Customs Service 
in Miami, says, "We know there are people 
bigger than her out there." Each count car- 
 
Volume 103, Number 12, December 1995 * Environmental Health Perspectives 
 
1102 
 
Spheres of Influence *Contraband in the Stratosphere 
 
ries a maximum penalty of five years in 
prison and a fine of $250,000. 
 
The Henneberg case is typical of the 
kinds of subterfuge being used by smug- 
glers of CFCs. Because developing coun- 
tries are still permitted to produce and use 
CFCs, it is not illegal to ship them through 
the United States on a tax-free, bonded 
basis. This status provides that the goods 
are, for legal purposes, not considered to 
be in the United States, even though they 
may be on a pier or in a warehouse on U.S. 
soil, provided they are passing through 
from one country to another. "Henneberg 
was convicted of filing 34 false documents 
with customs to make it appear as though 
all of the CFC had been reshipped out of 
the U.S., when in fact it had not been," 
explained Watts-FitzGerald. 
 
To date, CFC smuggling has been a 
white-collar crime. "The key to black mar- 
ket smuggling is to get it introduced into 
legitimate commerce. The people we have 
arrested so far have all been associated with 
the legitimate CFC market," said Prager. 
Opening a Loophole 
 
In addition to the excise tax, another gov- 
ernmental regulation on CFCs was imple- 
mented in 1990, which some experts feel 
eventually gave further impetus to smug- 
glers. This regulation involved controls on 
the amounts of CFCs produced and 
imported into the United States. Its pur- 
pose was to ensure compliance with inter- 
national control agreements. 
 
The controls used 1986 as a base year 
and required that CFC production and 
importation, which had been on a growth 
curve between 1986 and 1990, be cut back 
to 1986 levels. To meet this requirement, 
the EPA gave producers and importers 
quotas based on their 1986 levels of activi- 
ty. The total U.S. 1995 production quota 
is 150 million pounds, 70 million of which 
is allotted to DuPont, the leading producer 
of CFCs in 1986. Quota compliance is 
carefully tracked by the EPA, which 
requires quarterly activity reports from 
involved companies. 
 
A move in 1994 to lift the import 
quota on used CFCs further opened the 
floodgates to contraband. Until that time, 
the import quotas applied to both virgin 
and recycled CFCs equally. Then, as of 1 
January 1994, the import quota on used 
CFCs was lifted. As with the original limi- 
tations, this too was done so that the 
United States would be in compliance with 
international agreements. As production 
controls grew ever more stringent, the 
international community reduced them on 
used product, both to ease the pain of tran- 
 
sition and to prevent the release of used 
 
CFCs into the atmosphere by promoting 
recycling. As a practical matter, with the 
EPA no longer watching, smugglers were 
emboldened to mismark virgin CFCs as 
recycled material. 
 
"A lot of people have imported virgin 
refrigerant and called it used, or contami- 
nated it slightly to appear as though it has 
been used . . . to get around the 
allowances," said Dave Stirpe, executive 
director of the Alliance for Responsible 
Atmospheric Policy (ARAP), an industry 
group in Arlington, Virginia, composed of 
producers and users of CFCs and their 
alternatives. 
 
To plug this loophole, the EPA has 
recently reentered the picture, this time 
not with quotas, but with a petition sys- 
tem, requiring importers to gain permis- 
sion to bring used refrigerant into the 
United States. "You have to document 
where it came from and where you are 
going to recycle it," said Stirpe. 
 
This loophole is not the only threat to 
the efficacy of the new regulations on 
CFCs, however. Members of the House 
Energy and Environment Subcommittee 
are questioning the impending ban and 
some have introduced legislation to thwart 
it. "I am convinced ... there has not been 
a sufficient showing of scientific evidence 
to justify the current and rapidly approach- 
ing ban date," said Representative John 
Doolittle (R-California) in an article in 
The Environmental Health Letter. Doolittle 
has introduced a bill (HR 2367) to post- 
pone the ban. Representative Tom DeLay 
(R-Texas) has introduced legislation (HR 
475) that would repeal the ban altogether. 
An Inundated Market 
 
Those involved in law enforcement are 
reluctant to speculate as to the sources of 
the contraband CFCs. The chemicals 
involved in the cases prosecuted thus far 
came from England and India, according 
to Watts-FitzGerald. It is suspected that 
some people in Russia and China are grow- 
ing rich from such illegal trade. 
 
Projections as to the quantity of CFCs 
being smuggled into the United States are 
also hard to come by. One joint industry- 
government estimate placed the quantity at 
40 million pounds per year, or about 25% 
of the current production and import 
allotment under EPA regulations. An 
industry representative at an EPA-spon- 
sored seminar estimated that 90% of the 
CFC market in southern Florida was being 
satisfied with smuggled product, according 
to Watts-Fitzgerald. Whatever the specific 
figures, smuggling is having a substantial 
impact on the marketplace. 
 
Sharon Gidumal, a senior environmen- 
 
tal specialist at DuPont, said her company 
started noticing something amiss over a 
year ago, when CFC prices began to drop 
to an unrealistically low level. "We 
believed, knowing our costs and those of 
our competitors, that they could not have 
made the material for what it was being 
sold at," she said. "There was a signal being 
sent to the marketplace that there really 
was no shortage of CFCs, there's no reason 
to get out of CFCs. They are plentiful. We 
felt it was the wrong thing to do for the 
environment and that businesses that had 
legitimately invested in CFC alternatives 
were being harmed by this illegal activity." 
 
The availability of contraband "put the 
market into a price tailspin," Gidumal 
added. "It doesn't take much in a com- 
modity business to cause a price war, and 
that is what this has done . .. the bottom 
dropped out of the market." As a result, 
DuPont decided not to produce its full 
1995 EPA allowance of CFCs. 
 
The black market has also been causing 
headaches for those who service air condi- 
tioners and their customers because a signif- 
icant portion of the contraband product is 
contaminated. The Air Conditioning & 
Refrigeration Institute in Arlington, 
Virginia, specifies that recycled CFCs 
should have no more than 0.5% contami- 
nants, but, "we have found contraband that 
has come in from off-shore with five, six, 
and seven percent contaminants," said 
Simon Oulouhojian, president of the 
Mobile Air Conditioning Society- 
Worldwide, an Upper Darby, Pennsylvania- 
based industry group. Contaminated CFCs 
can leak through hoses and damage systems, 
resulting in air conditioning having to be 
redone, according to Oulouhojian. 
Replacements 
 
CFCs are a melange of chemical com- 
pounds. Their designations were developed 
by DuPont in the 1930s as an esoteric 
code intended to keep competitors from 
knowing the products' chemical makeup. 
That code has long since been revealed and 
is used by the entire industry. 
 
The most widely used compound is 
CFC-12, also known as R-12, which car- 
ries the DuPont trade name Freon. Its pri- 
mary use is as a refrigerant in residential 
refrigerators and mobile air conditioners. 
The automotive industry used about half 
the worldwide production of CFC-12, or 
some 125 million pounds per year. 
 
Other CFCs, such as 11, 113, 114, and 
115, are used in the production of foam 
rubber and rigid insulating foam for appli- 
ances and construction, and as solvents, 
especially in the electronics industry. All of 
 
these CFCs are being replaced with an 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Volume 103, Number 12 December 1995 
 
1103 
 
Spheres of Influence * Contraband in the Stratosphere 
 
equally confusing number of hydrofluoro- 
carbons or hydrochlorofluorocarbons, 
known as HFCs and HCFCs, respectively. 
In the past two years, for example, the 
automotive industry has made a complete 
switch to HFC-134a, the replacement of 
choice for new cars. HCFC-22, which has 
always been used in residential central air 
conditioning units, is now also being used 
in large commercial chillers and in com- 
mercial refrigeration. 
 
Yet these replacements for CFCs are no 
panacea. It is known, for example, that 
HCFCs can also deplete the earth's ozone 
layer, albeit at a considerably slower rate 
than do CFCs. To address this problem, 
the 1992 meeting in Copenhagen also 
adopted a complex phaseout schedule for 
HCFCs. The agreement calls for the 
reduction of HCFCs in five stages begin- 
ning in 2004, with a total phaseout by 
2030. And, although HFCs have not been 
associated with ozone depletion, both they 
and HCFCs have recently been cited as 
possible acid rain culprits. 
 
In a paper published in the July 27 issue 
of Nature, T.K. Tromp and colleagues at 
Atmospheric and Environmental Research, 
Inc. in Cambridge, Massachusetts, note that 
atmospheric degradation of several HFCs 
and HCFCs "is expected to produce trifluo- 
roacetate (TFA), which is removed from the 
atmosphere mainly by rain." And while the 
authors find that the concentrations of TFA 
for the year 2010 will be "well below the 
concentrations thought to inhibit plant 
growth," they say that "TFA could attain 
appreciable concentrations (>102 pg) in the 
local surface waters of seasonal wetlands 
within a few decades." 
 
The paper goes on to state, "The eco- 
logical importance of many of these ubiq- 
uitous wetlands lies not only in their acting 
as habitat for many rare and endangered 
plant and animal species, but also in their 
use by migratory and wintering waterfowl 
for foraging and resting during winter and 
early spring." 
 
A number of alternative refrigeration 
technologies that can use inert gas as the 
heat transfer medium are at various stages 
of development, but when they will be 
available and economically practical is up 
in the air. 
 
Work is being done on several fronts to 
perfect Stirling cycle refrigeration units 
which can make use of helium. Although 
the technology is almost ready for commer- 
cialization, it is most efficient in small 
refrigerators and for low-temperature appli- 
cations. Additionally, the Stirling cycle can- 
not be used as a drop-in replacement for 
compressors in existing refrigerators 
because other refrigeration hardware must 
be changed as well. For these reasons the 
U.S. appliance industry has given Stirling a 
cold shoulder, although it seems to be 
receiving a warmer reception in Europe. 
 
Another promising refrigeration tech- 
nology involves a thermoacoustic refrigera- 
tion system, which uses sound ( see 
Innovations, EHP, vol. 102, no. 9). It was 
invented at Los Alamos National Labor- 
atory in New Mexico with the initial 
intent of providing cold storage for biolog- 
ical samples aboard space shuttles. Steve 
Garrett, a primary developer of thermoa- 
coustic refrigeration at the Naval Post- 
graduate School in Monterey, California, 
who is now a professor of acoustics at 
 
Pennsylvania State, says he has put much 
time into the thermoacoustic system 
because he believes it is an environmental 
and humanitarian necessity. "Refrigeration 
is not a glamorous field," he says, "but if 
you look at it realistically, refrigeration has 
done more to increase the life span of 
humans than pharmacology. More people 
used to die of food poisoning than used to 
die of the other diseases we can now cure." 
As a result, he continues, "When develop- 
ing countries start to make money, the first 
thing they are going to want is refrigera- 
tion. This will create the double pressure 
of an unmet need and restrictions on 
chemicals. This leads me to conclude that 
unless you have an inert gas-based refriger- 
ation system, or a solid-state system, you 
are at risk with regard to satisfying refriger- 
ation requirements." 
 
But for the time being, the need for 
CFCs and their questionable replacements 
will continue, as will the war against those 
who would make money on illegally traf- 
ficking in these compounds. Watts- 
FitzGerald, for one, doesn't mind. "This is 
the side of God and the angels," he says. 
"People who are environmentally con- 
cerned look at this and say, 'Hey, this is a 
good thing to be doing.' And the domestic 
industry says the same thing for reasons 
that are persuasive to them. Basically, 
except for the evildoers, you really don't 
have anybody saying, 'Why are you doing 
that?' and in the environmental area that is 
not always the case." 
 
Victor Chase 
 
1104 Volume 103, Number 12, December 1995 * Environmental Health Perspectives