3815pheelsevierInternational Journal of Disaster Risk ReductionInt J Disaster Risk ReductPMC1007308710073087100730873704188310.1016/j.ijdrr.2023.103670Urban resilience to socioeconomic disruptions during the COVID-19 pandemic: Evidence from China
YuanZhihang HuWanyang 1Department of Public and International Affairs, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong, China∗Corresponding author. Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, SAR, Hong Kong, China.
54202391103670103670542023© 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.

## Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic and the associated restrictions have raised the awareness of building pandemic-resilient cities. Prior studies often evaluated the resilience of one type of urban system while lacking a comparison across various urban subsystems. This study fills this gap by measuring and comparing the adaptive resilience to the pandemic of various urban subsystems in Chinese cities. We propose a novel outcome measurement of the pandemic's socioeconomic impacts on cities, i.e., the citizens' complaints data, and use its temporal changes to measure cities' adaptive resilience to the pandemic. We find a wide range of urban subsystems were severely shocked by the pandemic, including the urban economy, construction-and-housing sector, welfare system, and education system. Different urban subsystems exhibit divergent degrees of adaptive resilience to the pandemic. Using cluster analysis, we also identify three types of cities with different patterns of adaptive resilience: cities whose general economies were the least resilient, cities whose construction-and-housing system was the least resilient, and cities that were mostly affected by restriction measures. Our findings contribute to the understanding of the pandemic's socioeconomic costs and help identify the divergent resilience of different urban subsystems so as to develop targeted policy interventions to improve cities' resilience to the pandemic.
Keywords: COVID-19, Socioeconomic disruptions, Urban resilience, Text mining, Topic modeling

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Nov 19; Revised 2023 Mar 24; Accepted 2023 Mar 30; Issue date 2023 Jun 1.

1.

## Introduction
The first case of COVID-19 was found in Wuhan, a city in China, on December 8, 2019, and the disease has since become a global public health crisis [ ]. The disease has infected more than 637 million people as of November 2022 [ ] and has shaken the global economy, upending daily life for millions of people around the world. The Omicron variant of the virus poses a greater risk of infection and is more contagious compared to previous variants [ ]. To prevent transmission of the virus, non-pharmaceutical interventions have been implemented in countries and territories across the globe throughout the pandemic, particularly during the initial outbreak when effective vaccines and antiviral medications were not yet available [ ]. Measures and restrictions used to curb the pandemic have disrupted people's social lives, which has greatly affected people's quality of life and well-being [ , , ]. These restrictions, however, also worked to control the spread of the virus and facilitate the return to normal urban life.
The pandemic has been a test of cities' resilience to public health crises and their abilities to sustain and recover from these crises. The ways in which COVID-19 has affected various facets of people's lives and the operation of cities have attracted notable scholarly attention. Scholars have investigated the pandemic's impacts on a variety of urban issues, including air quality [ ], the impacts of pollution and environmental and meteorological factors on the transmission of the virus [ ], the association between the built environment and public health [ ], socioeconomic impacts of the pandemic [ ], transportation and travel disruptions [ ], and the role of the technical solutions in the context of COVID-19 [ ]. These studies herald the need for building a more just, resilient, and sustainable urban future in the post-pandemic era [ ]. However, these studies often focus on a particular type of pandemic's impact on cities. Some other studies gauge cities' resilience to the pandemic using various input and output indicators, such as GDP and population density [ , ], or health-related outcome indicators, such as the number of confirmed cases and death rate [ , ]. The former group of indicators is often used to capture the inherent resilience of cities prior to the pandemic shock, whereas the latter group of indicators is often used to measure cities' adaptative resilience during and after the pandemic [ , ]. Nevertheless, existing measurements of urban resilience to the pandemic, such as GDP or the number of confirmed cases, are often unable to capture the pandemic's socioeconomic disruptions to various urban subsystems, such as the urban economy, education, and environment, and compare their divergent degrees of resilience. Understanding the different degrees of resilience of various urban subsystems to the pandemic is conducive to better preparing the cities for future shocks and increasing their resilience. To fill this gap, this study aims to measure and compare the adaptive resilience of various urban sub-systems to the pandemic. We devise a novel outcome measurement of the pandemic's impacts on cities using citizens' complaint data on a national government website. Specifically, we conduct text analysis on citizens' complaint data using Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model to identify the number and the type of pandemic-related disruptions and measure their temporal changes to gauge the degree of urban adaptive resilience to COVID-19 in Chinese prefectural cities. We then use clustering techniques to classify cities into three categories based on the nature of their adaptive resilience. China is a relevant research context, as it experienced the initial COVID-19 outbreak and was the country with the most stringent lockdown policies throughout the pandemic. Compared with traditional data sources like social media or surveys, citizens' complaints to the government can more authentically reflect the setbacks and challenges citizens have experienced during the pandemic. We use the change rate of citizens' complaints on various urban subsystems to measure cities' adaptative resilience and how various subsystems were disrupted by and recovered from the pandemic.
This study, therefore, contributes to the existing literature in two ways. First, we develop a novel approach to measuring socioeconomic disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The complaints data is a useful alternative measurement that allows us to measure the pandemic's disruptions to various urban subsystems compared to other frequently used outcome measurements, such as the number of confirmed cases or death rate. This facilitates a comprehensive evaluation of the pandemic's socioeconomic disruptions. Using complaint data, we can then measure the adaptive resilience, or lack thereof, of various urban subsystems to disruptions caused by the pandemic and influenced by fluctuating pandemic conditions, ongoing urban activities, and quality of local governance. Second, we provide a nuanced understanding of the resilience heterogeneity of different urban subsystems to the pandemic. Prior studies that focused on one particular aspect of cities were unable to compare the resilience of different urban subsystems. Our findings could thus inform policymakers of the resilience feature of different urban subsystems and devise more targeted policy interventions to better prepare cities for future shocks. Examining how the pandemic affects multifaceted aspects of people's social lives helps scholars and policymakers gain a deeper understanding of the urban adaptive resilience to the pandemic. This analysis also generates empirical data on the social cost of the COVID-19 pandemic that can be used to tailor interventions and mitigate negative socioeconomic impacts.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section reviews the relevant literature on urban resilience, its measurements, and resilience to the pandemic. Section introduces the data and methods. Section presents the empirical results of the temporal analysis and the clustering analysis. Section concludes the paper and discusses policy implications. Section outlines the limitations of the study.

2.

## Literature review
2.1.

## Urban resilience
The concept of urban resilience has undergone a continuous process of evolution, from an initial engineering understanding to a growing emphasis on cities' adaptation and learning capacities. The concept of “resilience” first originated from the engineering science to describe materials' elasticity and resistance to external shocks [ ]. Its initial interpretation focused on a linear, equilibrium-based approach, while a non-linear and non-equilibrium-based perspective was incorporated into the definition of resilience in 1973 by Holling, who defined resilience as an ecosystem's capacity to absorb disturbance and reorganize itself while retaining its structure and function [ ].
Since then, a growing number of studies have contributed to resilience thinking in the context of urban systems, defining, explaining, and applying the concept to practice. Despite considerable efforts made, the concept of urban resilience remains vague, and to date, there is no universally accepted definition. In this study, we adopted the most widely accepted definition from Meerow, Newell, and Stults [ ], who defined urban resilience as “the ability of an urban system – and all its constituent socio-ecological and socio-technical networks across temporal and spatial scales – to maintain or rapidly return to desired functions in the face of a disturbance, to adapt to change, and to transform systems quickly that it limits current or future adaptive capacity.”
As the concept becomes increasingly attractive, adaptive resilience is gaining importance both in academia and practice [ ]. Adaptive resilience refers to a social learning process through which individuals, stakeholders, and communities continuously learn and respond to external disruptions (e.g., disaster events) [ ]. Adaptive resilience is particularly crucial to sustainable urban development [ , ].

2.2.

## Measuring urban resilience
Measuring resilience is an essential first step in understanding urban resilience [ ], and many resilience frameworks and indicators have been devised to improve evidence-based urban policymaking [ , , ]. The OECD has classified these measurements of urban resilience into four general categories: input indicators, output indicators, outcome indicators, and process indicators [ ]. Input indicators measure the resources available to implement certain policies, such as funding and staff, while output indicators quantify the extent to which a policy achieves its objectives, such as the number of people trained for disaster prevention. Outcome indicators focus on the effectiveness of a policy in realizing policy outcomes, including the time it takes for a city to return to normal function from a disaster shock, while process indicators are concerned with the identification and assessment of desirable actions or activities that may occur during policy implementation, such as whether the city has implemented a hazard mitigation plan or not. The input, output, and process indicators often indirectly measure urban resilience by capturing the planning and preparation capacities of cities. In contrast, the outcome indicators measure urban resilience directly by evaluating the extent to which cities respond to and recover from disasters using observable policy outcomes [ ]. These outcomes are the combined results of many factors, such as policy interventions, cities' self-adaption, and other mitigation measures.
Some studies distinguish two types of urban resilience: inherent resilience and adaptive resilience. As indicated in 
, inherent resilience focuses on the pre-existing stage of the disruption event. It measures the preparedness of urban systems and refers to the resources and abilities a city possesses to respond to and recover from potential disasters [ ]. Studies often measure inherent resilience through different dimensions. For example, Cutter, Burton, and Emrich [ ] constructed a set of indicators to measure community disaster resilience in the United States in five critical dimensions: social resilience (e.g., the percentage of the non-elderly population), economic resilience (e.g., the ratio of large to small businesses), institutional resilience (e.g., the percentage of population covered by a hazard mitigation plan), infrastructure resilience (e.g., the building age), and community capital (e.g., the net international migrant population). Suleimany, Mokhtarzadeh, and Sharifi [ ] developed an integrated framework for evaluating the pandemic resilience of communities. Their framework also includes five dimensions: institutional, social, economic, infrastructural, and demographic. Notably, inherent resilience assessments often rely on input, output, or process indicators.
 Adaptive resilience focuses on the post-recovery stage and emphasizes the ability of a city to respond to and recover from a disaster. In essence, urban resilience can only be assessed in the aftermath of a disruptive event ( ). In this sense, the measurement of adaptive resilience is more in line with the nature of urban resilience assessment. Scholars often use the time it takes for cities to recover from disasters to assess urban adaptive resilience combined with some observable outcome measurements of resilience, such as population and building conditions [ , ]. In general, the shorter the time it takes to return to normal, the more resilient the urban systems are. For instance, the recovery time for rebuilding damaged residential areas is considered a signal of Los Angeles' urban resilience from the 1994 Northridge earthquake [ ]. Contreras, Forino, and Blaschke [ ] constructed a recovery index combining the indicators of building conditions and usages to characterize urban systems' recovery progress after an earthquake in L'Aquila, Italy. Population growth after the shock period is used to measure urban resilience to disasters [ ]. Land value is also seen as an important sign of urban revitalization, as rising land value often signals the return of population and the reopening of business after severe shocks [ ]. Some studies have also used migration flow [ ] and per capita income [ ] to measure a city's ability to attract talent and investment during the recovery stage. In the era of big data, scholars also utilized data that was directly generated from individuals to examine urban resilience patterns. A variety of data sources, such as call records [ ], subway smart cards [ ], taxi trips [ ], Twitter [ ], and Weibo [ ], etc., have been applied to assess human behavior patterns during or after the disaster.
However, most studies can only assess one or a few aspects of urban systems. There is a lack of systematic understanding of the variability in adaptive resilience of different urban subsystems. Given the often-indiscriminate impact of disruptions, analyses covering multiple urban sectors allow for comparisons among different urban subsystems and facilitate the identification of urban sectors that deserve significant policy attention and resources in the post-disaster phase.

2.3.

## COVID-19 and urban resilience measurements
The COVID-19 pandemic caused significant social, organizational, and economic damage to almost all urban subsystems [ , ]. Building a pandemic-resilient city thus becomes an urgent need for urban planning and governance in the post-pandemic era. Enhancing city resilience to the pandemic should not only meet the pandemic-related health requirements [ ] but also require a better understanding of the resilience differences of various urban subsystems.
Extant studies have measured cities' inherent and adaptive resilience to the COVID-19 pandemic with various indicators. For instance, Chen and Quan [ ] evaluated inherent urban resilience in the Yangtze River Delta Region in China using input indicators such as GDP, tax revenue, land area, and highway freight volume. Mishra, Gayen, and Haque [ ] devised a COVID-19 vulnerability index using population density, residential building quality, and distance from drinking water. Similarly, Peters [ ] developed a set of socioeconomic indicators to evaluate the inherent resilience of susceptible places to COVID-19 at the county level in the U.S. Urban adaptive resilience was also measured in the context of COVID-19, mostly using public health measurements. Relevant studies attempted to use indicators such as the number of infection cases or time spent in controlling the spread of the virus to characterize urban adaptive resilience to the pandemic. For instance, Chu, Cheng, and Song [ ] used the number of confirmed cases, recovered cases, and deaths from COVID-19 as a proxy for urban adaptive resilience with the rationale that these metrics directly reflect a city's governance capacity. Similarly, Chen, Guo, Pan, and Zhong [ ] used the time spent by cities in containing the spread of COVID-19 as a measure of the cities' resilience. Besides, changes in other macroeconomic indicators, e.g., unemployment rate, fiscal balance, and firms' profitability, have also been used to measure cities' adaptative resilience during the pandemic [ ]. However, these studies often focus on one particular aspect of cities, whereas they lack a comprehensive measurement and comparison of socioeconomic disruptions to various urban subsystems brought by the pandemic and the associated adaptive resilience.
In order to measure the adaptative resilience of various urban subsystems to the pandemic, appropriate outcome measurements that can capture the pandemic's shocks to different urban subsystems need to be selected, whereas existing commonly-used outcome indicators, such as death rates, infection cases, or macroeconomic indicators are not able to achieve such goals. This study aims to fill this gap by relying on citizens' complaints to different urban subsystems during the pandemic as the outcome measurement of the pandemic's shocks to various urban subsystems. Leveraging a unique dataset of citizens' complaints and NLP techniques, this study empirically examines the adaptive resilience of different urban subsystems to the COVID-19 pandemic in Chinese prefectural cities. We further explore the patterns of adaptive resilience cities demonstrated during the COVID-19 pandemic. This study contributes to the existing literature in two folds. First, we provide a novel approach to measure the socioeconomic disruptions brought by the COVID-19 pandemic using citizens' complaints data so as to provide a comprehensive picture of how different urban subsystems were disrupted by the pandemic. Second, we reveal the heterogeneity of adaptive resilience of different urban subsystems during the pandemic, the understanding of which is critical to inform the targeted measures in accelerating the pandemic recovery and making cities more prepared in the future.

3.

## Data and methods
3.1.

## Measurements, data, and research framework
As pandemic restriction measures like social distancing have limited in-person interactions, usage of Internet messaging applications and social media platforms have become increasingly important in maintaining social connections. Scholars have therefore often relied on social media data from Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, and Weibo to investigate the pandemic's impact on society and human behavior [ ]. However, although social media data could partially reflect challenges encountered in people's daily lives, it is more of a venue for information-sharing instead of a channel to report problems and seek solutions. As the “terminal sensors” within the urban systems [ ], citizens are sensitive to the disruption to their daily activities. We thus use COVID-19-related complaints about different urban activities to measure the outcomes of how different urban subsystems were disrupted by the pandemic (as 
(a) indicates). Unlike traditional data sources such as surveys or social media, the complaint data more authentically captures the difficulties and challenges citizens have encountered during the pandemic. The data were obtained from the Message Board for Leaders (MBL) of China (https://liuyan.people.com.cn/home). 
https://liuyan.people.com.cn/homeIn China, citizens express their opinions, file complaints, propose suggestions, and seek help from local governments on this platform with limited restrictions [ ]. This platform has played a critical role throughout the pandemic and has recorded the disruptions to urban activities resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. Furthermore, this platform has the advantage of minimizing the self-censorship problems that citizens may encounter on other social media platforms in China. 
Data on city characteristics were gathered from the China City Statistical Yearbook 2019 for clustering analysis.
 As cities recovered from the pandemic, the change rate of complaints serves as a reasonable indicator to measure urban adaptive resilience. (b) gives a clear example. At the T1 time point, the number of COVID-19-related disruptions in the urban system is Q1. In the post-recovery stage, the urban system recovers from the disaster from T1 to T2, and the number of disruptions drops from Q1 to Q2. The change rate from Q1 to Q2 could reflect the degree of urban systems adapted to the pandemic and recovered from it.
 shows the research framework. Using web crawler techniques, we collected data from the MBL platform. Then we cleaned and pre-processed the data using text-mining techniques. The Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model was applied to mine the COVID-19-related topics from cleaned data. Temporal analysis was conducted to measure the adaptive resilience of various urban subsystems, while the k-means clustering technique was adopted to identify the pattern of disruptions and adaptive resilience of different cities to the pandemic. We introduce each method in detail subsequently.
 
3.2.

## Data collection and pre-processing
Using the web crawler techniques, we compiled COVID-19-related complaints on the MBL throughout 2020, the first wave of COVID-19 outbreaks in mainland China. Extending the time period to the entirety of 2020, beyond the initial outbreak of COVID-19 in early 2020, allows for a thorough and systematic evaluation of urban resilience to the pandemic. We used specific keywords, including “epidemic (疫)” and “pneumonia (肺炎)” to aggregate complaints with timestamps between January 1, 2020, and December 31, 2020. The following information was gathered for each relevant complaint: user ID, timestamp, and text content.
We pre-processed the raw complaint texts to exclude noise information and those cases irrelevant to the pandemic. Duplications were removed first, and then irrelevant cases were excluded. After text denoising, the word segmentation task was conducted, and then stop words were filtered. We relied on the dictionary that contains the stop words generated by the Harbin Institute of Technology, Machine Intelligence Laboratory of Sichuan University, and Baidu Inc, all of which are prestigious and credible institutions in the field of Chinese natural language processing. The final sample contained a total of 36,110 complaints from 264 Chinese prefectural cities in 26 provinces, representing 79% of the prefectural municipalities and 84% of the provinces in mainland China. 

3.3.

## Data analysis
3.3.1.

## LDA topic modeling
We used the Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model to identify and classify pandemic-related disruptions. The LDA model has been widely used in multiple disciplines, including medicine [ ], political science [ ], and behavioral science [ ]. As an unsupervised machine learning approach, LDA model is an efficient technique for identifying and generating unstructured document topics from large bodies of text [ ], as researchers do not need to label unstructured texts manually. The model is also helpful in capturing marginal topics that are important but might be overlooked by researchers. Compared to other topic modeling techniques, LDA performs better in its topic coherence and model interpretability in topic identification while dealing with short text data [ ]. In this study, the LDA model assumes that complaints are randomly distributed among latent topics, and each topic is classified by the distribution of words. Hence, two key posterior probability distributions could be obtained, one is the k topics within each complaint, and the other is the distribution of W words within each topic.
The word distribution within each topic follows the Dirichlet distribution:
(1)δk∼Dir(β)where is the hyperparameter that should be pre-set.
The topic distribution within each citizen complaint also follows the Dirichlet distribution:
(2)θi∼Dir(α)where the hyperparameter should also be predetermined.
The topic distribution and word distribution have a joint distribution of:
(3)Zi,j∼Multinomial(θi)(4)Wi,j∼Multinomial(δzij)where the represents the topic index for the word . After setting the parameter , other parameters could be inferred by a three-layer Bayesian mixture model. 
shows the generative process of the LDA model. A more detailed description of the LDA model can be found in the work by Blei, Ng, and Jordan [ ]. In this study, we used Scikit-learn 0.23.2 [ ], a python-based machine learning package, to construct our LDA model. The perplexity value, representing the goodness-of-fit of the learned LDA model, was adopted as a metric to determine the optimal topic number. The lowest perplexity value corresponds to the most suitable topic classification number [ ].
 
3.3.2.

## K-means clustering analysis
Cities may demonstrate different patterns in the type and proportion of identified pandemic-related disruptions within different urban subsystems. The k-means clustering method is good at identifying patterns among objects with similar characteristics [ ]. This approach is widely used in urban studies to distinguish patterns across or within cities [ ]. We used the k-means clustering technique to classify cities into several categories and examined the patterns in cities' disruptions and adaptive resilience to the pandemic. The clustering analysis was based on the type and proportion of identified pandemic-related disruptions within cities. We used the silhouette value to determine the optimal number of clusters. The closer the silhouette value is to 1, the better performance of the clustering results is [ ].

4.

## Empirical results
4.1.

## Identifying pandemic-related disruptions to various urban subsystems
Using the LDA model, we identified 24 types of pandemic-related social disruptions. indicates that the optimal number of clusters of latent topics is 24, with a relatively low perplexity value. We then grouped the 24 types of disruptions into eight categories, with each indicating a type of urban subsystem impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic (see 
). Given the unique socioeconomic role of the construction-and-housing sector in China [ , ] and its significant share of disruptions identified, we distinguished construction-and-housing-related disruptions from other urban economic issues. Construction-and-housing-related disruptions represented the largest share of complaints at 19.31%, indicating the pandemic's intense shock to this subsystem. Disruptions directly related to restriction measures (19.09%) and the general urban economy (except for the construction-and-housing sector) (17.98%) were the next two most frequently reported areas, suggesting the vulnerability of the urban emergency response system and economic system during the pandemic. Disruptions to urban welfare systems (13.80%), urban education systems (12.68%), and urban environment systems (10.00%) were also noted. Relatively smaller shares of complaints were found for urban travel (5.59%) and transportation systems (1.55%). breaks down the types of reported disruptions in each category. Under the broad category of construction-and-housing system disruptions (19.31% of total complaints), four specific types of disruptions were identified: issues related to housing contract delays (6.12%), property management fees (5.57%), housing demolition (4.80%), and construction delays (2.82%). Restriction-related disruptions (19.09% of total complaints) were classified as a standalone category, as these disruptions represented issues related to quarantine (8.98%), pandemic prevention and control (6.50%), and constraints on the resumption of work and production (3.61%) rather than to regular urban systems. Disruptions in the urban economy (except for the construction-and-housing sector) (17.98% of total complaints) often included delays in rent payments from firms (6.45%) and small businesses (3.62%), arrears of wages for migrant workers (4.66%), and defaults or delays in employment subsidies (3.25%). Issues related to urban welfare systems (13.80% of total complaints) included concerns about the supply of heating (5.54%), the supply of medical essentials (4.42%), medical insurance (2.49%), and housing provident funds (1.34%). Education-related disruptions (12.68% of total complaints) mainly included issues surrounding education fees (6.69%), education refunds (2.77%), examination delays (2.45%), and kindergarten enrollment issues (0.77%). Urban environment disruptions were broken down into three types: environmental security (5.78%), noise pollution (2.56%), and waste disposal (1.67%). Disruptions related to travel included stagnation in tourism and issues related to travel cancellation (5.59%). Complaints about disruptions to transportation represented 1.55% of the total complaints.
 
4.2.

## Urban adaptive resilience to pandemic disruptions over time
We first examined how the pandemic impacted different urban subsystems throughout different stages of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 to form an overall picture of the cities' adaptive resilience to disruptions over time. 
shows the number of complaints related to COVID-19-related disruptions each day from January 1, 2020, to December 30, 2020. We followed the pandemic timeline provided by China's State Council [ ] and divided 2020 into three stages based on the number of identified cases and the implementation of lockdown and restriction measures: the initial stage (before January 23, 2020), the outbreak stage (January 23, 2020, to May 5, 2020), and the recovery stage (after May 5, 2020). January 23, 2020, was selected as the inflection point between the initial and outbreak stages because it was the day Wuhan city was put under lockdown and the national public health emergency response was raised to its highest level. The outbreak stage lasted from January 23 to May 5, 2020, during which the confirmed number of COVID-19 cases spiked and restriction measures were the most stringent. By May 5, 2020, the number of newly confirmed cases per day was being controlled at a low level. Restrictions began to be lifted, and the country entered the recovery stage of the pandemic.
 shows the temporal changes of disruptions identified in citizens' complaints over these three stages. Overall, pandemic-related complaints surged rapidly at the beginning of the pandemic and remained at high levels throughout the outbreak period. The level of complaints related to pandemic disruptions then gradually decreased as the pandemic was controlled.
Initial stage (before January 23, 2020). During this period, pandemic-related complaints remained scarce, with a total of 2,569 complaints logged. In the absence of large-scale restriction measures, people's daily lives in most cities were not significantly affected, with a relatively low number of reported disruption complaints.
Outbreak stage (January 23, 2020, to May 5, 2020). During this period, cities across China saw rapid surges in the number of confirmed cases of COVID-19. To restrict population mobility and curb virus transmission, lockdown measures were initially implemented in Wuhan on January 23, 2020, and were subsequently expanded to other cities around the country. Due to the combined effects of the escalation of the pandemic and increased government restrictions, the number of complaints related to COVID-19 rose and remained high, with a total of 15,615 and an average of around 200 per day. Complaints peaked on April 17, 2020, at 372. The surge in self-reported disruptions indicates that most Chinese cities lacked adequate emergency response systems to deal with the pandemic.
Recovery stage (after May 5, 2020). As the number of new daily infections dropped, cities began to enter the recovery stage. Restriction measures were gradually lifted by city governments across the country. Consequently, pandemic-related disruptions decreased significantly after May 2020 and followed an overall downward trend. There were a total of 17,916 pandemic-related complaints during this stage, averaging around 75 per day. This gradual decline in pandemic-related disruptions indicates that cities were in the process of recovering from pandemic disruptions and various restriction measures. This also indicates that the cities' governance systems had gradually adapted to the pandemic.

4.3.

## Urban adaptive resilience in various urban subsystems
After de-aggregating pandemic-related disruptions into various categories, we found that different urban subsystems demonstrated divergent degrees of adaptive resilience to the pandemic over time. 
and 
show the temporal changes in reported pandemic-related disruptions in various urban subsystems. Subsystems were grouped into three types based on their characteristics of adaptive resilience to the pandemic and speed of recovery.
 Type 1: Urban subsystems that were immediately affected by the pandemic and recovered quickly.
The most widely reported disruptions during the initial and outbreak periods were directly related to various restrictive measures, accounting for 36% and 29% of the total complaints in each period, respectively. During these periods, lockdown measures and social distancing measures were implemented in many cities, which greatly affected people's daily lives. However, these disruptions were related to pandemic prevention and control measures rather than regular urban subsystems with specific functions. The establishment of these emergency response systems was crucial to reducing the transmission of the virus [ ], especially during the early stage of the pandemic [ ], but the significant shares of reported complaints also show that these ad-hoc systems did not always function smoothly.
Cities also recovered the fastest from restriction-related disruptions. With restrictions being relaxed, there was an 83% decline in the average number of daily reported complaints from the outbreak period to the recovery stage. Disruptions to emergency systems were among the least-reported complaints in the recovery stage. This indicates that, despite the intensity of restriction-related disruptions in terms of absolute number and the rapid increase during the outbreak period, these complaints decreased rapidly along with the removal of restrictive measures. This type of disruption is indicated by the blue curve in . The daily number of reported disruptions returned to almost the initial-stage levels during the recovery period.
Type 2: Urban subsystems that were vulnerable to pandemic-related disruptions and recovered gradually.
The transportation, economic, welfare, environment, and construction-and-housing systems in the cities demonstrated a high degree of vulnerability and a low degree of adaptive resilience to pandemic-related shocks. The number of complaints about disruptions to these systems surged rapidly during the outbreak period but showed a steady but slow recovery trajectory in the recovery stage.
The number of reported disruptions to these urban subsystems dramatically increased between the initial stage and the outbreak period, indicating that the transportation, economy, welfare, urban environment, and construction-and-housing systems were severely affected by the pandemic. However, the average number of daily disruptions reported in these sectors quickly declined between the outbreak stage and the recovery stage: the number of complaints about the transportation system declined by 55%; about the general economic system by 46%; about the welfare system by 43%; about urban environment system by 43%; and about the construction-and-housing system by 42%. These statistics suggest that these urban subsystems were susceptible to shocks during the early stages of the pandemic and recovered from the shocks steadily and gradually, suggesting a gradual adaptation of these systems to the pandemic.
Type 3: Urban subsystems that were vulnerable to pandemic-related disruptions and recovered slowly.
Complaints about pandemic-related disruptions in travel and education systems displayed similar but slightly different trends. The number of complaints about disruptions to these systems grew rapidly between the initial stage and the outbreak period. These subsystems, however, did not demonstrate signs of rapid recovery during the recovery stage, as the number of reported daily disruptions continued to increase or only slightly declined during this period. There were few complaints concerning education-related disruptions during the initial period, but the number grew by 20% between the outbreak period and the recovery stage. This may be partially due to the seasonal nature of urban education, as most students end their school years in May and begin again in August. Its initially small number of complaints may not indicate a high level of resilience in the urban education system and may instead be tied to the school calendar.
Overall, various urban subsystems demonstrate heterogeneous degrees of resilience to pandemic-related disruptions. Disruptions related to pandemic restrictions and transportation systems have immediate effects on people's lives but can be remedied faster than disruptions to other urban subsystems, such as the general economy, the construction-and-housing system, and the education system. This also indicates that the latter group of urban subsystems shows a low level of adaptive resilience to the pandemic and may require long-term interventions to recover from the negative impacts of the pandemic.

4.4.

## Divergence in cities’ resilience to pandemic-related disruptions
We used the k-means clustering technique to categorize cities and examined cross-city divergence in resilience to pandemic-related disruptions. The clustering analysis was based on the proportions of different types of pandemic-related disruptions in each city. We only included cities with more than 50 reported disruption complaints in the sample to ensure the robustness of the results. Our sample for the cluster analysis included 112 cities in 23 provinces, representing 42.4% of prefectural cities in the full sample and 74% of the provinces in mainland China.
The summary statistics for the variables used in the cluster analysis are presented in . We conducted a two-stage cluster analysis. In the first stage, we identified two clusters of cities based on the silhouette value. We calculated the mean of the silhouette value for each k by repeating the calculation 20 times to improve reliability (see ). 
We identified a cluster of cities with a significant share of restriction-related disruptions (Cluster 3). The mean proportion of restriction-related disruptions within this cluster is 47.3%. We then conducted a second-stage cluster analysis with the remaining cities. We reidentified two clusters of cities, one cluster with a higher share of disruptions to the general urban economy and the other with a significant share of disruptions to the construction-and-housing systems. In total, we identified three clusters of cities.
 presents the means of the variables for these three clusters of cities. 
visualizes the centroid coordinates of each cluster, characterizing the typical features of the three types of cities. The general urban economies of the 30 cities in Cluster 1 were particularly vulnerable to pandemic-related shocks, although urban construction-and-housing systems, welfare systems, and urban education systems were also affected. As seen in 
, most cities in Cluster 1 have much higher GDP per capita than cities in the other two clusters, indicating a higher level of economic development. The tertiary industries in these cities also constitute a larger proportion of the urban economy than cities in the other clusters. Cities with highly active economic activities were quite vulnerable to the pandemic and subsequent restriction measures.
 Most cities (67 cities) were clustered into the second group (Cluster 2), which represented cities with high shares of reported disruptions related to construction-and-housing systems. Cities in Cluster 2 were vulnerable to pandemic-related shocks to these systems, although they also reported similar shares of disruptions to urban environment systems, education systems, and welfare systems as cities in Cluster 1. As shows, cities in Cluster 2 have higher GDP growth rates and more active construction sectors, measured by the proportion of the workforce engaged in construction activities, than cities in the other two clusters. This indicates that many of these cities in Cluster 2 are still undergoing mass construction and rapid urbanization, making the pandemic's disruptions to various construction-related activities particularly evident. The 15 cities in Cluster 3 were predominately affected by restriction-related disruptions, with fewer significant disruptions to other urban subsystems. Beijing is a notable exception in this cluster, as it also suffered a considerable number of disruptions in other urban subsystems as well, although the disruptions related to restrictions measures were the most prominent. 
As China's political center, Beijing enacted stricter restriction measures than other parts of the country, which may have led to a greater number of complaints about restriction-related disruptions. presents the list of cities in each of the clusters. provides the descriptive statistics for city characteristics.
Our findings indicate that cities' resilience to the pandemic is closely related to the type and intensity of activities in the city. In economically developed cities in eastern China, the general urban economies were particularly vulnerable to pandemic-related disruptions. These cities are often near the end of their urbanization process and have active economic activities in manufacturing sectors [72]. In contrast, urbanizing cities with highly active construction sectors reported high shares of disruptions to their construction-and-housing systems, such as issues related to housing demolition, contracts, and construction delays. These cities often concentrate in central and western regions that are still undergoing rapid urbanization and mass construction.

5.

## Conclusions and policy implications
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted almost every aspect of cities in China and across the world, especially during the implementation of restrictive lockdown in the early stage of the pandemic. These measures have been important in containing the spread of the disease but have also created tremendous disruptions to cities, resulting in great social costs. Scholars have examined urban adaptive resilience to the pandemic using various health-related measures, but few studies have measured and compared the adaptive resilience of various urban subsystems to pandemic-related disruptions. This study makes an early effort to fill this gap.
Leveraging text mining techniques, we devised a novel quantitative approach to measure and evaluate the adaptive resilience of various urban subsystems to disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and the associated restrictions. We identified and extracted reported complaints made by citizens and categorized the types of disruptions. Using data on self-reported complaints allows us to capture the de facto disruptions experienced by citizens during the pandemic, which serves as a useful outcome indicator of the pandemic. We then use its temporal changes to measure and compare the adaptive resilience of various urban subsystems.
We found significant disparities in the adaptive resilience of various urban subsystems. Understanding these disparities will help policymakers design targeted policy interventions to mitigate the negative impacts of these disturbances and accelerate recovery. This study also represents an early attempt to quantitatively measure and evaluate the socioeconomic disruptions and the associated costs caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
We found that a wide range of urban subsystems was disrupted by the pandemic and the associated restrictions, with dramatic differences in nature. Disruption to the general urban economic system and construction-and-housing system solicited the greatest number of citizens' complaints, with the urban welfare system, education system, environment system, travel system, and transportation system also garnering considerable numbers of complaints. These subsystems are critical functional components of cities in which intensive policy interventions should be implemented.
Temporally, all types of urban subsystems experienced short-term shocks during the outbreak period and large numbers of disruptions. Cities gradually returned to normal as the pandemic was controlled and the restriction measures were slowly lifted. Additionally, in most cities, various urban subsystems gradually adapted to the pandemic, and urban governance capacity improved accordingly [ ]. This general trend supports Glaeser's optimistic attitude toward cities' resilience to the pandemic [ ].
Specifically, we found that different urban subsystems demonstrated divergent degrees of adaptive resilience to disruptions. We found that some urban subsystems, such as the general urban economy, education system, and construction-and-housing system, despite being greatly affected by the pandemic, did not immediately generate many reported disruptions. These urban subsystems, however, did not return to pre-pandemic levels even after the relaxation of restrictive measures. This indicates that the pandemic has disturbed these urban subsystems with a lag and that these deep-seated challenges may need long-term government interventions to address. The persistent high levels of disruptions may be because the activities in these urban subsystems are complex and fragmented, involving interactions among many stakeholders. This finding is in line with both simulated results and empirical evidence that complex systems generally recover more slowly than simple systems to external shocks [ ], as increased complexity and fragmentation require more effective collaborations among stakeholders. This finding also implies that policy interventions intended to increase urban adaptive resilience should target subsystems that experience the most pressing issues across varying phases of a pandemic.
In contrast, the shocks to the emergency response system (measured by restriction-related disruptions) brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic were significant in terms of the number and relative share of complaints, but these numbers decreased rapidly as restrictive measures were gradually removed in the recovery stage.
Other urban subsystems, such as transportation system, welfare system, and urban environment system, exhibited high levels of vulnerability during the initial and outbreak periods. These systems were subject to a rapid surge in complaints about pandemic-related disruptions but also showed signs of gradual recovery during the recovery stage. The number of reported disruptions to these systems declined to levels similar to those during the initial stage. Although urban travel system and urban education system were also quite vulnerable to pandemic-related shocks, these subsystems recovered slowly during the recovery stage. Complaints about urban travel mainly concerned cancellation issues. Urban education systems are subject to seasonal changes, which means that complaints related to the pandemic may have been likely to arise near the beginning of new academic semester in August 2020. This indicates that for some urban subsystems, a low initial level of reported disruptions does not necessarily indicate the subsystem's resilience.
Temporal analysis indicated that the pandemic brought about long-term and deep-seated impacts on various urban subsystems, such as the general urban economy and construction-and-housing system. Shocks to these systems were much more severe than the shocks generated by restriction measures, as the latter tended to diminish as the pandemic was controlled. Policy interventions in the post-pandemic stage should therefore focus on the pandemic's impacts on regular urban systems to accelerate the pace of recovery. This will involve multi-party collaboration and long-term efforts to mitigate the long-term negative impacts of the disruptions to the systems.
We also identified three types of cities with different characteristics of adaptive resilience using clustering techniques. The general urban economy of cities in Cluster 1 was particularly vulnerable to the pandemic compared with other urban subsystems. Most of these cities have highly developed economies, which were forced to pause by the pandemic and the subsequent restrictive measures. Many large cities, such as Shanghai and Shenzhen, are clustered into this category. In these cities, policy interventions should focus on addressing disruptions to the general economic system and maintaining its function. This finding may also be applicable to regional economic centers and commercial hubs worldwide, in which reviving business activities should be prioritized in post-pandemic recovery. Cities in Cluster 2 reported the greatest shares of complaints about pandemic-related disruption to the construction-and-housing system. Most cities in this cluster are moderately developed and still undergoing rapid urbanization, and the construction-and-housing sector accounts for a considerable share of the local economy. Policy interventions in these cities should therefore emphasize addressing pandemic-related disruptions to these systems. The third cluster of cities was affected most prominently by various pandemic-related restriction measures. Overall, cities' adaptive resilience is closely related to the type of active activities in its jurisdiction, and post-pandemic recovery interventions should thus focus on these areas. 
summarizes our findings and the associated policy implications for enhancing urban adaptive resilience in different urban subsystems.
 
6.

## Limitations
Despite the above-mentioned contributions, this study also has limitations. Self-selection problems may arise in studies using self-reported data, and the necessary demographic data on respondents to address this issue is often unavailable. For example, highly-educated citizens may be more prone to file complaints and express their dissatisfactions via online platforms. To further unravel the underlying disparities among cities, more extensive data collection is needed to address the possible bias resulting from self-selection. Second, despite the fact that the MBL encourages free expression, self-censorship that limits politically sensitive speech may still exist. Therefore the conclusions of this paper should be treated with caution. Third, the complaint data in some cities in western China were unavailable due to data accessibility restrictions. To gauge the resilience of these cities, additional data collection through surveys should be conducted.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Footnotes
1This data source potentially shares the self-selection issues found in social media posts and survey responses. For example, highly educated people may tend to file more complaints. Despite this, the MBL data is more relevant to this study than social media data, as the latter may contain distorted information generated by bots, collective accounts, or organizations, reducing the credibility of conclusions drawn from its analysis [ ]. Furthermore, while citizen complaints may not fully capture the socioeconomic disruptions caused by the pandemic, in the absence of more suitable data, these complaints still serve as a reasonable measurement of the impacts of COVID-19 on cities.
2Self-censorship in China's social media is a frequently mentioned issue in existing studies. However, the MBL platform has the advantage to minimize potential self-censorship problem at the best. The MBL is established and managed directly by the central government, and its operation is not under the direct control of local governments. Therefore, local officials do not have the authority to censor or selectively display citizens' posts, thereby reducing the impact of external censorship and encouraging citizens to report problems more authentically [ ]. In addition, the MBL anonymizes the personal information of users, and only part of the users' information is displayed. The protection of privacy prevents users from being tracked and located in reality. Citizens can use the platform without too much concern and fear for potential punishment. The advantages of MBL have been well recognized in previous studies which aim to evaluate the performance of the platform or use the data from it [ , ]. Despite this, self-censorship may still exist. We highlight such a limitation at the end of paper and the conclusions should be interpretated with caution.
3Due to website restrictions, data from cities in several western provinces were inaccessible, including Xinjiang, Tibet, Qinghai, Gansu, Ningxia, Shaanxi, Yunnan, and Guizhou. However, the analysis is still useful, as Ji et al. (2021) noted that the majority of citizens' complaints come from the eastern regions of the country [ ]. Cities in western provinces were also less affected by the pandemic [ ].
4Due to the characteristics of the k-means algorithm, the silhouette value may be slightly different with respect to a specific k value in each calculation. Using the mean value generated by repeating the calculation multiple times helps improve the robustness of the results.
5The overall number of reported pandemic-related disruptions in Beijing was 4972: 30% was restriction-related complaints, 17% was construction-and-housing-related complaints, 12% was economy-related complaints, 11% was education-related complaints, 11% was environment-related complaints, 10% was travel-related complaints, 9% was welfare-related complaints, and 1% was transportation-related complaints.

Appendix A.
 
 
 
 
 

## Data availability
Data will be made available on request.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Data Availability Statement
Data will be made available on request.