pmcPLoS Comput BiolPLoS Comput Biol328ploscompplosPLOS Computational Biology1553-734X1553-7358PLOSPMC12594346PMC12594346.112594346125943464118312510.1371/journal.pcbi.1013660PCOMPBIOL-D-24-019991SoftwareBiology and life sciencesBiochemistryNucleic acidsRNANon-coding RNANatural antisense transcriptsMicroRNAsBiology and life sciencesGeneticsGene expressionGene regulationMicroRNAsBiology and life sciencesBiochemistryNucleic acidsRNAMessenger RNAMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancers and NeoplasmsComputer and Information SciencesNetwork AnalysisBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGene ExpressionMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancers and NeoplasmsGastrointestinal TumorsGastric CancerMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancers and NeoplasmsHead and Neck CancersMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancers and NeoplasmsColorectal CancerRNACOREX - RNA coregulatory network explorer and classifier
RNACOREXhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-0166-6635Oviedo-MadridAitorConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSoftwareValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8549-0453González-GomarizJoséInvestigationMethodologySupervisionVisualizationWriting – original draft ArmañanzasRubenConceptualizationFunding acquisitionMethodologyResourcesSupervisionWriting – review & editing 1
Institute of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain2
TECNUN School of Engineering, Universidad de Navarra, Donostia-San Sebastian, Spain3
Cancer Center, Clínica Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, SpainAlberMarkEditor ]. Through this mechanism, miRNAs influence a wide array of biological processes, including development, differentiation, and cancer progression. The set of miRNA-mRNA interactions form what are known as post-transcriptional networks, coregulatory layers that operate after gene transcription to modulate gene expression. Understanding these networks, particularly the specific interactions associated with certain diseases or biological conditions, can provide deep insight into the coregulatory patterns that underlie pathological processes.
The discovery and validation of a miRNA-mRNA interaction in a conventional laboratory requires large amounts of resources, making it unfeasible to study all possible interactions. To overcome this limitation, numerous miRNA target prediction computational methodologies have been developed, based on structural characteristics of the RNA sequences and statistical analyses of experimental data [ ]. These methods have allowed the generation of databases of predicted interactions. However, a predicted interaction is not necessarily real, and even if it does exist, its biological relevance remains unknown. In this regard, there is a critical need for computational tools that not only predict reliable interactions, but also assess their functional relevance in the context of a given pathology or biological condition.
This challenge has traditionally been approached from two perspectives. Some methods leverage curated biological knowledge to define interaction sets, but these are generally not designed to use such sets as predictive models, limiting their practical validation outside the laboratory [ , ]. Conversely, Bayesian Networks (BNs) can be implemented to extract disease-associated sets of interactions combining both predictive power and explanatory capabilities [ ]. General-purpose Bayesian network packages provide robust implementations of algorithms for network inference and prediction [ ]. However, when these models incorporate no curated biological information, the resulting interaction sets may lose robustness and reliability, potentially leading to spurious or less biologically relevant connections (see ).
In this work, we present the RNACOREX package, a Python-based tool that allows researchers to unravel post-transcriptional coregulatory networks by identifying the most relevant miRNA-mRNA interactions associated with a specific disease or biological process. The novelty of RNACOREX lies in its integrated pipeline, specifically adapted to work with transcriptomic data, which enables researchers to easily identify relevant sets of interactions and use them to induce predictive models. The package uses a novel hybrid approach that integrates sequence and structure information from well-known databases with conditional mutual information based analyses of miRNA and mRNA expression data. This hybrid approach has demonstrated its ability to filter spurious interactions and identify more robust interaction sets [ , ]. The set of interactions is then modeled as Conditional Linear Gaussian (CLG) classifiers, a specific kind of BN classifier based on the graphical representation of the post-transcriptional coregulatory network. These models are particularly well-suited to this problem, as they avoid the need for data discretization and take advantage of the properties of Gaussian distributions to enable more efficient inference. This model is used to further validate the interaction set and classify new samples of miRNA-mRNA quantifications. In the current work, the RNACOREX pipeline was applied to 13 cancer datasets from The Cancer Genome Atlas, identifying cancer-associated interaction sets of interactions and using these sets to classify new samples.

## 2 Design and implementation
MicroRNAs regulate gene expression by binding to specific mRNAs, influencing their stability and translation. Analyzing the expression levels of both miRNAs and mRNAs linked to a particular phenotype can reveal key interactions that may contribute to disease progression. Structural features of miRNAs and mRNAs can also help identify candidate interactions. However, not all miRNAs interact with all mRNAs, and relying solely on expression or structural data often results in a high number of false positives [ ]. RNACOREX addresses this challenge using a hybrid approach that combines functional information (based on empirical expression values) with structural information (including curated knowledge about the molecular structure of miRNAs and mRNAs). Functional and structural knowledge are translated into scores, which are then used to rank interactions according to their relation with the pathology.

## 2.1 RNACOREX pipeline
The pipeline of RNACOREX takes a dataset containing matched miRNA and mRNA expression profiles and a binary class or phenotype as input. Candidate interactions are initially filtered using curated prediction and validation databases, removing those that lack biological plausibility. For each remaining interaction, two complementary scores are computed: a structural information score, capturing the level of prior biological support for the interaction, and a functional information score, reflecting the empirical association between the interaction and the phenotype of interest, derived from expression data. These two scores are then integrated to establish an interaction hierarchy, which ranks miRNA–mRNA pairs according to both their biological credibility and functional relevance. Using this hierarchy, RNACOREX defines the topology of the Bayesian network and estimates the parameters of the CLG model. Once the model is built, the user can evaluate its performance and make predictions on new data. presents a graphical summary of the package workflow divided in its main seven stages.
 

## 2.2 Interactions filtering
A growing number of computational methods have been developed to predict miRNA–target interactions (MTI). Among the most widely used resources for predicted MTIs are TargetScan v8.0 [ ] and DIANA-microT 2023 [ ], which base their predictions on sequence complementarity and other biologically relevant characteristics. In contrast, miRTarBase v10.0 [ ] and TarBase v9.0 [ ] compile MTIs that have been experimentally validated.
RNACOREX leverages these four databases to perform an initial biological plausibility filter. Specifically, it retains only those interactions that are supported by at least one of the previously mentioned sources (either as a prediction, or as experimental evidence) while discarding interactions absent from all of them. The resulting set of interactions defines the pool of candidate interactions S that RNACOREX considers for further modeling and analysis. The reasoning behind this is that if an interaction has not even been predicted using well-established features such as sequence complementarity, it is unlikely to occur in a real biological context. This filtering reduces the likelihood of including spurious interactions, though at the cost of overlooking unlikely novel ones. However, as many entries from TargetScan and DIANA remain computational predictions without experimental validation, recovering these interactions could guide future biological validation.

## 2.3 Information scores
For each interaction in the candidate set S, two metrics are computed: the structural information score and the functional information score. These metrics assess the relevance of each interaction based on its biological support and its association with the phenotype under study.

## 2.3.1 Structural information score.
The structural information represents the biological support associated to each interaction. To quantify this relevance, the four databases used in the filtering step are considered: TargetScan, DIANA Micro-T, miRTarBase, and TarBase. Greater representation of an interaction across these databases will indicate stronger biological support, either because it has been consistently predicted, or because it has been directly validated through experimental evidence. The term ‘structural’ is used to denote that predictions generated by these tools are based on features such as sequence complementarity, regional accessibility, and target site position. If an interaction has been consistently predicted, it is likely due to its structural characteristics.
The structural information score SI is based on two components: the number of databases in which the interaction is present and the consistency index among the pairs of databases where it appears. The consistency index [ ] measures the similarity between two sets of interactions, assigning greater weight to an interaction if it occurs in databases that are themselves similar. The score is computed by summing the consistency indices of all pairs of databases in which the interaction is present. This index is normalized such that the total sum of indices across all database pairs equals 1, ensuring that the structural score of interactions present in all databases is equal to 1. The presence of a (i,j) interaction in a pair of engines will be represented as a binary value, being equal to 1 if the interaction is present in both engines and 0 if it doesn’t.
 SIij=∑k=14∑l=14Inorm(Sk,Sl)*wijkl.
(1)Interactions that appear only in a single engine may still remain at the stage of calculating structural information. However, since they are not supported by at least two engines, their structural information is automatically assigned to zero, as they cannot be considered as consistently predicted or validated interactions. Since the package is intended to serve as a tool for discovering new potential, not yet confirmed interactions, same weight is assigned to presence in validated and predicted databases. Nevertheless, validated interactions tend to be more consistently represented across all databases compared to predicted ones, thus benefiting from the consistency index and the structural score without the need for manual adjustment.

## 2.3.2 Functional information score.
For all interactions with a non-zero structural information score, the functional information score is computed. This score, aims to include miRNA-mRNA relations empirically identified as relevant through their joint expression data. This association of the triplet miRNA-mRNA-class is analyzed in RNACOREX by computing the information that each miRNA-mRNA pair provides about the class being studied through their conditional mutual information (CMI) [ ]. The value of the CMI for a ij interaction regarding the class C is defined as the functional information score of the interaction (FIij).
 FIij=CMI(i,j|C)=∑c∈Ωc∫j∫ip(c)fij(i,j|c)logfij(i,j|c)fi(i|c)fj(j|c)didj,
(2)When calculating the conditional mutual information of each element, continuous expression values are kept, estimating their density functions with Gaussian kernel methods [ , ], and approximating the function’s value using the trapezoidal rule [ ]. Pairs with higher CMI values are expected to be more related with the class under study.

## 2.4 Interaction hierarchy
To balance existing structural and functional knowledge, the set of detected miRNA-mRNA interactions are separately ranked using their structural (SIij) and functional (FIij) information scores. These two rankings are then combined to determine the order in which interactions are included in the network. The top of the ranking includes those interactions with the greatest relevance with respect to the class under study and the highest biological significance. By default, RNACOREX applies the “alternative” ranking method to build the final hierarchy of interactions. In this approach, elements are selected alternately from the functional and structural rankings to generate the combined list. In cases where interactions have identical structural information scores, ties are resolved using the “isolated” method, giving priority to interactions composed of elements that occur less frequently within the pool of potential interactions, as these may represent a more isolated and potentially novel regulatory pathway. RNACOREX also supports other ranking strategies and tie-breaking methods, which are described in detail in .

## 2.5 Conditional linear Gaussian classifier
A Bayesian network is defined by a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) where V is the set of nodes and A the set of directed edges, and a set of parameters θ representing the conditional probability distributions associated with each node. A Conditional Linear Gaussian (CLG) model is a specific type of Bayesian network handling both continuous and discrete variables. In these models, continuous variables are modeled using Gaussian distributions whose parameters depend on the values of their parent nodes.
The networks inferred by RNACOREX consist of two types of variables: continuous expression variables (miRNAs and mRNAs) and a binary class variable (phenotype). This structure makes them ideally suited for representation using a Conditional Linear Gaussian (CLG) model, as it allows working directly with continuous data without the need for discretization, and enables highly efficient inference by leveraging the Gaussian properties of the variables.
In Conditional Linear Gaussian classifiers, the class variable C is treated as a parent of all other variables; therefore, for a Xi continuous variable, two types of dependencies are possible: (1) continuous variables that have only the class as their parent pai = {C} (typically miRNAs), and (2) continuous variables that depend both on the class and on other continuous variables (typically mRNAs). If a variable depends only on the class, its distribution is modeled as a univariate Gaussian conditioned on the class: . If, in addition to the class, a variable has continuous parents, it is modeled as a conditional Gaussian distribution with a mean that depends linearly on the continuous parents: 
The analysis using CLG classifiers can be divided into three main steps: (1) define the network topology, (2) estimate the network parameters, and (3) perform inference based on the network. The topology of the network is fully defined by the interaction ranking and the number of interactions (k) set by the user. The network will be composed of the first k interactions in the ranking. Given a fully specified network structure, parameters are estimated from the expression data using the conditional (in)dependence relationships encoded in the topology. Finally, classification is performed by computing the joint likelihood of the observed data and selecting the class with the highest posterior probability:
 c*=argmaxc∈ΩCP(c)·∏Xi∈XRP(Xi|Yi,c),
(3)where is the set of possible classes, and XR the set of observed variables in the network.

## 2.6 Software features
Before initializing RNACOREX, the user must load the engines (miRTarBase, TarBase, DIANA microT-CDS, and TargetScan), as well as the gene annotation database from GENCODE. The package includes a built-in function, download(), which must be executed after installation. This function automatically downloads and stores the required resources in a predefined directory. The function check_engines() can be used to verify that the databases have been correctly downloaded and stored. If this check returns a positive result, the package is ready to be used.
The MRNC class (MiRNetClassifier) is the main element of RNACOREX. An object of MRNC class is a scikit-learn [ ] compatible estimator that develops the whole package workflow. This object computes the structural and functional information scores, ranks interactions by their relevance, and builds the CLG model. It also displays the associated coregulation network in an easy and intuitive way.
To initialize an MRNC object, two main objects are required: a X matrix, associated with the mRNA and miRNA expression data, and a y array, corresponding to the phenotype or the class. While data in the X expression matrix should be numerical, the class array should be binary, coded with numerical 0 and 1 values. An MRNC object has five main attributes: n_con, precision, mode, weight and ties. All five attributes are optional and can be modified by the user. The n_con value will correspond to the default number of connections used for fitting the model and displaying the network. The precision attribute will define the precision in the conditional mutual information estimation process. Mode will be used to select the ranking building approach, being weight the weight of the structural information score in the weighted case. Ties will define the tie-breaking strategy. As a quick start, a network with a specific number of interactions can be fitted with the fit method and used for predictions with predict. The network can be displayed with get_network. Using connections_, the interaction ranking with the associated structural and functional information score of each interaction can be obtained. Further specifications on available methods and default parameters can be found at .

## 3 Results

## 3.1 Data
We tested RNACOREX on 13 miRNA and mRNA expression databases obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project [ ] through the NCI’s Genomic Data Commons (GDC) [ ] using the University of California Santa Cruz (UCSC) Xena platform [ ]. Specifically, the data used was from Breast Invasive Carcinoma (BRCA), Colon Adenocarcinoma (COAD), Head-Neck Squamous Carcinoma (HNSC), Kidney Renal Cell Carcinoma (KIRC), Acute Myeloid Leukemia (LAML), Liver Hepatocellular Carcinoma (LIHC), Lung Adenocarcinoma (LUAD), Lung Squamous Cell Carcinoma (LUSC), Low Grade Glioma (LGG), Sarcoma (SARC), Skin Cutaneous Melanoma (SKCM), Stomach Adenocarcinoma (STAD) and Uterine Corpus Endometrial Carcinoma (UCEC). For model development, only tumoral samples were considered. mRNAs with more than 25% of samples showing fewer than 5 counts, and miRNAs with more than 25% of samples showing fewer than 1 count, were excluded. Differential expression analysis was then performed on the remaining mRNAs retaining only those that were significant after FDR correction (p.adj < 0.05). Expression counts were log-normalized as . Patients were divided into two classes depending on their survival time (long-survival/short-survival) with an equal number of samples in each class. To this end, the 75% of uncensored samples with the shortest overall survival times were assigned to the short-survival class. The remaining 25% of uncensored samples were included in the high-survival class, which was further complemented with censored samples exhibiting the longest follow-up times in order to balance the class sizes. Only censored samples with follow-up times exceeding the maximum survival time observed in the low-survival group were considered for this purpose. RNACOREX was used with two main goals, first, to extract the network most likely associated with the survival time in each disease, and secondly, to evaluate the classification ability of the model.

## 3.2 Model induction
Starting from the most simple network with a single interaction, 200 networks were built for each database, sequentially increasing the complexity of the network by adding a new edge. The network parameters were estimated using a 3-fold CV scheme, implementing three iterations for each network with a different train-test split. The performance of the network with the best metrics computed by RNACOREX was compared to five state-of-the-art classification models. Specifically, the comparison includes two graph-based classification methods, a Graph Kernel approach and a Graph Neural Network, as well as three classical vector-based machine learning models, namely Random Forest, Gradient Boosting, and Support Vector Machines. This selection ensures that both graph-structured and traditional feature-based approaches are represented in the evaluation. At each step, the five classification models were trained using only the variables present in the current network extracted by RNACOREX, ensuring a fair comparison for each specific value of k. shows an example of the post-transcriptional network for the COAD database with best classification performance (k = 97).
 

## 3.3 Quantitative performance
 presents classification performance metrics for the 13 databases analyzed. Values show the best marks out of the 200 runs of the CLG model identified by RNACOREX.
 With two balanced classes, the accuracy of the classifier increased from a 9.2% in SKCM to a 24.8% in LAML, compared with random assignment (50% baseline). The behavior of the classifier varied depending on each database, as evidenced by the fact that the network that classified best occurred under different settings; in some cases with many connections (164) and in others with few (45). This may indicate an adaptive behavior that aligns with the biological reality underlying the data. presents the distribution of the accuracy for each of the six classification models. When comparing the CLG with the other five models, RNACOREX consistently outperformed other graph-based models (GNN and Graph Kernel), and achieved similar results to vector-based classifiers. Furthermore, RNACOREX offers a significant advantage: its results are fully explainable and the associated coregulation network can be extracted.
 In addition to the main results of the article, the performance of RNACOREX was also compared with CGBayesNets [ ], a generic Bayesian network package that also implements CLGs. The results showed the advantages of using a pipeline specifically adapted to this problem, over a generic Bayesian network model. All comparisons are included in .

## 3.4 TCGA pancancer analysis
To demonstrate the usability of RNACOREX, a preliminary biological analysis of the results was conducted. Based on the data obtained from 13 TCGA databases, the sets of mRNAs, miRNAs, and their interactions comprising the resulting networks were examined. in shows the most frequently occurring miRNAs and mRNAs, in shows the shared interactions across multiple cancers and in provides a graphical summary of the number of tissue-specific versus cross-tissue interactions observed in the different networks.
Specifically, hsa-miR-1293 emerged as the most recurrent miRNA in a tissue-specific context, appearing in 54 interactions within the HNSC dataset, being present in approximately half of the interactions in the network. In contrast, hsa-miR-378c was the most widely represented miRNA overall, being involved in a total of 190 interactions across 12 different tissue types. miR-1293 has been previously implicated in head and neck squamous carcinoma [ ], while hsa-miR-378c is primarily associated with gastric cancer [ ], though it has also been linked to other cancer types [ ].
A similar analysis was performed at the mRNA level, revealing BACH2 (9 tissue-specific interactions in COAD) and SLC2A1 and TBL1XR1 (7 interactions in different cancer tissues) as the most recurrent mRNAs. BACH transcription factors are important regulators of pathophysiology in the digestive system and have been associated to colorectal cancers [ ]. On the other hand, SLC2A1 has been previously considered as a potential pancancer biomarker [ ] and TBL1XR1 has been widely recognised as a protooncogene [ ].
At the level of miRNA–mRNA interactions, 3 interactions (hsa-miR-378c - SERPINE1, hsa-miR-378c - SLC2A1 and hsa-miR-4326 - TPX2) appeared as the most frequently observed, appearing all of them in 5 different tissues. While the specific hsa-miR-378c - SERPINE1 interaction has not been associated with cancer, the hsa-miR-378a version of hsa-miR-378c has been directly related with SLC2A1 in cancer contexts [ ]. Individually, both SERPINE1 and the previously commented SLC2A1 have been widely associated to cancer [ , ]. TPX2 has also been linked with a variety of cancers [ ], but its relation with hsa-miR-4326 remains unknown.
A more detailed discussion of the most relevant findings is provided in miR-1293 in Head and Neck Squamous Carcinoma section in , emphasizing how these interactions relate to the pathology under study. Overall, this brief analysis highlights the usability of RNACOREX for the biological exploration of complex regulatory networks. The identification of recurrent molecules, as well as previously unreported interactions, underscores the potential of the tool to generate novel biological hypotheses that could guide subsequent experimental validation.

## 4 Availability and future directions
A logical next step in the application of RNACOREX is to focus on specific tissues or conditions, by performing a more in-depth biological analysis of the identified interactions. This will include a systematic functional interpretation, such as pathway and enrichment analyses, to better understand the biological roles of the selected networks in a given context. In addition, incorporating methods to estimate global feature importance including metrics to quantify the overall relevance of individual RNAs or interactions across the network could offer deeper insights into the key biological drivers. Both types of analyses could greatly enhance the relevance of the results and are scheduled for integration into future versions of the package.
One other promising direction is the integration of more detailed coregulatory effects within the interaction networks. Currently, the package assumes a regulatory flow from miRNAs to mRNAs, typically resulting in gene down-regulation due to transcript degradation or translational repression. However, recent evidence suggests that miRNAs can also induce gene up-regulation, particularly through interactions at promoter regions [ , ]. Incorporating this information into RNACOREX would allow users to distinguish between up- and down-regulatory interactions, enhancing the biological interpretability of the resulting networks.
While RNACOREX only allows miRNA-mRNA relations, the incorporation of other forms of regulation, such as mRNA-mRNA (epistatic) or miRNA-miRNA interactions, represents another venue for future development. These additional types of interactions have been linked to various disease processes [ , ], and their inclusion could provide a more comprehensive view of the overall transcriptomic regulatory process.
Extra methods, figures, and tables can be found in – . The code and the package repository is accessible at https://github.com/digital-medicine-research-group-UNAV/RNACOREX. The package is also available on the Python Package Index (PyPI) at https://pypi.org/project/rnacorex/, allowing direct installation via pip install rnacorex. A Docker image of the package including all necessary dependencies for running is also available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17397953. The package is open-source with an APACHE 2.0 license.

## Supporting information
S1 Text

## Engines.
Table A. Engine nomenclatures.​
Table B. Engine composition.​
Fig A. Engine overlap.​
(PDF)
S2 Text

## Theoretical Background.
Fig A. CMI Estimations.​
Fig B. CMI Standard Deviation.​
Fig C. CMI execution time.​
Fig D. Tie-breaking procedures.​
(PDF)
S3 Text

## Package Implementation.
(PDF)
S4 Text

## Experiments.
Fig A. Class Assignment.​
Table A. Dataset characteristics.​
(PDF)
S5 Text

## Results.
Table A. Performance.​
Fig A. Most Repeated RNAs.​
Fig B. Pancancer Interactions.​
Fig C. Shared and tissue-specific interactions.​
Table B. Interaction ranking.​
Fig D. miR-1293 interactions in HNSC.​
Fig E. Gene expression levels.​
Fig F. miR-1293 interacting gene metrics.​
(PDF)
S6 Text

## Benchmarking.
Table A. Benchmarking.​
(PDF)

 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013660.r001Decision Letter 0
AlberMarkSection Editor© 2025 Mark Alber2025Mark Alberhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
13 May 2025

PCOMPBIOL-D-24-01999
RNACOREX - RNA coregulatory network explorer and classifier
PLOS Computational Biology
Dear Dr. Oviedo-Madrid,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS Computational Biology. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS Computational Biology's publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
​Please submit your revised manuscript within 60 days Jul 13 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at ploscompbiol@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pcompbiol/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
* A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'. This file does not need to include responses to formatting updates and technical items listed in the 'Journal Requirements' section below.
* A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
* An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, competing interests statement, or data availability statement, please make these updates within the submission form at the time of resubmission. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Mark Alber, Ph.D.
Section Editor
PLOS Computational Biology

Journal Requirements:

1) We ask that a manuscript source file is provided at Revision. Please upload your manuscript file as a .doc, .docx, .rtf or .tex. If you are providing a .tex file, please upload it under the item type u2018LaTeX Source Fileu2019 and leave your .pdf version as the item type u2018Manuscriptu2019.
2) Please provide an Author Summary. This should appear in your manuscript between the Abstract (if applicable) and the Introduction, and should be 150-200 words long. The aim should be to make your findings accessible to a wide audience that includes both scientists and non-scientists. Sample summaries can be found on our website under Submission Guidelines:

https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/s/submission-guidelines#loc-parts-of-a-submission

3) Please upload all main figures as separate Figure files in .tif or .eps format. For more information about how to convert and format your figure files please see our guidelines: 

https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/s/figures

4) We have noticed that you have uploaded Supporting Information files, but you have not included a complete list of legends. Please add a full list of legends for your Supporting Information files ( RNACOREX-main.zip) after the references list.
5) Some material included in your submission may be copyrighted. According to PLOSu2019s copyright policy, authors who use figures or other material (e.g., graphics, clipart, maps) from another author or copyright holder must demonstrate or obtain permission to publish this material under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) License used by PLOS journals. Please closely review the details of PLOSu2019s copyright requirements here: PLOS Licenses and Copyright. If you need to request permissions from a copyright holder, you may use PLOS's Copyright Content Permission form.
Please respond directly to this email and provide any known details concerning your material's license terms and permissions required for reuse, even if you have not yet obtained copyright permissions or are unsure of your material's copyright compatibility. Once you have responded and addressed all other outstanding technical requirements, you may resubmit your manuscript within Editorial Manager. 
Potential Copyright Issues:
i) Figure 1. Please confirm whether you drew the images / clip-art within the figure panels by hand. If you did not draw the images, please provide (a) a link to the source of the images or icons and their license / terms of use; or (b) written permission from the copyright holder to publish the images or icons under our CC BY 4.0 license. Alternatively, you may replace the images with open source alternatives. See these open source resources you may use to replace images / clip-art:
- https://commons.wikimedia.org
- https://openclipart.org/.
ii) The following file contains screenshots: Library_instructions.pdf in RNACOREX-main.zip. We are not permitted to publish these under our CC-BY 4.0 license, websites are usually intellectual property and are copyrighted.This includes peripheral graphics of the web browser such as icons and button. We ask that you please remove or replace it.
6) Please amend your detailed Financial Disclosure statement. This is published with the article. It must therefore be completed in full sentences and contain the exact wording you wish to be published.
1) State the initials, alongside each funding source, of each author to receive each grant. For example: "This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health (####### to AM; ###### to CJ) and the National Science Foundation (###### to AM)."
2) State what role the funders took in the study. If the funders had no role in your study, please state: "The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript."
3) If any authors received a salary from any of your funders, please state which authors and which funders..

Reviewers' comments:

Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Reviewer #1: The authors present RNACOREX, a computational method for analyzing miRNA-mRNA interactions using a combination of structural information from existing databases and functional information derived from expression data. The methodology culminates in the construction of a Conditional Linear Gaussian (CLG) classifier.
The comments will be sorted by the supplementary material sections as look like an extended version of the main manuscript.
Section 2.1
The structural information score aims to minimize false interactions resulting from the Open World Assumption. One of its key components, the consistency index, evaluates whether a given interaction is reported in one, two, or all three databases. However, one of these databases exclusively contains experimentally validated miRNA–target interactions. The presence of an interaction in this database should be interpreted as biologically confirmed rather than merely inferred.
How is this aspect incorporated into the scoring mechanism? Additionally, how many interactions present in miRTarBase have been discarded or assigned a low score by this method?
The equation (2) for the structural information score lacks clarity in how exactly the normalized consistency index contributes to the final score. The relationship between I_norm(A,B) and w_ij^ab should be explicitly defined.
Also, RNACOREX seems to consider only the already existent pairs from other databases, excluding the discovery of newly interactions.The authors should clarify whether the filtering process might introduce biases by potentially excluding novel but biologically relevant interactions not yet documented in databases.
Section 2.2
While kernel density estimation is a reasonable approach, the authors should address how they handle the curse of dimensionality, particularly for datasets with limited samples.
The default of 10 trapezoids for numerical integration seems arbitrary. The authors should provide justification for this choice or demonstrate its adequacy through validation experiments.
Section 2.3
The alternating selection approach from structural and functional rankings is interesting but lacks theoretical justification. The authors should explain why this approach is preferable to other ranking combination methods (e.g., weighted combinations).
The method for handling ties in either ranking is not specified but could significantly impact results.
Section 2.4
Figure 2 illustrates the post-transcriptional network generated. Two main types of interactions can be identified:
1.Those with higher Structural Information than Functional Information
2.Those with the inverse pattern
Is there a systematic bias favoring structural or functional information during training? If so, how does this affect prediction accuracy? It might also be useful to check feature importance scores from the classifier to support this claim.
Section 3
A Docker container with all necessary data and a well-organized folder structure would significantly enhance usability, enabling users to seamlessly run the methods and better understand the required inputs.
Section 4.2
The differential expression analysis (DEA) between Short and Long Survival groups is used to reduce the number of mRNA candidates before constructing the network. This is a reasonable approach to remove non-variable mRNAs that are unlikely to influence overall survival.
However, filtering by p-value instead of FDR is statistically incorrect when applying thousands of tests. Moreover, the justification for further filtering—"genes are filtered by RNACOREX using databases of predicted and validated interactions"—raises concerns about the DEA approach. If RNACOREX is already filtering mRNAs based on documented interactions, why apply a questionable pre-filter beforehand?
Additionally:
Supplementary Figure 3 is not properly referenced.
Supplementary Figure 3 contains a typo ("enaugh" → "enough").
Section 4.3
While Random Forest (RF), Gradient Boosting (GB), and Support Vector Machine (SVM) are widely used in vector-based classification, they are not inherently designed for graph-based classification.
To establish a baseline for evaluating RNACOREX, I suggest comparing it against more graph-specific state-of-the-art methods, such as:
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
Graph Kernels (e.g., Weisfeiler-Lehman kernel + SVM)
Section 5.1
The section begins by claiming a 10%–30% accuracy increase, but this should be clearly visualized in a single figure.
Additionally, does accuracy correlate with the number of mRNAs used? At first glance, datasets with the highest performance (LGG and UCEC, with 4,729 and 3,000 mRNAs, respectively) contain substantially more mRNAs than the lowest-performing datasets (SKMC and LUSC, with 1,270 and 1,079 mRNAs). Is there a statistical correlation (spearman) between accuracy and mRNA count?
Other figure-related concerns:
1.Figures for different sample results (Supp. Fig. 4–15) lack proper descriptions.
What is the y-axis?
What does the blue ribbon represent?
What do the rank and metrics indicate?
2.Since "Test" remains constant across three figures, and the different models are color-coded, it would be more readable if all lines were presented within a single graph.
Section 5.2
The final validation of the tool is underdeveloped. Given that miRNA–mRNA interactions are cancer-specific and focus on overall survival shifts, I would expect an analysis demonstrating that the mRNAs in predicted miRNA–mRNA pairs are linked to biologically relevant pathways.
I strongly suggest performing such an enrichment/pathway analysis to better showcase the tool’s potential.
Additionally:
Supplementary Figures 17–29 add little to no value, as they are neither analyzed nor referenced.
miRTarBase was updated on January 6, 2025—newly added interactions could be used to validate the predictions.
Overall Questions:
1.Why not leverage TCGA’s paired tumor–healthy data?
TCGA provides a well-characterized, paired dataset, facilitating a clearer comparison between tumor and normal samples.
Why did the authors opt for a tumor-specific survival drift approach rather than identifying miRNA–mRNA interactions that directly drive the oncological phenotype?
Would integrating paired tumor-normal data improve the model’s interpretability?
2.Explanatory Capability
The abstract highlights RNACOREX's "inherent explanatory capability related to the pathology being studied", yet no supporting results are provided.
No bibliographical validation is offered to demonstrate that the predicted miRNA–mRNA pairs correlate with changes in overall survival across different cancers.
Reviewer #2: RNACOREX was developed for the classification capability for cancer survival based on miRNA-mRNA interactions and their functional relevance within a Conditional Linear Gaussian (CLG) Bayesian network framework. However, some aspects of the methodology and presentation require clarification and more detailed justification before publication. Key details regarding the implementation of the structural and functional information scoring, the network learning process within the CLG framework, and a more in-depth discussion of the biological interpretation of the results and network structures are needed. The performance evaluation could also benefit from additional context and possibly alternative metrics.
Major revision
1. The manuscript would benefit significantly from a more detailed, practical case study. Currently, the authors highlight a few pan-cancer miRNA biomarkers. However, deeper biological insight into specific miRNA-mRNA interactions is lacking. I suggest the inclusion of a case study focused on a single cancer type, analyzing how the top-ranked interactions relate to known biological pathways or potentially novel mechanisms. A deeper biological analysis of the network structures and the roles of the highlighted interactions would significantly strengthen the manuscript's impact.
2. The manuscript would benefit from specifying the advantages of MTI interaction in survival prediction over simply a group of miRNAs or a group of mRNAs.
3. The performance or novelty of RNACOREX should be compared with previous methods such as CGBayesNets; miRNA–Target Gene Regulatory Networks: A Bayesian Integrative Approach to Biomarker Selection with Application to Kidney Cancer; A Bayesian framework that integrates multi-omics data and gene networks predicts risk genes from schizophrenia GWAS data and so on.
4. The use of the Conditional Linear Gaussian (CLG) classifier is briefly justified by stating that it is suitable for gene expression data. A clearer theoretical rationale for its choice—possibly compared to alternative probabilistic models—would improve the manuscript's methodological transparency. Please clarify the process of learning the CLG Bayesian network structure. Is a structure learning algorithm employed, and if so, which one and how does the interaction ranking influence it? How are the parameters of the CLG learned from the data?
5. Related to 4, key methodological details—such as data preprocessing steps (Supplementary Material Section 4.2 is referenced for preprocessing, but a brief mention in the main text would improve clarity), methods for dividing patients based on survival time (long/short) (how this cutoff was determined). A brief overview of these steps should be included in the main text for clarity and transparency.
6. While the manuscript describes the general idea of structural and functional information scores and an interaction hierarchy, the specific mathematical formulations and weighting schemes are referenced to the Supplementary Material. These are fundamental to the RNACOREX methodology and should be clearly summarized in the main manuscript or provided with sufficient detail in the supplementary material (once accessible) to allow for critical evaluation and reproduction.
7. "The performance of the network with the best metrics computed by RNACOREX was compared to three state-of-the-art classification models: Random Forest, Gradient Boosting, and SVM." Please provide proper reference or rationale that these are considered state-of-the-art for this problem type. In addition, Table 1 only shows RNACOREX's performance for a subset of the datasets. A comprehensive comparison, presenting the key performance metrics for the mentioned models across the selected datasets, is necessary to allow readers to assess the relative performance of RNACOREX. A comprehensive figure would be much stronger to support your claims. It would also strengthen the manuscript to include the full performance comparison in the main text, rather than relegating it to supplementary materials.
8. While the supplementary files are linked at the end of the manuscript, they are either missing from the GitHub repository or difficult to locate there. The wording in the manuscript gives the impression that the files are available on GitHub, which may cause readers to overlook the fact that they are actually included at the end of the manuscript.
Miner revision
9. Figure 1 provides a workflow, which is helpful. Improving the structure and clarifying the meaning of figures would benefit the manuscript.
10. While the manuscript is generally well written, there are several imprecise sentences. I recommend a thorough proofreading and language polishing to improve fluency and clarity.
11. Terms like “post-transcriptional network,” “coregulatory network,” and “regulatory network” are used interchangeably. Consider being consistent in definitions throughout.
12. For readers less familiar with classification metrics, consider briefly explaining key metrics such as AUC, sensitivity, and specificity in the manuscript.
13. To promote adoption of RNACOREX, consider uploading the package to the PyPI repository, allowing users to install it via pip. This would eliminate the need for manual environment configuration or file downloads.
Reviewer #3: Authors propose a Python package that finds disease associated post-transcriptional networks and use them to classify micro and mRNA interactions.
I have the following concerns and comments.
My main concern is that the authors propose a new method based on some heuristics but the method is not benchmarked against any existing methods. THe paper is positioned as a software paper, a Pyhthon package certain features, but the underlying method's validity is not well established. It is not clear if as a user we are using the state of the art method with nice software features.
Authors claim the following but there is no experimental support on this: "However, not all miRNAs interact with all mRNAs, and relying solely on expression data often results in a high number of false positives. RNACOREX uses a hybrid approach... This strategy improves accuracy and reduces the likelihood of misleading results..." Please provide evidence that the first approach has many false positives and this new strategy improves accuracy.
The abstract is confusing with a poor flow. It needs to be restructured.
-->For instance, not clear at all what this means: "The process is developed using a hybrid approach by combining expert information with empirical knowledge extracted from expression data"
-->"RNACOREX is a new, easy-to-use tool that allows researchers to find disease associated post-transcriptional networks and use them to classify new unseen observations of micro and mRNA quantifications." Not clear what is classified yet. This is later clarified in classifying tumors. Also micro -> micro RNA.
Section 2.1 aims to provide an overview but it rather is confusing. Figure 1 and its caption is also confusing. It is not clear what structural information refers to and what is expert information-based score. Section 2.2 explains structural information score but I do not understand what this needs to do with structure it seems to be a support based on number of databases the interaction occurs and the confidences of those supports.
Authors divide patients into two classes depending on their survival time (long-survival vs. short-survival) but ensure that there are equal number of samples in each class. Depending on the underlying distribution this may make the time periods meaningless if there is an imbalance in the data. Is this the case?
Not clear what this means: "The first two databases include only predicted interactions based on their genomics".
L82 first ->First
**********

Have the authors made all data and (if applicable) computational code underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?

The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data and code underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data and code should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data or code —e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]

Figure resubmission:

While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step. If there are other versions of figure files still present in your submission file inventory at resubmission, please replace them with the PACE-processed versions.

Reproducibility:

To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that authors of applicable studies deposit laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013660.r002Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version1
14 Jul 2025

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Review.pdf
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013660.r003Decision Letter 1
AlberMarkSection Editor© 2025 Mark Alber2025Mark Alberhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
24 Aug 2025

PCOMPBIOL-D-24-01999R1
RNACOREX - RNA Coregulatory Network Explorer and Classifier
PLOS Computational Biology
Dear Dr. Oviedo-Madrid,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS Computational Biology. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS Computational Biology's publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
​Please submit your revised manuscript within 60 days Oct 24 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at ploscompbiol@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pcompbiol/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
* A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'. This file does not need to include responses to formatting updates and technical items listed in the 'Journal Requirements' section below.
* A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
* An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, competing interests statement, or data availability statement, please make these updates within the submission form at the time of resubmission. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Mark Alber, Ph.D.
Section Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
Mark Alber
Section Editor
PLOS Computational Biology

Journal Requirements:

If the reviewer comments include a recommendation to cite specific previously published works, please review and evaluate these publications to determine whether they are relevant and should be cited. There is no requirement to cite these works unless the editor has indicated otherwise.

Reviewers' comments:

Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Authors:

Please note here if the review is uploaded as an attachment.​
Reviewer #1: I want to thank the authors for taking the time to satisfactorily address the comments I raised. After reading the software submission requirements, I understand that an exhaustive biological analysis is not necessary. Even so, I am glad that the other reviewers also requested it. We are not asking for a complex experiment to prove that the predicted interactions are physically occurring, but rather for some interpretability in the model — for example, assessing whether the predicted interactions are related to the phenotypes under study. In the same way the DEG pipeline is proposed, it would be useful to verify that the model is capturing relevant biological information rather than purely topological patterns.
Reviewer #3: I thank the authors for addressing my comments. However, some of the issues I raised still remain.
-Regarding my question on benchmarking the pipeline against others (Q1), the authors reckon that often a method does either network construction or classification. While it is still possible for authors to compare with such methods, they combine multiple tasks and it is understandable to just discuss this issue in the paper.
-Authors indicate that there is only one method which combines network inference and classification: CGBayesNets. It is different than RNACOREX because it does not include curated. Authors indicate that they are not comparable. I do not understand why this is a problem. CGBayesNets aims to solve the same problem with less data and even uses CLG. So this comparison should show the importance of the prior information and the contribution of the authors to justify the need for a new pipeline.
Minor.
- Regarding my comment (Q2), could the authors cite references from the literature to back up the claim that "It is well established in the literature that the identification of false positives is a recurrent and significant challenge when working with miRNA–mRNA interaction predictions".
- The issue in Section 2.1 remains: It is not clear what "structural information" is at this point in "Candidate interactions are initially filtered based on their structural information". This sounds like the 2D/3D structure of the RNAs but it is not and it is confusing. Please clarify in text with you answer to Q5.
- Abstract: while offers —> while offering
Reviewer #4: The paper introduces RNACOREX, a graph-based framework that integrates known miRNA–mRNA interaction databases with expression data to build coregulation networks. Using a Conditional Linear Gaussian classifier, RNACOREX classifies patient samples while simultaneously highlighting potentially disease-relevant regulatory interactions. The method allows users to control network construction through different interaction-ranking strategies and number of edges, balancing predictive accuracy with biological interpretability.
Major Issue 1: The performance evaluation of RNACOREX may be confounded by the fact that Differential Expression Analysis (DEA) is performed using the long and short survival group labels. Since DEA already incorporates class information, the subsequent network construction cannot fully demonstrate that the model itself contributes to classification performance. In principle, one could randomly select mRNAs, perform DEA, and then use a standard classifier (e.g., SVM) to obtain comparably good results. The authors should clarify how the results would change if DEA were not performed as a preprocessing step, or provide an analysis demonstrating that the observed performance is not solely driven by the initial DEA filtering.
Major Issue 2: In the introduction, the authors do not clearly articulate the primary objective of RNACOREX. Classifying patients according to survival time should be presented as a validation strategy rather than as the central aim of the model. Based on the structure of the paper, it appears that the ultimate goal is to identify miRNA–mRNA interactions and potential gene groups associated with specific diseases. If this interpretation is correct, the authors should explicitly state this goal in the abstract/introduction to better frame the contribution and novelty of the work.
Major Issue 3: The claim of “successfully uncovering disease-specific networks” appears overstated. As reported, the model’s performance is only comparable to, or in some cases weaker than, existing machine learning approaches. Moreover, the current implementation of RNACOREX does not yet provide substantive insights into underlying pathology. The authors should temper this statement and clarify that such interpretability remains a potential future direction rather than a current strength of the model.
Minor Issue 1: RNACOREX integrates four datasets, but the manuscript does not explain how potential bias or batch effects across these datasets are addressed. Furthermore, it would be informative if the authors could report how many miRNA–mRNA interactions are shared across datasets and how many are unique to each source. This additional analysis would provide users with a clearer understanding of the consistency and complementarity of the datasets employed.
Minor Issue 2: In line 142, the authors state that “only those interactions that are supported by at least one of the previously mentioned sources” are retained. However, in the definition of the SI score (line 186), it is stated that “the interaction must be present in at least two databases to be considered.” Does this mean that SI scores are only computed for interactions present in at least two sources, while interactions supported by only one source are assigned only a functional information score without any SI score? Clarification is needed.
Minor Issue 3: In line 217, the authors describe a tie-breaking strategy. Have alternative tie-breaking methods been considered or tested, and if so, how do the results compare?
Minor Issue 4: In the Conditional Linear Gaussian Classifier section (line 250), the class variable C is not clearly defined. This should be explicitly described in the main text rather than left only to the supplementary material.
Minor Issue 5: Line 352 mentions that the model was trained using a 3-fold cross-validation. Have the authors considered alternative cross-validation strategies, and what was the rationale for choosing 3-fold in particular?
**********

Have the authors made all data and (if applicable) computational code underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?

The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data and code underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data and code should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data or code —e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #3: No
Reviewer #4: Yes: Zhana Duren

Figure resubmission:

While revising your submission, we strongly recommend that you use PLOS’s NAAS tool (https://ngplosjournals.pagemajik.ai/artanalysis) to test your figure files. NAAS can convert your figure files to the TIFF file type and meet basic requirements (such as print size, resolution), or provide you with a report on issues that do not meet our requirements and that NAAS cannot fix.
After uploading your figures to PLOS’s NAAS tool - https://ngplosjournals.pagemajik.ai/artanalysis, NAAS will process the files provided and display the results in the "Uploaded Files" section of the page as the processing is complete. If the uploaded figures meet our requirements (or NAAS is able to fix the files to meet our requirements), the figure will be marked as "fixed" above. If NAAS is unable to fix the files, a red "failed" label will appear above. When NAAS has confirmed that the figure files meet our requirements, please download the file via the download option, and include these NAAS processed figure files when submitting your revised manuscript.

Reproducibility:

To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that authors of applicable studies deposit laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013660.r004Author response to Decision Letter 2
Submission Version2
22 Oct 2025

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Reviews.pdf
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013660.r005Decision Letter 2
AlberMarkSection Editor© 2025 Mark Alber2025Mark Alberhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
24 Oct 2025

Dear Oviedo-Madrid,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'RNACOREX - RNA Coregulatory Network Explorer and Classifier' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Computational Biology.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us now if you or your institution is planning to press release the article. All press must be co-ordinated with PLOS.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Computational Biology. 
Best regards,
Mark Alber, Ph.D.
Section Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
Mark Alber
Section Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
***********************************************************
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Authors:

Please note here if the review is uploaded as an attachment.​
Reviewer #4: Thank authors. My comments are addressed.
**********

Have the authors made all data and (if applicable) computational code underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?

The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data and code underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data and code should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data or code —e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #4: No
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013660.r006Acceptance letter
AlberMarkSection Editor© 2025 Mark Alber2025Mark Alberhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.PCOMPBIOL-D-24-01999R2
RNACOREX - RNA Coregulatory Network Explorer and Classifier
Dear Dr Oviedo-Madrid,
I am pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Computational Biology. Your manuscript is now with our production department and you will be notified of the publication date in due course.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Soon after your final files are uploaded, unless you have opted out, the early version of your manuscript will be published online. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
For Research, Software, and Methods articles, you will receive an invoice from PLOS for your publication fee after your manuscript has reached the completed accept phase. If you receive an email requesting payment before acceptance or for any other service, this may be a phishing scheme. Learn how to identify phishing emails and protect your accounts at https://explore.plos.org/phishing.
Thank you again for supporting PLOS Computational Biology and open-access publishing. We are looking forward to publishing your work!
With kind regards,
Anita Estes
PLOS Computational Biology | Carlyle House, Carlyle Road, Cambridge CB4 3DN | United Kingdom ploscompbiol@plos.org | Phone +44 (0) 1223-442824 | ploscompbiol.org | @PLOSCompBiol