pmcMicrob BiotechnolMicrob Biotechnol2231microbiotech101316335MBT2Microbial Biotechnology1751-7915WileyPMC11129164PMC11129164.111129164111291643880100110.1111/1751-7915.14456MBT214456MICROBIO-2024-0771EditorialEditorialA concept for international societally relevant microbiology education and microbiology knowledge promulgation in society
EDITORIALTimmisKennethhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-0066-4670 kntimmis@gmail.comHallsworthJohn E.https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6797-9362 McGenityTerry J.https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1497-8822 ArmstrongRachelhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-3516-6815 ColomMaría Franciscahttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-8672-5429 KarahanZeynep Cerenhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-7727-3363 ChavarríaMaxhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-5901-3576 BernalPatriciahttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-6228-0496 BoydEric S.https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4436-5856 RamosJuan Luishttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-8731-7435 KaltenpothMartinhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-9450-0345 PruzzoCarlahttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-1280-4677 ClarkeGerardhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-9771-3979 López‐GarciaPurificaciónhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-0927-0651 YakimovMichail M.https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1418-363X PerlmutterJessamynhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-9789-4674 GreeningChrishttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-7616-0594 Eloe‐FadroshEmileyhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-8162-1276 VerstraeteWillyhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-3140-3713 NunesOlga C.https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4742-2537 KotsyurbenkoOleghttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-4748-3017 NikelPablo Ivánhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-9313-7481 ScavonePaola HäggblomMax M.https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6307-7863 LavigneRobhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-7377-1314 Le RouxFrédériquehttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-9112-6199 TimmisJames K.https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7773-0859 ParroVictorhttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-3738-0724 MichánCarmenhttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-2921-0987 GarcíaJosé Luis CasadevallArturohttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-9402-9167 PayneShelley M.https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3112-4340 FreyJoachimhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-9133-0280 KorenOmryhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-7738-1337 ProsserJames I.https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1757-5102 LahtiLeo LalRuphttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-8364-8547 AnandShaillyhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-7852-3512 SoodUtkarshhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-0886-0107 OffrePierrehttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-3660-2164 BryceCasey C.https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1132-5201 MswakaAllen Y.https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4868-1530 JoresJörghttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-3790-5746 KaçarBetülhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-0482-2357 BlankLars Mathiashttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-0961-4976 MaaßenNicole PopePhillip B.https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2067-4059 BanciuHoria L.https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6563-3226 ArmitageJudithhttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-4983-9731 LeeSang Yuphttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-0599-3091 WangFengpinghttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-0376-6947 MakhalanyaneThulani P.https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8173-1678 GilbertJack A.https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7920-7001 WoodThomas K.https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6258-529X VasiljevicBrankahttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-2315-3590 SoberónMariohttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-1593-9227 UdaondoZulemahttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-3445-6842 RojoFernandohttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-1848-7745 TamangJyoti Prakash GiraudTatianahttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-2685-6478 RoparsJeannehttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-3740-9673 EzejiThaddeushttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-8384-895X MüllerVolkerhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-7955-5508 DanbaraHirofume AverhoffBeatehttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-1460-3649 SessitschAngelahttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-0137-930X Partida‐MartínezLaila Pamelahttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-8037-2856 HuangWeihttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-1302-6528 MolinSørenhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-7973-2639 JunierPilarhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-8618-3340 AmilsRicardohttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-7560-1033 WuXiao‐Leihttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-9897-6903 RonEliorahttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-2615-8685 ErtenHuseyinhttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-1537-2416 de MartinisElaine Cristina Pereirahttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-6089-6238 RapoportAlexanderhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-6185-0039 ÖpikMaarjahttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-8025-7460 PokatongW. Donald R.https://orcid.org/0009-0009-6692-9879 StairsCourtneyhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-6650-0970 AmoozegarMohammad Alihttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-9638-0532 SernaJéssica Gilhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-2113-1830 

1

Institute for Microbiology
Technical University of Braunschweig
Braunschweig
Germany

2

Institute for Global Food Security
Queens University Belfast
Belfast
UK

3

School of Life Sciences
University of Essex
Colchester
UK

4

Department of Architecture
KU Leuven
Gent
Belgium

5

Laboratory of Medical Mycology
Universidad Miguel Hernández
Alicante
Spain

6

Department of Medical Microbiology
Ankara University School of Medicine
Ankara
Turkey

7

Escuela de Química, CIPRONA
Universidad de Costa Rica & Centro Nacional de Innovaciones Biotecnológicas (CENIBiot)
San José
Costa Rica

8

Department of Microbiology
Universidad de Sevilla
Sevilla
Spain

9

Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology
Montana State University
Bozeman
Montana
USA

10

Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas
Estación Experimental del Zaidín
Granada
Spain

11

Department of Insect Symbiosis
Max Planck Institute for Chemical Ecology
Jena
Germany

12

Department of Earth, Environmental and Life Sciences (DISTAV)
University of Genoa
Genoa
Italy

13

Department of Psychiatry and Neurobehavioural Science and APC Microbiome Ireland
University College Cork
Cork
Ireland

14

Ecologie Systématique Evolution, CNRS
Université Paris‐Saclay
Gif‐sur‐Yvette
France

15

Institute of Polar Sciences
Italian National Research Council (ISP‐CNR)
Messina
Italy

16

Department of Molecular Biosciences
University of Kansas
Laurence
Kansas
USA

17

Department of Microbiology, Biomedicine Discovery Institute
Monash University
Clayton
Australia

18

Metagenome Program, DOE Joint Genome Institute
Lawrence Berkeley National Lab
Berkeley
California
USA

19

Center for Microbial Ecology and Technology (CMET)
Ghent University
Ghent
Belgium

20

LEPABE‐Laboratory for Process Engineering, Environment, Biotechnology and Energy, Faculty of Engineering
University of Porto
Porto
Portugal

21

Higher School of Ecology
Yugra State University
Khanty‐Mansiysk
Russia

22

Systems Environmental Microbiology Group, The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability
Technical University of Denmark
Lyngby
Denmark

23

Departamento de Microbiología
Instituto de Investigaciones Biológicas Clemente Estable
Montevideo
Uruguay

24

Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology
Rutgers University
New Brunswick
New Jersey
USA

25

Laboratory of Gene Technology
KU Leuven
Heverlee
Belgium

26

Département de Microbiologie, Infectiologie et Immunologie
Université de Montréal
Montreal
Quebec
Canada

27

Department of Political Science
University of Freiburg
Freiburg im Breisgau
Germany

28

Centro de Astrobiología (CAB)
CSICINTA
Madrid
Spain

29

Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular
Universidad de Córdoba
Córdoba
Spain

30

Environmental Biotechnology Laboratory
Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas Margarita Salas (CIB‐MS, CSIC)
Madrid
Spain

31

Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health
Baltimore
Maryland
USA

32

Department of Molecular Biosciences
University of Texas at Austin
Austin
Texas
USA

33

Vetsuisse Faculty
University of Bern
Bern
Switzerland

34

Azrieli Faculty of Medicine
Bar‐Ilan University
Safed
Israel

35

School of Biological Sciences
University of Aberdeen
Aberdeen
UK

36

Department of Computing
University of Turku
Turku
Finland

37

Acharya Narendra Dev College
University of Delhi
New Delhi
Delhi
India

38

Department of Zoology, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya College
University of Delhi
New Delhi
Delhi
India

39

Department of Zoology, Kirori Mal College
University of Delhi
New Delhi
Delhi
India

40

Department of Marine Microbiology and Biogeochemistry
NIOZ–Royal Netherlands Institute for Sea Research
Den Burg
The Netherlands

41

Cabot Institute for the Environment
University of Bristol
Bristol
UK

42

University of Nottingham
Nottingham
UK

43

Institute of Veterinary Bacteriology
University of Bern
Bern
Switzerland

44

Department of Bacteriology
University of Wisconsin–Madison
Madison
Wisconsin
USA

45

Institute of Applied Microbiology
RWTH Aachen University
Aachen
Germany

46

Faculty of Biosciences
Norwegian University of Life Sciences
As
Norway

47

Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science
NMBU
As
Norway

48

Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology
Babeș‐Bolyai University
Cluj‐Napoca
Romania

49

Department of Biochemistry
University of Oxford
Oxford
UK

50

Department of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering
KAIST (Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology)
Daejeon
South Korea

51

International Center for Deep Life Investigation (ICDLI)
Shanghai JiaoTong University
Shanghai
China

52

Department of Biochemistry, Genetics and Microbiology
University of Pretoria
Hatfield
South Africa

53

Department of Pediatrics and Scripps, Institution of Oceanography
UC San Diego
La Jolla
California
USA

54

Department of Chemical Engineering
Pennsylvania State University
University Park
Pennsylvania
USA

55

Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering
University of Belgrade
Belgrade
Serbia

56

Instituto de Biotecnología
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México
Mexico City
Mexico

57

Department of Microbial Biotechnology, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología
CSIC
Madrid
Spain

58

Department of Microbiology
Sikkim University
Gangtok
Sikkim
India

59

Laboratoire Ecologie, Systématique et Evolution (ESE)
Université Paris‐Saclay
Gif‐sur‐Yvette
France

60

Department of Animal Sciences
The Ohio State University & OARDC
Wooster
Ohio
USA

61

Molekulare Mikrobiologie & Bioenergetik
Goethe‐Universität Frankfurt
Frankfurt
Germany

62

Shibasaburo Kitasato Memorial Museum
Kitasato University
Minato‐ku
Japan

63

AIT Austrian Institute of Technology
Tulln
Austria

64

Departamento de Ingeniería Genética
Centro de Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados‐Unidad Irapuato
Irapuato
Mexico

65

Department of Engineering Science
University of Oxford
Oxford
UK

66

DTU Biosustain
Lyngby
Denmark

67

Laboratory of Microbiology
University of Neuchâtel
Neuchâtel
Switzerland

68

Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa
Madrid
Spain

69

Department of Energy Resources Engineering
Peking University
Beijing
China

70

The Shmunis School of Biomedicine and Cancer Research
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv
Israel

71

Department of Food Engineering
Cukurova University
Adana
Turkey

72

Faculdade de Ciências Farmacêuticas de Ribeirão Preto
Universidade de São Paulo
São Paulo
Brazil

73

Institute of Microbiology and Biotechnology
University of Latvia
Riga
Latvia

74

Department of Botany
University of Tartu
Tartu
Estonia

75

Department of Food Technology
Universitas Pelita Harapan
Tangerang
Indonesia

76

Department of Biology
Lund University
Lund
Sweden

77

Department of Microbiology
University of Tehran
Tehran
Iran

78

Departamento de Genética, Fisiología y Microbiología
Universidad Complutense de Madrid
Madrid
Spain

*
Correspondence

Kenneth Timmis, Division of Microbiology, Technical University of Braunschweig, Spielmannstrasse 7, Braunschweig D‐38106, Germany.
Email: kntimmis@gmail.com

27520245202417546128210.1111/mbt2.v17.5e14456
0822024
0832024
270520242705202418032025© 2024 The Authors. Microbial Biotechnology published by Applied Microbiology International and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

## Executive summary
Microbes are all pervasive in their distribution and influence on the functioning and well‐being of humans, life in general and the planet. Microbially‐based technologies contribute hugely to the supply of important goods and services we depend upon, such as the provision of food, medicines and clean water. They also offer mechanisms and strategies to mitigate and solve a wide range of problems and crises facing humanity at all levels, including those encapsulated in the sustainable development goals (SDGs) formulated by the United Nations. For example, microbial technologies can contribute in multiple ways to decarbonisation and hence confronting global warming, provide sanitation and clean water to the billions of people lacking them, improve soil fertility and hence food production and develop vaccines and other medicines to reduce and in some cases eliminate deadly infections. They are the foundation of biotechnology, an increasingly important and growing business sector and source of employment, and the centre of the bioeconomy, Green Deal, etc. But, because microbes are largely invisible, they are not familiar to most people, so opportunities they offer to effectively prevent and solve problems are often missed by decision‐makers, with the negative consequences this entrains. To correct this lack of vital knowledge, the International Microbiology Literacy Initiative–the IMiLI–is recruiting from the global microbiology community and making freely available, teaching resources for a curriculum in societally relevant microbiology that can be used at all levels of learning. Its goal is the development of a society that is literate in relevant microbiology and, as a consequence, able to take full advantage of the potential of microbes and minimise the consequences of their negative activities. In addition to teaching about microbes, almost every lesson discusses the influence they have on sustainability and the SDGs and their ability to solve pressing problems of societal inequalities. The curriculum thus teaches about sustainability, societal needs and global citizenship. The lessons also reveal the impacts microbes and their activities have on our daily lives at the personal, family, community, national and global levels and their relevance for decisions at all levels. And, because effective, evidence‐based decisions require not only relevant information but also critical and systems thinking, the resources also teach about these key generic aspects of deliberation.
The IMiLI teaching resources are learner‐centric, not academic microbiology‐centric and deal with the microbiology of everyday issues. These span topics as diverse as owning and caring for a companion animal, the vast range of everyday foods that are produced via microbial processes, impressive geological formations created by microbes, childhood illnesses and how they are managed and how to reduce waste and pollution. They also leverage the exceptional excitement of exploration and discovery that typifies much progress in microbiology to capture the interest, inspire and motivate educators and learners alike.
The IMiLI is establishing Regional Centres to translate the teaching resources into regional languages and adapt them to regional cultures, and to promote their use and assist educators employing them. Two of these are now operational. The Regional Centres constitute the interface between resource creators and educators–learners. As such, they will collect and analyse feedback from the end‐users and transmit this to the resource creators so that teaching materials can be improved and refined, and new resources added in response to demand: educators and learners will thereby be directly involved in evolution of the teaching resources. The interactions between educators–learners and resource creators mediated by the Regional Centres will establish dynamic and synergistic relationships–a global societally relevant microbiology education ecosystem–in which creators also become learners, teaching resources are optimised and all players/stakeholders are empowered and their motivation increased.
The IMiLI concept thus embraces the principle of teaching societally relevant microbiology embedded in the wider context of societal, biosphere and planetary needs, inequalities, the range of crises that confront us and the need for improved decisioning, which should ultimately lead to better citizenship and a humanity that is more sustainable and resilient.

## Abstract
The biosphere of planet Earth is a microbial world: a vast reactor of countless microbially driven chemical transformations and energy transfers that push and pull many planetary geochemical processes, including the cycling of the elements of life, mitigate or amplify climate change (e.g., Nature Reviews Microbiology, 2019, 17, 569) and impact the well‐being and activities of all organisms, including humans. Microbes are both our ancestors and creators of the planetary chemistry that allowed us to evolve (e.g., Life's engines: How microbes made earth habitable, 2023). To understand how the biosphere functions, how humans can influence its development and live more sustainably with the other organisms sharing it, we need to understand the microbes. In a recent editorial (Environmental Microbiology, 2019, 21, 1513), we advocated for improved microbiology literacy in society. Our concept of microbiology literacy is not based on knowledge of the academic subject of microbiology, with its multitude of component topics, plus the growing number of additional topics from other disciplines that become vitally important elements of current microbiology. Rather it is focused on microbial activities that impact us–individuals/communities/nations/the human world–and the biosphere and that are key to reaching informed decisions on a multitude of issues that regularly confront us, ranging from personal issues to crises of global importance. In other words, it is knowledge and understanding essential for adulthood and the transition to it, knowledge and understanding that must be acquired early in life in school. The 2019 Editorial marked the launch of the International Microbiology Literacy Initiative, the IMiLI.

## Here, we present

our concept of how microbiology literacy may be achieved and the rationale underpinning it;
the type of teaching resources being created to realise the concept and the framing of microbial activities treated in these resources in the context of sustainability, societal needs and responsibilities and decision‐making; and
the key role of Regional Centres that will translate the teaching resources into local languages, adapt them according to local cultural needs, interface with regional educators and develop and serve as hubs of microbiology literacy education networks.

The topics featuring in teaching resources are learner‐centric and have been selected for their inherent relevance, interest and ability to excite and engage. Importantly, the resources coherently integrate and emphasise the overarching issues of sustainability, stewardship and critical thinking and the pervasive interdependencies of processes. More broadly, the concept emphasises how the multifarious applications of microbial activities can be leveraged to promote human/animal, plant, environmental and planetary health, improve social equity, alleviate humanitarian deficits and causes of conflicts among peoples and increase understanding between peoples (Microbial Biotechnology, 2023, 16(6), 1091–1111). Importantly, although the primary target of the freely available (CC BY‐NC 4.0) IMiLI teaching resources is schoolchildren and their educators, they and the teaching philosophy are intended for all ages, abilities and cultural spectra of learners worldwide: in university education, lifelong learning, curiosity‐driven, web‐based knowledge acquisition and public outreach. The IMiLI teaching resources aim to promote development of a global microbiology education ecosystem that democratises microbiology knowledge.

Microbes are all pervasive in their distribution and influence on the functioning and wellbeing of humans, life in general and the planet. Understanding their activities is vital for decisions and policies at all levels, in particular those relating to sustainability. The International Microbiology Literacy Initiative (IMiLI) is a global microbiology community creating freely available teaching resources to promote literacy in societally‐relevant microbiology worldwide. The resources also teach about global citizenship, sustainability, and critical and systems thinking. IMiLI Regional Centres adapt and translate resources to regional needs and languages, and promote their use in educational facilities and web‐based learning. 

critical‐systems thinkingcurriculum changedemocratisation of microbiology knowledgeglobal citizenshipInternational Microbiology Literacy Initiative (IMiLI)lifelong learningmicrobial technologiessocietal inequalitiessustainability‐sustainable development goals 

## 
MicroStar portrait galleries
While the focus of the curriculum is on microbial activities that affect us and the wider world, such activities are carried out by specific microbes and microbial communities. Children usually want to know who is responsible for the action. However, unlike a favourite football team consisting of a limited number of players whose names, faces and personalities may be well known, the microbes underlying the activities revealed in the lessons are mostly very numerous and poorly distinguishable. Actors may also be redundant, some working under certain conditions while others rest, with the others taking over under different conditions. Moreover, most microbes have no obvious personalities or recognisable characters. But children love personalities–for example, music and sport stars–to the extent that some are role models. The IMiLI solution is to give due recognition to the Stars/Heroes/Villains of the most important processes discussed in the TFs, through portraits that endow them with personalities, some of which are unapologetically anthropocentric or anthropomorphic, for the purposes of illustration and enjoyment, and thus memorability. The Stars have nicknames, such as Alca for Alcanivorax borkumensis, because complex Latin names that can change (Spiru, originally for Spirulina, which is now Arthrospira), should not detract from the fun of discovery. The Galleries of portraits constitute microbial Halls of Fame.
The Portraits, mostly about one page of text plus images, are short exposés that allow children to get up close to and learn important details about the actors carrying out the activities described in the TFs, to discover the stars and rogues of the microbial world and become familiar with their characters, characteristics and processes in which they are involved.
The main criterion for inclusion in the Galleries is the strength of the claim to fame–the fascination of the story that can be weaved–which is specified up front and creates the drama and whets the appetite for discovery that can excite children and adults alike.
There are a number of different Portrait Galleries focusing on the Stars of different activities/processes, such as biotechnological applications (DesignerMicroStars), infections (MicroRogues), activities that protect us or other organisms from harm (MicroDefenders). In addition, the same format is adopted to profile microbial activities themselves (Fermented foods), microbial products (MicroVaccines) and even vital things microbes need (Elements of life) and the main discoverers of microbes and microbial processes (MicroDiscoverers; MicroNobels). 

The template of Gallery portraits is the MicroDefender Alca (Alcanivorax borkumensis) whose claim to fame is defending the marine biosphere and its resources against ecological damage caused by oil spill pollution. Its activity has wide‐ranging consequences, including defending marine biodiversity and food webs, food security (fishing and aquaculture), employment (in the fishing industry, as well as in tourism) and, importantly for children, defending against beach pollution. Its activities have implications for several SDGs, including No poverty (SDG1), Zero hunger (SDG2), Decent work (SDG8) and Life below water (SDG14).

## Some uses of MicroStar gallery portraits

Teacher topic preparation
Student reading: in class, for homework
Student discussion/presentation: in class
Student writing: summarising, comparing, assessing, in class, for homework
Student/class projects: knowledge deepening‐expansion through individual and class web‐based research projects; in‐class presentations of findings as individuals and groups
Class competitions and debates: between individual students or groups
TV/movies/social media/music: collecting and writing about/discussing topics featuring involvement of a MicroStar (e.g., Sánchez‐Angulo,  )
Creative arts: depiction of a favourite MicroStar through drawings, paintings, short stories (fact/fiction), videos, comics, theatre, songs, dances, board games
Home projects involving family and/or friends
Citizen science international competition

Many science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) professionals have difficulty explaining to family and friends in simple language what they do or what their profession is about, despite a strong desire to communicate this. MicroStars are particularly useful for explaining interesting and relevant aspects of microbiology. For this reason, MicroStar portraits are made available to learned societies for publication in their regular newsletters. The Spanish Society for Microbiology (SEM) publishes MicroStars in Spanish on a monthly schedule, the first of which, Alca, can be viewed as item 10 in the October 2022 SEM Newsletter (https://www.semicrobiologia.org/en/revista‐noticiasem/octubre‐2022).

## Class excursions
A series of recommendations for class excursions has been previously published as an editorial in Microbial Biotechnology (McGenity et al.,  ). These are designed to immerse children in diverse examples of natural and practical microbiology that can be experienced in their localities and explained by educators or local experts, in order that children (and, collaterally, their families and friends) mentally connect everyday observations and experiences with the underlying microbes and their activities. Class excursions may also inspire those who do not always thrive in the traditional classroom. Examples of excursions include wastewater treatment plants, food manufacturing facilities, research centres, geologically impressive landscapes, ponds, heritage works, farms, garden centres, forests, coastlines and even the local market/grocery store (e.g., the cheese counter, freezer: ‘how many microbes did you consume yesterday?’) or pharmacy. There are also recommendations for how to incorporate microbiological elements into visits to museums, zoos and botanical gardens, thereby broadening their scope. As well as focussing on environments local to the school, which makes excursions affordable, opportunities (sometimes involving external professional microbiologists) for bringing remote or exotic environments and microbiological research into the classroom are considered. Excursions can also expose children to career/employment options that may not be on their radar screens and potentially create contacts with professionals who can provide expert information and facilitate exploration of opportunities.

## 
Multimedia teaching aids

As stated, there is a serious need to visualise, ideally in an interactive fashion, the subjects of lessons. On one hand, there already exists online an enormous selection of MTAs that can be considered for this purpose and, indeed, many TFs include such materials. On the other hand, many existing MTAs are not ideal, either because their purpose is more to promote than to teach or are not of the necessary degree of interest (generated engagement and excitement), quality, clarity, or coherence. It is the intention, therefore, to create custom TF‐specific MTAs. For this purpose, the IMiLI is producing guidelines for the production of different types of MTA: videos, animation, comics, games and so on. A summary of this was published recently (https://www.the‐microbiologist.com/issues/the‐microbiologist‐december‐2021/114.article, pp. 33‐35) and the full analysis will be submitted shortly (van Beek, R., et al., in preparation). The creation of MTAs will generally follow the finalisation of the corresponding TF. Feedback from academics suggests that a number of MTAs will be created by university students, either as coursework or research projects, or as voluntary contributions independent of their studies. It is also anticipated that students in secondary education will create MTAs.

## 
TF‐specific class experiments

‘Students should have opportunities to participate in authentic research experiences and learn how to evaluate complex biology problems from a variety of perspectives, not just recite facts and terminology.’ Although this quote from Woodin et al. ( ) refers to teaching undergraduate students, it is equally valid for younger and older students. A series of class experiments is in the planning that will specifically address the intention to immerse children in microbiology. When children carry out experiments, they are actors in the learning process, face the reality of it, develop abilities and qualities (planning, structuring, objectivity, observation, analysis, synthesis, teamwork, relationships, communication, etc.) necessary for science, but also life (a blossoming of intelligence, as described in the ‘A comment on education and epistemology’ section of Hallsworth et al.,  ). The themes of class experiments will mostly relate to specific TFs (e.g., bread making/fermentations and preparation of Winogradsky columns) and hence satisfy the need to visualise and personally experience underlying microbial activities discussed in lessons.

## The importance of hands‐on class experiments

Physical interaction with the study objects
Active, personal engagement in the educative process
Diversity in teaching methods benefiting children with diverse learning needs
Gain in understanding of the scientific method: identification of the question, design of the experiment to address the question, the importance of controls to validate the results and constrain the range of possible interpretations, carrying out the experiment, discussion and evaluation of results, derivation of conclusions, etc
Excitement generated during the inception and evolution of the experiment
Communication of results: preparation of written report, class presentation
Experiencing teamwork and its value, distribution of responsibilities
Learning about objectivity and critical analysis of experimental conduct/results by self and others.

## 
Virtual participation in field work/sampling campaigns in exotic habitats

Microbiology research can be tremendously exciting, especially when it involves field work in fascinating local and/or exotic places, like the polar regions, glaciers, the deep sea, coral reefs, the deep subsurface, hot springs, the Atacama Desert, Rio Tinto, Dallol Volcano, Shark Bay, Cuatro Ciénegas, Pitch Lake, the Amazonian forest and many, many more, which are often expeditions of exploration and discovery (witness the excitement of recent deep sea sampling campaigns involving human‐piloted submersibles, like Alvin (https://www.whoi.edu/what‐we‐do/explore/underwater‐vehicles/hov‐alvin/paged‐2/5/) and remotely operated underwater vehicles, like Jason (https://ndsf.whoi.edu/jason/) and Nereid (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rBU8hFz‐4tc).
The spirit and excitement of discovery, and the enormous range of very diverse habitats worked in and sampled, is an exceptional privilege of the microbiology research community that few other disciplines can provide. We have an undeniable responsibility to share this privilege with the general public, not only because they fund such work through the taxes they pay. This responsibility is very well fulfilled by larger organisations like the Woods Hole Institute of Oceanography (link above) and the Fondation Tara Océan (https://fondationtaraocean.org/en/expedition/tara‐oceans/), but less so by smaller organisations and individual research groups.
And we have a special responsibility to communicate this excitement to children, to expose them to the beauty and thrill of things they would ordinarily not see and to satisfy and fuel their thirst for adventure, exploration and discovery in microbiology. This is the reason we have created TF Section 11: Adventures and Discovery, which aims to describe a wide range of exotic and fascinating habitats that are explored and sampled by microbiologists and reveal what microbiologists discover with the samples they obtain. And to leverage the content and excitement generated by Section 11, the IMiLI intends to involve children in a more personal, immersive fashion in the most exciting sampling trips through creation of its MicroExplorer series, videos that will transform them into virtual microbiologists on campaigns.

## 
Home assignments, family–friend and citizen science projects, competitions

As for any other subject, home assignments can be set and suggestions for these will be made, some of which will be centred on the study, use or creation of MicroStar portraits and independent researching of everyday issues on television/social media, etc., having an association with microbes, such as researching/documenting/creating stories around microbes and music (e.g., https://lyrics.lyricfind.com/en‐GB/lyrics/dionne‐warwick‐ill‐never‐fall‐in‐love‐again‐1; https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oN4Bkal4eFU).
In addition to normal home assignments, the IMiLI will propose facultative family–friend projects for children interested in developing collaborative projects with others. These activities can be carried out as either stand‐alone or networked citizen science projects (research conducted as collaborations between scientists and the wider public), to encourage microbiology‐centric, out‐of‐school activities and to leverage the educational multiplier role of pupils (Timmis et al.,  ).
This type of homework and individual–family–friend projects can be assessed by the educator, presented in class, or be part of competitions: class, school, inter‐school, national, international. In general, children love to work together and also to compete and win prizes (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gamification), so the motivation for engagement in projects should, where appropriate within the framework of competitions, be increased through awarding of prizes, however modest (e.g., points, levels reached, badges).
An important life lesson that can be learned by being involved in cooperative activities, especially those involving people from very different backgrounds, is that other people often bring new information, ideas, viewpoints and insights to the table that enrich creativity and problem‐solving processes. Moreover, the peer pressure of social media often engenders the pursuit of unattainable perfection to avoid negative reactions and judgements. Working in a group on a common project reveals the ‘normality’ of imperfection among peers, that the goal should not be perfection but rather doing the best possible and that important synergies arising from cooperations often yields a better result than expected from the viewpoint of the individual. 

The IMiLI teaching resources and their deployment are summarised in Figure  .
 

## REGIONAL CENTRES: THE INTERFACES BETWEEN CREATORS AND USERS OF TEACHING RESOURCES AND NODES OF THE IMiLI ECOSYSTEM
The IMiLI resources are being created in English and need to be translated into whichever language is appropriate for any given setting. Moreover, schools, curricula, educational needs and approaches to teaching vary across the world and the integration of IMiLI resources in diverse educational systems will require local and regional adaption and support. There also needs to be a local interface between the IMiLI teaching resources and end users, education authorities, government, commerce, funding agencies and philanthropic organisations, etc. To provide this, the IMiLI is establishing IMiLI Regional Centres whose responsibilities are summarised below.

## Regional centres

adapt IMiLI resources to the regional needs
translate adapted IMiLI resources into regional languages
create a professional regional language website posting IMiLI resources
network with other Regional Centres; sharing translations to serve multi‐cultural regions/nations
support educators using the IMiLI resources
develop regional networks of educators to promote the teaching of the IMiLI microbiology curriculum in schools
facilitate exchanges of experience
organise workshops, bootcamps that promote and facilitate the use of IMiLI resources
develop a platform to encourage the exchange of ideas about excursions, experiments and projects
collect and analyse educator–pupil feedback and communicate to teaching resource creators
provide feedback on regional needs of IMiLI to maintain the topicality of resources and practises into the future
organise regional networks of professional microbiologists to promote and facilitate engagement in microbiology outreach activities
recruit additional teaching materials, where needed or useful
obtain financial and logistical support for regional IMiLI tasks, where needed
engage and coordinate with regional and national education agencies and ministries

The IMiLI websites of Regional Centres will develop into dynamic communication/interaction/networking platforms, interfacing with educators, educational agencies and ministries, the wider public and provide an IMiLI ‘info channel’. The Regional Centres will maintain the relevance of IMiLI over time by ensuring that changing needs of teachers, learners and societies are catered for within the evolving IMiLI ecosystem of services and resources. Parts of the websites will be devoted to the direct engagement of self‐learners–children and adults–through the dissemination of microbiology knowledge and news, and the creation of fun microbiological activities and entertainment. They will participate in the processes of recruiting additional teaching materials, including MTAs and games and of editing and harmonisation of IMiLI education resources. They will also collect and analyse teacher–pupil feedback and communicate this to teaching resource creators.
The first Regional Centre, IMiLI‐South Asia Centre (IMiLI‐SAC; imili.org), New Delhi, was created in 2022; the second, IMiLI‐East Asia Headquarters (IMiLI‐EAH; imili‐eah.com), in Suzhou was launched in December 2023. Other Regional Centres are currently under discussion.

## WIDER USE OF THE IMiLI TEACHING RESOURCES
While the IMiLI is focused on early‐life education, the IMiLI teaching resources are generic in design and so can be used for all categories of learners, both children–the next generation of adults–and the current generation of adults. Thus, with some minor tweaks in presentation, they will also serve for adult education/life‐long learning in the classroom and web‐based self‐learning by both adults and children.

## Microbiology in universities and colleges

Biology for educators in higher education and teacher training courses. The IMiLI resources are ideal for teacher degree courses because they provide prospective educators with the knowledge of microbiology they need, show how to present and convey complex, technical issues in simple attractive ways and provide precisely the teaching resources they will need as educators. Future educators will learn the subject matter with the same materials they will use to teach it.
Microbiology degree courses. While microbiology courses at college/university are well established and served by excellent texts, like Brock Biology of Microorganisms (Madigan et al.,  ), the individual‐/societal‐centricity, content, spectrum and emphasis of IMiLI resources, such as the TFs, may encourage some college/university teachers to consider modifications to curriculum content, approach (the 3 E's and 3 I's) and emphasis (students are often informed about what they will learn but not always why). Emphasising the importance of interdependencies in processes, with changes often provoking unanticipated compensatory reactions and decisioning, may gain traction, not only in the context of One Health. The IMiLI philosophy of approaching the curriculum from the standpoints of societal relevance and social equity, as well as emphasis on the broader context, the SDGs, relevance for decisions, etc., may give additional impulses to concept development for college/university learning experiences. For example, medical/clinical microbiology courses often lack the concept/context of the metaorganism/holobiont (though there are initiatives aimed at correcting this, e.g., see https://cifar.ca/research‐programs/humans‐the‐microbiome/), the gut‐brain axis and all the other human microbiota‐human organ axes, and human well‐being being dependent upon microbial diversity and the microbial ecosystem, so the IMiLI concept may encourage the incorporation of such aspects.

While information provided in IMiLI resources is written in simple language understandable by educators at a level suitable for transmission to school‐age learners, the messages are universal and thus relevant to higher level education. It is relatively easy to increase level and complexity of IMiLI resources, also to keep up with advances in knowledge, for university‐level teaching (less easy to lower complexity, which is what the IMiLI is doing).

Microbiology research projects and coursework: undergraduate and postgraduate students in some universities are already being offered the creation of IMiLI teaching resources as projects and coursework. For example, a trial group of year‐2 undergraduates designed games, posters or quizzes based on a TF of their choice that could be used by teachers to enthuse school children of a defined age. With the exception of mature students, university students were themselves recently school pupils, so are in the best position to judge and create what they would have liked to have learned at school.
Elective and mandatory courses in the framework of other degree subjects. Since microbes impact a wide range of activities and processes, the teaching of relevant aspects of microbiology is essential in a number of other bachelor's and master's degree courses, including medicine, nursing, veterinary medicine, dental medicine, public health, biological sciences, zoology, botany, biotechnology, environmental sciences, astrobiology, agriculture, bioengineering, energy, geosciences, food science, materials science, business and economics and more. And, as is the case for schoolchildren, it is important that university students not in the STEM fields develop scientific literacy and knowledge to evaluate media coverage and critically analyse and discuss social issues and concerns relevant to the field of microbiology, including disease and pandemics, antibiotic resistance, the ubiquity of microbial products and humankind's exploitation of the microbial world. In most cases, such students will not have a background that facilitates learning formal microbiology and, in some cases, they may have little science knowledge. The availability of teaching resources in language understandable by the general public will facilitate the creation of courses for non‐scientist students.

There is also an increasing tendency to make available non‐specialist courses in climate change/sustainability and related topics to all undergraduate students (e.g., https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/nov/12/barcelona‐students‐to‐take‐mandatory‐climate‐crisis‐module‐from‐2024; Reimers,  ; Filho et al.,  ). The IMiLI teaching resources may provide both a model for such courses and a substantial contribution to their content.

## Lifelong learning–training in a global community of scholars and curiosity‐driven information searches
We anticipate that the freely available resources will become the go‐to source of citizen‐relevant microbiology, including the microbiological basis of/impact on pandemics, like COVID‐19 and antimicrobial resistance (Coque et al.,  ); crises, such as global warming (Heleno et al.,  ); and good health, like vaccines, probiotics and feeding our microbiomes (see Data  ), but also of how things work, how we explore the possibility of life on other planets and how we discover new products and processes that can serve humanity.

## Outreach and science communication by academic microbiologists
Many of the contributors of IMiLI teaching resources are already involved in different forms of outreach, such as occasional teaching in schools or in public events such as Open Days of universities and other institutions. These activities are important because they seed interest in microbiology among children, educators and the general public and are therefore pioneering activities. However, adapting academic educational resources to produce new outreach materials involves significant time and effort that many overstretched academics can ill afford. The IMiLI has already invested and continues to invest in this effort to create resources designed for educators and learners. These efforts have created an extensive collection of off‐the‐shelf resources describing the most important and relevant microbial activities (Gilmore,  ). The IMiLI resources thus remove a significant hurdle to engagement in outreach activities and so should encourage more academics to become involved.
In addition, the IMiLI resources represent an engaging and comprehensive selection of off‐the‐shelf materials for science communicators, thereby expanding the repertoire of topics they can articulate in their efforts to bring societally relevant microbiology to society.

## Wider use of the IMiLI Teaching resources

In universities and colleges
Teacher training degrees
Biology degrees
Microbiology degrees (majors and minors)
Microbiology degree projects and coursework
Elective/mandatory courses for other degrees
Elective/mandatory courses independent of degree courses

Lifelong learning (formal/informal)
Outreach by professional microbiologists
Science communication

## KEY ASPECTS OF THE IMiLI CONCEPT MERITING FURTHER DISCUSSIONS

## The 3 R's: relevance! relevance! relevance! Excitement, the fun factor, motivation and learner‐centricity
The goal of the IMiLI curriculum is to transmit information about microbes and their activities that is needed to gain an understanding of ourselves and our place in the biosphere, how things work, what we need to do to maintain and improve our well‐being and that of other inhabitants of the planet and what can go wrong and what needs to be done to correct things when they do. Thus, the curriculum focuses on microbiology topics and concepts relevant to the well‐being of individuals, society, other life on the Earth and the planet and its various planetary systems, including climate.
Today, children of many societies spend a considerable amount of time engaged with screen technologies, including electronic games (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gamification), television and interactive and social media. To engage them and sustain their concentration, the material presented must be relevant to their preoccupations, exciting and tap into their natural fascination for exploration. On the other hand, there is significant global disparity in the life experiences of children in different regions of the world, so the content and design of IMiLI teaching resources seek to captivate and motivate diverse groups.

## Emphasis on relevance in IMiLI teaching resources

Learner centricity
Personal well‐being
Planetary well‐being
Understanding processes that affect us, directly/indirectly
Sustainability
Exploration, discovery, energising natural curiosity
Strengthening links between education and communities.

## The notion of generic: age dynamics
It may seem obvious that we cannot provide teaching materials that are suited for all ages, from pre‐school to high school! Or can we? Clearly, some topics are too complex for younger children, but others can be taught with different levels of information content, emphases and complexity and so a single knowledge outline/framework could in principle be sufficient for educators to teach multiple age groups. In this regard, it should be noted that, in some parts of the world, especially in remote villages, there may only be one teacher for different classes and age‐groups and all pupils of the school may be taught together in the same classroom. A single, generic teaching resource, adaptable to different age groups, may be particularly advantageous in such situations and may even enable different age groups in the same room to link up occasionally and participate in common activities. It may also encourage older pupils to contribute to the teaching of younger ones.
And is there an abrupt transition from high school to college/university? Is a 15‐year‐old not able to grasp some of the concepts taught at college/university? And, conversely, aren't some topics destined for 15‐year‐olds equally interesting and relevant to college/university students? The IMiLI teaching resources are predicated on the principle that many issues are of generic interest to children and adults, while recognising that not all resources will be suitable for all ages. And the advantages are not inconsiderable.

## Merits of a single set of teaching resources for all learners

a single, coherent set of teaching resources that can be used across all educational levels, including that of adults within and outside the framework of universities
a single, coherent set of resources for educators to grasp and familiarise
reinforcement of the knowledge and understanding as children progress through school and are provided with more information about the topic from the same resources
facile evolution and updating of IMiLI resources
straightforward engagement of educators and pupils in this evolution and hence facilitation of their stakeholder responsibilities and empowerment

## The issue of stand‐alone topics
Formal education in schools, colleges and universities typically follows a determinative sequence of knowledge acquisition, in which understanding of new information necessitates understanding of previously acquired information. The rationale and advantages of this are obvious and it is difficult to imagine an alternative for subjects like languages and those with an inherent chronology, like history, geology, mathematics, etc. However, for other topics, a flexible knowledge network‐based modular approach might be worth considering.
Advantages of a curriculum based on stand‐alone lessons are significant:
Learner‐adaptable content. The traditional system requires different linked contents for each year. With the type of stand‐alone system the IMiLI is creating, there is a single source of materials for all age groups from which the teacher freely selects content and adapts to whichever class is being taught. This should help motivate educators by allowing them to explore new materials and select just what is most interesting for them, which in turn should generate a more dynamic and inspiring learning environment.
Culture‐sensitive differences in content. Different cultures emphasise different topics, so different curricula must be developed worldwide. With the stand‐alone, modular system, educators can include cultural criteria in the selection process and so adapt curricula to locally prevailing norms and values and requirements.
Educator–learner empowerment. The absence of a mandatory sequence of lessons, allowing educators to pick and choose, empowers them. The learners themselves provide the educators with feedback in expressing preferences and critiques, which will undoubtedly influence educator selections, so this also empowers the learners.
Organic evolution based on educator–learner feedback. Educators are encouraged to provide feedback to the IMiLI and thereby directly influence author revision of the teaching materials and the recruitment of additional TFs on new topics/archiving of less relevant/interesting TFs and hence the dynamic evolution of the curriculum (see also Johnston & Lane,  ). This represents an important further empowerment of key stakeholders. While educational authorities may wish to maintain certain topics they deem to be essential, teacher–pupil influence on evolution of the curriculum will result in continuous improvement and refining of the curriculum and its thematic relevance.
Engagement‐motivation. Knowing that feedback will have consequences should motivate educators and learners alike and foster engagement in the topic.
Advantages for teaching children with different learning abilities or who miss lessons. Some children have difficulties with structured curricula, in which each lesson builds on previous ones, or where the broader relevance and interdependencies of diverse issues are not always clear. Institution of stand‐alone lessons may reduce pressure/stress caused by structured curricula or because children miss lessons, change school and other factors, since missing some lessons does not prejudice comprehension of other (subsequent) lessons. Moreover, since the teaching resources are web‐based and freely available, children have the opportunity to explore and catch up on missed content (see also unesco.org/en/legal‐affairs/recommendation‐open‐educational‐resources.oer).
Changes in educators or teaching priorities. Stand‐alone lessons facilitate changes in both teaching priorities and teaching personnel because it is not essential that a new educator continues a specific learning pathway which had been adopted by a predecessor.

## Examinations and mandated curricula
While stand‐alone teaching resources and selection of learning pathways have considerable merit, they may be perceived as incompatible with student assessment and examination practices, or strict locally mandated curricula. This issue is particularly relevant where regional or national examinations relate to specific learning requirements. However, when this arises for classes, it can be handled in various ways:
through designation of some core, examinable topics compulsory for all students,
by focusing on abilities, through formulating generic/general questions that can be answered whichever topics have been studied,
through project work, such as selecting a MicroStar relevant to their environment, preparing a report on it, presenting orally in class and
through a combination of the above.

## The interdependence of things and systems thinking
As John Muir observed: ‘When we try to pick out anything by itself, we find it hitched to everything else in the Universe.’ (https://vault.sierraclub.org/john_muir_exhibit/writings/misquotes.aspx; see also: ‘Restructure curricula to emphasize interdisciplinary projects and connections between disciplines’: https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Innovative_Learning_Solutions_to_Navigate_Complexity_2023.pdf).
Many leaders confronted with crises tend to view an individual symptom in isolation and develop a response designed to specifically address it, rather than its root causes; they often ignore the fact that, in many instances, a problem faced is inextricably intertwined and integrated with and interdependent on, others. As a result of this linear thinking, an implemented solution strategy may fail because of unseen constraints imposed by other factors and may even engender new, unanticipated, adverse outcomes (as Albert Einstein noted: ‘We cannot solve our problems with the same thinking we used when we created them.’). Finding effective solutions to many problems requires systems thinking: careful analysis of the system in which the symptom to be addressed is embedded and exploration of relevant networks, including those elements, the influence of which may not be immediately apparent (https://systemthinking.docs.cern.ch; https://thesystemsthinker.com/making‐the‐jump‐to‐systems‐thinking/; https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FW6MXqzeg7M&t=10s).
Leaders frequently consult experts to inform themselves of the key issues underlying problems. However, without awareness of interdependencies, leaders risk creating a restricted, potentially misleading solution strategy framework for the experts they consult, which may engender decisions based primarily on siloed considerations. Modellers are often consulted to provide predictions of future trends, but their models are only as good as the quality and relevance of the boundaries and information upon which they are based. They also do not always incorporate relevant connected variables. As George Box famously stated: ‘all models are wrong, some are useful’.
To illustrate and emphasise the pervasive interdependence of microbial activities and their influence on problems of current concern, it can be instructive to consider just one topic that is vital to us all, is experienced personally every day and is one of the high priorities of children, namely food (its production, processing, transport, supply to consumers, preparation, consumption, spoilage and fate; see Data ). This example reveals the web of microbial connections and interdependencies relating inter alia to soil fertility, plant health and resilience to stresses, food‐borne infections, food deterioration, food preservation and upgrading, environmental pollution, eutrophication/oxygen minimum zones/loss of biodiversity, antimicrobial resistance, global warming and energy security.
The issue of interdependence may not always be easy to convey and, more importantly, to instil in the deliberations of children (and adults, for that matter). Nevertheless, it is imperative that those being taught are made aware of it so that at least some will attempt to consider the whole picture when faced with the need for a decision. The curriculum in general and the TFs in particular, attempt, where possible, to emphasise the pervasiveness of interdependence and several TFs explicitly deal with the issue, such as Global connectivity and Interconnected nature of environmental problems. One, on the microbiology of romance and reproduction, is designed to expose connectivity in a topic that is likely to be of particular interest to most young adults attaining sexual maturity (see also Timmis,  ). And there will be one or more Gallery Portraits specifically dedicated to illustrations of systems and linear thinking.

## Critical thinking
Knowledge and understanding of issues–in our case, microbiology‐influenced issues–underlying problems faced are the enablers of obtaining and evaluating the specific evidence needed for evidence‐based decision‐making. But they are not sufficient for reaching best option decisions, inter alia because of bias. Bias accumulates with age and exposure to biases of others and is one reason why leaders fail to take prompt effective responses to problems and why the public fails to hold them to account.
While it is not possible to eliminate personal or cultural biases, it is possible to lessen and counteract them by making children (and adults) aware of different types of biases and teaching them evidence‐based deliberation and its value and about misinformation and persuasion by others, so that they as decision takers are more likely to be less biased and stakeholders are more likely to recognise bias in their leaders and hold them to account.
Importantly, optimal decision‐making and problem‐solving (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Problem_solving) are favoured by critical and systems thinking. Critical thinking is the analysis of available facts, evidence, observations and arguments, in order to form a judgement by the application of rational, sceptical and unbiased analyses and evaluation (e.g., see Glaser,  ; Danchin,  ; https://www.skillsyouneed.com/learn/critical‐thinking.html; https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/critical‐thinking/).
However, critical thinking is not easy to teach and even more difficult to implement, because it requires both adoption of principles and volition: a certain mental attitude (https://www.criticalthinking.org/pages/defining‐critical‐thinking/766). Especially for younger members of society, it is rather abstract. But, since biases accumulate with age, it is vital to begin as early as possible (Timmis, et al., How to foster critical thinking in school: the microbiologists' approach, in preparation). To confront the conundrum that critical thinking is best taught to older learners, but increasingly compromised by age‐accumulating biases, the IMiLI will initiate awareness of critical thinking in young people by introducing in story form (https://www.forbes.com/sites/shanesnow/2023/01/16/science‐shows‐humans‐have‐massive‐capacity‐for‐sustained‐attention‐and‐storytelling‐unlocks‐it/)–the MicroChats–readily understood practical elements of critical thinking in the context of familiar examples.

## 
MicroChats aiming to convey the elements of critical thinking: a selection of those in preparation

What is the evidence?
Plausibility and reasonable doubt (if it seems too good to be true, it probably is)
Correlation and causality
Bias and misinformation
Interdependencies and systems thinking
Limiting parameters/bottlenecks/pinch points: focusing on the key issues
Essentiality: if it ain't broke, don't fix it
Want is not the same as need
Is a decision issue black and white or shades of grey?
Stakeholder involvement: two(+) brains and diverse perspectives are (usually) better than one
Due diligence and cost:benefit analysis
Cost externalisation: a reality check of true costs
Success: has it been defined and can it be measured?
Who benefits (directly; indirectly)?

Talking the talk and walking the walk

Experience versus talent
Benchmarking and best practice
Transparency and accountability
Quality control

Stories exemplifying elements of critical thinking also include examples of uncritical thinking to reveal the consequences of the latter. (Simply getting into the habit of posing the question why? to proposed actions and thereby demanding justification (which may lead to some level of cost:benefit discussion), already transfers decisioning into a more healthy framework.) In this way, children learn to apply critical thinking without the baggage of the theory. Collectively, the MicroChats will also aim to integrate critical thinking with systems thinking and problem‐solving.

## Key role of microbiology education in equipping children with generic knowledge and problem‐solving abilities they will need as adults

providing understanding of fundamental issues central to planetary and personal well‐being, including the vital importance of microbes
revealing the interconnectedness of things and dangers of consideration of topics in isolation (silo thinking)
fostering critical thinking that will aid them strive for evidence‐based, rational decisions and policies
widening vistas by revealing and stimulating interest in other systems and cultures and the options they offer and stimulating out‐of‐the‐box considerations
encouraging a sense of personal responsibility and involvement for the state‐of‐affairs and its improvement
inspiring the creativity (artistic and scientific: www.weforum.org/agenda/2023/07/creativity‐science‐matters‐ways‐to‐achieve‐it/), curiosity and initiative that will be needed to address future societal and environmental problems.

## The 3 D's: decisioning, decisioning, decisioning (and the vital importance of sustainability considerations)
Since the primary goal of education is to develop the minds of children in preparation for adulthood and its everyday events and regular challenges and opportunities that require decisions, an emphasis on informed decisioning best practice is essential. Therefore, key to our deliberations on what should be taught is related to decisioning and the critical and systems thinking underlying it. It is also important to communicate the fact that science and evidence are only the best available at the present time and that future developments may provide new evidence that will require decision/policy modification. In any case, the best decisions can also be wrong, so it is important to communicate the need to monitor the efficacy of decisions–oversight–and re‐evaluate when needed.

## The 3 D's: Decisioning! Decisioning! Decisioning (see also Data : Terry McGenity)!

informing decisioning (acquiring relevant knowledge and understanding)
the act of decisioning (objectively considering the relevant issues and options to reach a decision and

accountability in decisioning (explaining/justifying decisions and, crucially, taking responsibility for the consequences).

One of the key overarching considerations in policy development is sustainability, which is itself a series of highly interdependent aspects of human behaviour and endeavour. This is readily seen in the sustainability development goals (SDGs) formulated by the United Nations (https://sdgs.un.org/2030agenda) which, though discrete, are obviously overlapping and interdependent (e.g., poverty, hunger, health, employment). While an old and proven mantra is ‘if it ain’t broke, don’t fix it’, when something does look as though it will break, the mantra has become ‘if it needs fixing, make sure the fix is consistent with sustainable development’. It is also worth mentioning: considering sustainability aspects of a decision also helps to counter silo thinking.

## Immersion in the world of microbes, and microbes as teachers
To sustainably engage and motivate all pupils, especially those on the margins–to be maximally inclusive–it is essential to make education fun, fascinating from the point of view of the students, relevant to their lives and experiences and that engages and stimulates their inherent thirst for discovery and exploration. Despite the mostly lack of visibility of microbes, microbiology has huge pedagogical advantages. In teaching microbiology, it is essential to leverage these advantages, in particular the opportunities for immersion and immersive experiences.

## Immersive strategies

Let's make it personal! TF Sections 4, 6, etc.

Let's make it physical! Class and field experiments

Let's make it exciting! Virtual participation in those incredible research expeditions to/sampling campaigns in exotic places

Let's make it interactive! Class discussions/competitions relating to TF topics, Gallery portraits

Let's make it empowering! Feedback to teaching materials creators; learner creation of new resources

Let's make it fun! Class excursions; microbial games–art–theatre–music

Let's make it social! Family–friend–citizen science projects.

And immersion in microbiology reveals that microbes themselves have much to teach us.

## Microbes as teachers–what we can learn from them

Microbes vitalise! They give added value to their habitats (soil, water, air, rocks)
Microbes function almost entirely in partnerships: partnerships bring together key skills to achieve best solutions!
Microbes operate at low energy levels (we can certainly lower our energy consumption)
Microbes integrate processes (and so can we, e.g., integrate CO2‐producing processes with CO2 capturing/converting processes)
Circular economy of resources
Microbial commons.

## Opening vistas for the future
Though not explicitly specified in the goals of education discussed at the outset, education should also open vistas for the future personal development of the learner, from the points of view of both career routes and non‐career activities. The pervasiveness of microbial activities that impact human endeavours and human–biosphere–planetary well‐being has as a consequence that microbiology‐microbial technology knowledge and expertise find application in many different types of careers.
Children may be advised on career options by experts, but most experts have little knowledge of the range of careers that benefit from a microbiology knowledge. To rectify this lack of information, the IMiLI will create a comprehensive series of career portraits–the MicroCareers Gallery–that will profile the diverse microbiology‐relevant careers both for children considering career options and for career advisors. This Gallery will also expose the value of microbiology knowledge for careers such as finance (e.g., venture capital investment in start‐ups) not traditionally considered to require expertise in microbiology, to provide new vistas for children that help them imagine their futures in engaging new ways. If we can stimulate excitement that leads to children deciding to get involved in vector control in Africa, exploration of the deep ocean, creation of new pre‐ and probiotics to treat/prevent mental illness, seek microbes that can degrade and recycle recalcitrant wastes, formulate and implement policies to reduce our negative impact on the planet, etc., we will achieve our goals. 

Providing learners with information and materials that set them on the path to exploration and excitement in discovery, encourages and supports long‐term satisfying constructive and productive endeavours–professional–leisure–family–community–that benefit them and society.

## Engagement, fun, play, creative arts and competitions
Children who are excited by a subject feel engaged. But there are other ways and means of engaging them. Children are worried about the future of the world they will inherit, witness the international Friday school strikes to raise awareness about climate change and stimulate mitigating activities (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/School_Strike_for_Climate). They are also interested in sustainability and other societally relevant topics. Microbial activities impact many of these topics, so by dealing with them, the curriculum will engage.
Children are children, each growing their own lived experience and enjoy playing and social activities, being unserious, challenging one another and having fun, so it is imperative that, where possible, education is fun. The diversity and pervasiveness of microbial activities and impacts upon humans, our pets and plants, the planet, constitutes a huge space for the development of ideas for play, artistic creativity and competitions, such as board games, stories and storytelling, theatre, music, petri dish art (e.g., https://twitter.com/hashtag/MicrobeArt2023?src=hashtag_click) and sand art (https://drive.google.com/file/d/1tssshADADckp8HX3ge2FjLZQcb‐FI98Y/view). The IMiLI aims to support educators in this endeavour by providing suggestions for group activities, class competitions, ideas for creative arts, games and so forth. This will be particularly important for the creatives who go cold when they see a science lab (see Data  : Rachel Armstrong).
And, as also can be seen from the Strike for Climate movement, children enjoy interacting with others, especially via social media and participating in international activities, interactions that can amplify their enthusiasm and motivation. To engage and stimulate this enthusiasm for group activities, the IMiLI will encourage development by IMiLI Regional Centres of family–friend network projects, class and school projects and international citizen science projects and competitions (e.g., https://www.societyforscience.org/research‐at‐home/citizen‐science/; McGenity et al., ; Shah & Martinez,  ; https://tinyearth.wisc.edu; https://igem.org). Such collaborative and competitive activities can significantly amplify the fun factor, social interactions, engagement and motivation of learners and enrich the teaching experiences of educators (e.g., https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gamification_of_learning; https://academictech.uchicago.edu/2021/11/23/introduction‐to‐the‐use‐of‐gamification‐in‐higher‐education‐part‐1/; https://uwaterloo.ca/centre‐for‐teaching‐excellence/catalogs/tip‐sheets/gamification‐and‐game‐based‐learning).
The fun factor can also be elevated by the explicit interjection of humour into teaching resources themselves, where appropriate and indeed some of the IMiLI materials are explicitly humorous (e.g., video on a do‐it‐yourself microscope and some of the MicroChats).
Another aspect of engagement (and empowerment) of children is their ability to act themselves as educators (Timmis et al.,  ), as agents of knowledge transmission among family members and friend and peer networks. The pupil/student‐centricity of the curriculum, the portrait galleries that expose fascinating personalities of microbes and the family projects being designed, will all stimulate the natural tendency of children to transmit their newly acquired microbiology knowledge and hence their feeling of empowerment.

## Engendering classroom positivity
A great deal has been written about classroom positivity (e.g., ‘Positivity is the foundation for optimism, which can manifest as reduced stress, greater resilience, better problem‐solving skills and higher levels of achievement. Positive, optimistic individuals often have greater motivation to work through challenges, both in the classroom and in life.’ https://www.pbisrewards.com/blog/build‐a‐positive‐classroom‐environment/) and how it can/should be achieved. However, commonalities include valuing cultural diversity and promoting a feeling of community, encouraging active participation, teacher and mutual support, extending classroom activities outside of school and reinforcing positivity through rewards and incentives for success. While it is not the intention to deal here with the generic issue of classroom positivity, it is important to emphasise how microbiology inherently lends itself to efforts to achieve classroom positivity and how the IMiLI concept leverages this. For example
the value of diversity: the enormous extent of microbial diversity and its value to biosphere health (and, also the contrary: e.g., the problems of monocultures in agriculture; reducing diversity of microbiomes) is a recurring theme in the IMiLI resources, so it is a natural step to initiate class discussions on this topic and then move to human diversity and its value (how do we differ? Role playing imagining we are like someone else: what new things can we contribute, etc.)
community: collaborative class/group projects – examples are provided in the teaching resources, including fun class experiments like preparation of dough for bread and pizza and group work in the creative arts, such as theatre, song and dance and in competitions, etc. designed around microbes
active participation: class discussions/debates on issues suggested inter alia in the TFs, class and home projects including artistic and recreational activities designed around microbes; etc.
extending classroom activities outside of school: joint projects that also involve family and friends; citizen science projects; class excursions that have been suggested by the IMiLI; etc,

An important aspect of the IMiLI that relates to disadvantaged children and classroom positivity is language. Quite apart from multicultural societies whose schools may handle well (or, in some cases, less well) the teaching of children (and in some cases adults) whose mother tongues may differ from the official national/regional language, current mass migrations are resulting in children being incorporated in significant numbers from one day to the next into classrooms in which lessons are held in a–for them–hardly‐understood foreign language. While children in general quickly acquire new languages, the transition period can be difficult, stressful and may result in some falling behind. Having the teaching materials available in their own languages may reduce this. The different Regional Centres will be creating translations of IMiLI resources which they will post on their websites for anyone to access. So, for example, a Chinese pupil transferred into a German school will be able to access Chinese translations of IMiLI lessons.
And, of course, although classroom positivity is an important issue, some children, such as those in conflict zones, or who are politically constrained, may not have the benefit of a teacher in a classroom. In such cases, where Internet is available, the online availability of IMiLI teaching materials may, for some, enable self‐education and provide opportunities to engage with other like‐minded peers and educators across the globe.

## The biodiversity mindset–appreciation and the respect of human diversity and dignity–and the inclusivity contract
Much tension and conflict in the world is caused by differences (real, perceived or imaginary) that may distinguish one type of person from another, including those relating to biases of personal preferences, gender, medical/genetic issues and disabilities, etc. Some of our commonalities may be minimised and differences maximised, distorted and even weaponised by those who seek to gain and maintain influence and power through divisiveness, demonisation of others and propagation of discrimination (Afshar,  ; Ejiofor,  ; Feldman,  ). A powerful means of counteracting this are efforts to create knowledge, understanding and familiarity of others, reveal and emphasise our commonalities (including our microbiomes), encourage appreciation and respect of the value of diversity and humanity, have empathy for the disadvantaged and promote contact, dialogue and friendship between diverse groups and peoples (e.g., see SDG 10).
Exceptions notwithstanding, biologists in general and microbiologists in particular love and treasure biodiversity for a host of reasons including the beauty of variation in form or function (e.g., flowers, butterflies, sulfur‐oxidising bacterIa), the high stability and functionality of biodiverse ecosystems and the efficiency of resource utilisation in diverse communities (e.g., see Timmis et al.,  ). Microbes inform us of the advantages of living together and of engaging in beneficial transactions with different organisms. Microbiologists have a special and compelling duty to inform human society of the benefits of diversity and the tragedy of ‘othering’.
A characteristic feature of the teaching resources provided by the IMiLI is that their authors are clearly specified: educators and learners can see that a resource has been created by a particular expert or group of experts in India, China, the United States, Costa Rica, Mexico, Italy, Nigeria, Australia, Russia, France, Germany and so on, i.e., by people from all over the world and diverse cultures. Since many TF authors are willing to act as mentors and interact with educators and children, at least in the context of the teaching resources they have created and, in some cases, in the wider context of microbiology, there exists the possibility of a teacher/child from Ethiopia being mentored by an Australian microbiologist, a teacher/child from Denmark being mentored by a Kenyan microbiologist and so on. Such interactions will promote the evolution of international networks of microbiology education and citizen knowledge acquisition and exchange and, importantly, create familiarity with other peoples and cultures. These will be reinforced by IMiLI Citizen Science projects, which will not only create common projects in different parts of the world but also provide global social networking opportunities for the children and educators who participate in them. Such elements of the IMiLI concept will, in some cases, result in the blossoming of international friendships and formation of groups with similar interests.
Furthermore, as revealed in IMiLI teaching resources, many microbial technologies, current and in development, e.g., malaria vaccines, frugal diagnostics, seed inoculants, are specifically targeted for regions different from those where they are developed and their deployment involves a diverse spectrum of actors from different fields. And the research and development underpinning such advances is an international endeavour and relies on the input, expertise and resources (natural, intellectual, experience, knowledge) of scientists from different countries and backgrounds representing a diversity of opinions, traditions, cultures, etc. Just as there are interdependencies of different microbes in environmental processes, so there are interdependencies of humans with different skills from different regions and cultures crucial to the implementation of microbial solutions to pressing local, regional and global problems.
The IMiLI teaching resources and activities will thus enable educators and learners to appreciate the nature of science and the importance of diversity – microbial and human – and should help erode perceived differences between peoples and lead to better appreciation of our shared commonalities. This, in turn should help counteract bias, prejudice and attempts to emphasise and distort differences. We hope that the strategic aim of the IMiLI to help fulfil the inclusivity contract of society, will eventually be reinforced by the creation of international study programmes/stipends to promote the internationalisation of microbiology education and its democratisation.

## Provision of basic goods and resources, levelling up and social equity
A consequence of integrating the IMiLI resources into school curricula is that children worldwide will learn about the huge diversity of biotechnological applications (and other potential applications) of microbial activities and their ability to satisfy many basic needs, including the provision of clean water, sanitation, vaccines, medicines, food security, new enterprises and jobs and thereby contribute to the provision of basic goods and services considered to be a human right: a birth right (Anand et al., ). Appreciation of relevant microbiology and social responsibilities gained in school will inform decisions in adulthood to implement measures inter alia to level up, to fight poverty and hunger, to use effective biotechnologies to promote a wide range of improvements in human well‐being and thus enhance human dignity. As we have discussed elsewhere (Anand et al., ), asymmetries in basic goods and services can become a source of conflicts, so more fairly (re‐)distributing basic goods and services across the globe can also reduce such conflicts and promote peace and prosperity.

## Potential humanitarian reach of a curriculum in societally relevant microbiology
Microbes and their activities affect all living beings and thereby constitute the functional glue of the biosphere. Microbes also glue the biosphere to the geosphere and atmosphere. Might the IMiLI, in its effort to reveal the microbial world and how it affects us all, and to microbially engage children (and adults) globally, become an international humanitarian glue? And in emphasising the potential of microbial technologies to provide basic services and goods where they are lacking, and the importance of deploying them, the IMiLI may contribute in some measure to improvement of the human condition and increasing human dignity. While it may be going too far to suggest that the IMiLI will directly contribute to efforts to reduce conflicts in the world, in opening children's minds to the richness and value of human diversity, our similarities and our ability to leverage microbial activities to diminish social inequalities, it should reinforce other endeavours and may well have a cumulative positive impact over time.

## Teaching in informal settlements and refugee camps
The world population is currently around 8 billion. Of these, I billion live in informal settlements (https://gsgii.org/wp‐content/uploads/2022/05/informal‐settlements‐report‐2022.pdf) with another 6.6 million living in refugee camps. (https://www.unrefugees.org/news/refugee‐camps‐explained/). More than 100 million people are classified as displaced, i.e., have lost their homes, and the rising trajectory of human displacement is alarming (https://www.unhcr.org/about‐unhcr/who‐we‐are/figures‐glance). In all these situations, there are large numbers of children whose education is challenging but crucial. According to UNESCO, about 244 million children do not attend school (244 M children won't start the new school year|Global Education Monitoring Report (unesco.org).
While the IMiLI cannot contribute directly to increasing the number of children in education, by creating teaching materials that emphasise child interest and that are relevant to problems encountered in informal settlements and refugee camps, such as water, hygiene, infections, pollution, crops and food, it can stimulate educators and learners, encourage regional would‐be educators to engage, and perhaps stimulate improvements in settlement practices and organisation (Hallsworth et al., in preparation).

## The microbiology education value chain and cloud
The concept of value chains developed by Porter (Porter,  ; see also https://www.cisl.cam.ac.uk/education/graduate‐study/pgcerts/value‐chain‐defs), deals with the chain of activities that an organisation performs to create a product of value for a customer and the manner in which value is added along the chain. The goal is to identify activities in the chain where optimisation can add value to the system. Value can be financial, but also ethical, environmental, and societal. Customer feedback is often a key driver of value addition.
Education has vital consequences for individuals and society which are sometimes depicted as an educational value chain (e.g., Dorri et al.,  ; Mpofu & Chikati,  ). In education (and other contexts), value chains, like food chains, are not linear but branched and constitute a web or network, which increases the scope for adding value. Education value chains available on the Internet are often restricted to the educational context–university, school, business. One notion of the educational value chain is: Information–Knowledge–Wisdom–Changed mindset–Changed behaviour–Influencing others to change their mindset and behaviour (https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/knowledge‐wisdom‐education‐value‐chain‐formula‐d/), which has the virtue of emphasising the progression of knowledge acquisition to mindset change, i.e., of being transformative and supporting development of problem‐solving skills.
But education has almost limitless consequences for humanity and a far‐ranging value web. Figure  integrates the issues discussed above into an education value cloud. Some of the elements are microbiology education‐specific, but the majority are or should be generic. We elected to depict the microbiology education value cloud in terms of increasing societal scale and complexity, ranging from the values added at the personal level, to those at the family–community–national and global levels, but there are obviously other ways of representing opportunities to add value to education, including a more traditional way involving a branching path.
 Intervention opportunities to increase value from education in societally relevant microbiology that are apparent from Figure  are numerous. They include increasing emphasis on microbial technology applications to improve social equity, frugal innovation and levelling up, increasing emphasis on critical and systems thinking to reduce bias and the impact of misinformation and to increase the efficacy of political decisions at all levels. As is the case for classical commercial value chains, customer–in our case the educator‐learner–feedback is essential to maximise options to add value.
Another important utility of the educational value web is that it reveals the comprehensive set of values that education embodies. The knock‐on effects of education are all pervasive, ranging from personal development and betterment to consequences for the family and friends, career, the economy, sustainability, societal well‐being and the future of the biosphere and planet. However, despite the obvious societal importance of education, in many societies it is undervalued, as reflected in the facts that teachers are relatively underpaid (compared with say bankers, lawyers) and overworked because of understaffing, their societal status does not reflect the importance of their work and there is serious underinvestment in education infrastructure. Underinvestment in education seriously constrains the development and realisation of inherent potential of young people and, as a consequence, prejudices overall economic performance and sustainability. It is worth noting that subsidies for strategic industries and recruitment of individuals with specific skill sets cannot recoup this lost potential. Given the pervasive power of microbial technologies to solve problems and create novel products and processes, the IMiLI will seek to explore, extend and make apparent to society the educational value chain/web, with the explicit aim of raising appreciation of education and educators and the need to support them better and allocate them their rightful place in society.

## CONCLUDING REMARKS

## The need for change: IMiLI an enabler of change

Formal education. Calls for change in school curricula, to make future generations of adults fitter for the challenges they will face, are increasing in frequency (https://widgets.weforum.org/nve‐2015/chapter1.html; https://www.un.org/sites/un2.un.org/files/report_on_the_2022_transforming_education_summit.pdf).). While the case for change is irrefutable, key questions are (i) what new elements (subjects/topics; teaching methods, etc.) are needed, (ii) to what purpose and (iii) how should they be integrated into existing curricula? Much discussion about what changes are needed in education focuses on employment skills needed for national economic development (The reskilling revolution: https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2023/09/universities‐adapt‐future‐of‐learning‐skills‐work/). However, the well‐being of individuals, nations and the biosphere is determined by more than employment and national economies, not least because we and future generations face/will face crises that seriously impact diverse aspects of humanity and the planet. Therefore, change in school curricula is needed not only to improve employability potential, but also to elevate awareness of broader societal and planetary challenges, and understanding of their causes and potential solutions and prepare people for significant behavioural and societal change. And we should not neglect the importance of philosophy in personal development (O'Malley, ; O'Malley & Parke, ); indeed the philosophy of microbiology is a theme in the IMiLI curriculum.
Many of the problems faced by humanity have microbiological solutions or mitigation actions, problems and solutions that also impact employment and economies. Indeed, the core of the bioeconomy (www.fao.org/interactive/bioeconomy/en/) and much of the Green Deal (www.consilium.europa.eu/en/policies/green‐deal/) is based on microbial technologies. Educating children in societally relevant microbiology will provide them with important knowledge and skills that are key to informed decisions relating to their personal well‐being, citizenship and economic development.
Major societal challenges are worsening inequalities, inadequacies in basic goods and services in impoverished communities, bias‐driven polarisation of opinions and societal fragmentation and disinformation amplified by social media. Such challenges need to be countered by promoting at an early age critical‐systems thinking, global citizenship and the value of diversity and sustainability. While classical teaching also emphasises ramifications and applications of the subjects taught, the resources being created by the IMiLI aim to go beyond this and teach and raise awareness of societally relevant skills and qualities, such as critical thinking and objective, evidence‐based discussion, opinion‐building and decisioning, the interconnectedness of things, systems thinking and problem‐solving, sustainability, stewardship and stakeholder responsibility and activities, global citizenship and responsibilities and the educational value chain.
Current education at all levels is mainly organised along disciplinary lines with disciplinary boundaries often acting as barriers to exploration of transdisciplinary networks. But, life is a web of interconnected experiences, issues to understand and problems to solve, just like that of the larger biosphere of which we are a part. For children to become adults who look beyond the saucer, make connections that are vital to identifying the underlying problem rather than just seeing the symptoms, it is essential that interdependencies are not only revealed to them but shown to be pervasive. This can be done by both dedicated teaching of interdisciplinarity, illustrated by practical, everyday examples and through exposing the connections between disciplines. By dealing with microbial activities that impact societally relevant issues and their ramifications, the IMiLI seeks to counter teaching, thinking, opinion formation and decisioning from disciplinary silos.

Lifelong learning. Lifelong learning has always been the activity of scholars and the curious, but is growing in importance for a number of reasons that include opportunity (increasing longevity/longer retirement can provide time previously lacking during periods of employment), greater availability of educational resources (especially on the Internet) and the need to learn new skills for employment (https://www.uil.unesco.org/en/unesco‐institute/mandate/lifelong‐learning). Lifelong learning is also a growing priority of various organisations, including the United Nations, which has included it in its SDGs (Goal 4. Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all; ….) and the European Commission (‘To succeed, lifelong learning for all must become a reality in Europe.’ (p. 4: https://ec.europa.eu/migrant‐integration/sites/default/files/2020‐07/SkillsAgenda.pdf). Microbial activities and their manifold impacts on human lives, endeavours and well‐being and on biosphere and planetary health, predestine them to be a priority topic of public interest and lifelong learning. The resources being created by the IMiLI will not only satisfy this need but also, as a single curriculum for all ages, add coherency to lifelong learning and the ability of learners of all ages and cultures to communicate and exchange information within the IMiLI education ecosystem.

System resilience of society: increasing societal engagement in problem‐solving and provision of services. As modern civilisation has progressed from hunter‐gatherer, via Stone Age farmer, there has been increasing specialisation of roles in relation to the division of labour. Whereas not that long ago, families were inter alia able to build dwellings, cultivate food crops in a self‐sufficient manner and prepare all food from raw ingredients, today in typical high‐income countries, we may work in an office or at home and often buy processed foods or ready‐made meals, or order delivery of ready‐to‐eat meals. If something needs maintenance or goes wrong within the home, in relation to the fabric of the building, or even in the garden, we may engage a specialist to fix it. We pay taxes and in return receive access to roads and other infrastructure, healthcare, education, protection against crime and so forth.
Major challenges confronting humanity that include global warming, unsustainable practices, the massive inequalities among peoples and the need to level up, large‐scale conflicts, pandemics, food insecurity, human migrations and organised crime, divert and consume huge amounts of economic resources (including tax revenues used to provide us with services), are raising debt levels and the financial cost of servicing this debt and driving cost of living increases. There is no indication that this situation will improve for the foreseeable future. Rather, such crises and limited intrinsic planetary‐biosphere resources and services for the world's growing human population, may worsen such problems in the future, witness the problems, such as reducing access to healthcare and deteriorating infrastructure, experienced in many countries. As a result, basic services funded by taxation that are currently taken for granted may become increasingly restricted and compel major changes in human lifestyle, behaviour and expectations.
There will be several ways and means of dealing with these challenges, but one will certainly be increased personal engagement of people in the acquisition of/securing access to products and services currently provided by specialists (either employed by the state and funded by tax revenues or directly by us), i.e., an increase in self‐help/do‐it‐yourself (DIY). Such people will also be engaged in helping others less able to engage in DIY to obtain the same services, a process that will be promoted by increased social responsibility/global citizenship of the type the IMiLI aims to encourage. The diversity of relevant products and services will be significant, ranging from food and nutrition, clean water, primary healthcare (e.g., Timmis & Timmis,  ) and so forth. An increase in self‐help willingness and competence and resulting DIY activity, will endow greater resilience on over‐specialised modern societies vis‐à‐vis the challenges they will face. It will also result in increased empowerment of the individual‐families‐friends networks and communities, further democratisation of relevant knowledge, increasing appreciation of diversity because abilities will count more than biases, all of which will contribute to motivation.
Crucial to effective engagement in self‐help/DIY activity will be acquisition of relevant knowledge and expertise from its specialist practitioners. Many of the services that are currently inadequate in certain communities or will become inadequate as a result of the challenges on the horizon, involve microbes/microbial technologies, so literacy in relevant aspects of microbiology/microbial technology enabled by the IMiLI will be a significant facilitator of improved societal resilience.
Moreover, such societal changes will require acceptance and active participation of individuals, communities and nations and this in turn will require that people understand the causes of challenges and the potential remedies and all this in the face of pushback by vested interests and mis‐ and disinformation. It will be essential that society is properly informed about relevant issues so that it can form evidence‐based opinions that promote acceptance of necessary change. Scientists in general and microbiologists in particular, have a duty of care, a special responsibility to inform the public.

## What is the IMiLI?
The IMiLI is a global microbiology education ecosystem, depicted in Figure  , consisting of
a concept of an international curriculum in societally relevant microbiology with a vision to enable children and adults worldwide to acquire knowledge and understanding vital to the well‐being of society and the biosphere,
a global community of microbiologists constituting a platform dedicated to the creation of the teaching resources that make up the curriculum,
the teachers, the taught and the independent learners (the global classroom)

the interfacing Regional Centres that adapt and make available the teaching resources, provide support, create synergistic networks within and between the regions they serve.

 But the IMiLI is also a conviction by the contributing microbiology actors, that microbial technologies can make a material difference to society, its well‐being and that of the biosphere and a determination to promote their increased deployment through the broadest possible exposure of their potential.

## The privilege and satisfaction of engagement in microbiology: a humanitarian calling
Saving lives and reducing human suffering are among the greatest callings of humanity, an endeavour usually considered to be primarily the realm of clinicians–the healers–although some non‐governmental aid agencies, emergency responders like the police and fire services, other health workers and carers and so forth, also enjoy this privilege. But so do microbiologists, like those involved in development of vaccines, life‐saving drugs and microbiota therapies, or in monitoring infectious diseases, but also those who develop and bring to settlements who need them technologies to microbially clean faecally contaminated water, to treat wastewater and remove toxic chemicals from drinking water, to reduce starvation and malnutrition by increasing agricultural yields. All these and other activities of microbiologists save lives and reduce disease and suffering.
But it is not only a case of saving human lives: we are part of a global ecosystem of interdependent organismal interactions whose healthy functioning requires a high diversity of participating organisms: we need to prevent the loss, that is save the lives, of other organisms. So developers of agrobiochemicals that reduce the use of chemical fertilisers which cause eutrophication and de‐oxygenation of water bodies and the killing of oxygen‐requiring aquatic animals, of biomining technologies that reduce acid mine drainage pollution, of biodegradable bioplastics that reduce the use of petro‐chemical‐based plastics and their global contamination, of all manner of technologies that reduce greenhouse gas production and the resulting global warming that is making life impossible for some species, are all in some form or other saving lives and reducing suffering. In this sense, microbiology is broadly a life‐saving and suffering‐reduction occupation. Therefore, even if these benefits are often less direct and immediate than healing by clinicians, microbiologists have the privilege and satisfaction of knowing that they make a major contribution to humanitarian efforts in society. Microbiology is indeed a great humanitarian calling and microbiologists have a duty to reveal this to children!

## ‘Tries hard but could do better’: democratisation of microbiology and learner‐driven evolution of the IMiLI

It is important to emphasise that although the current IMiLI teaching resources being released–the TFs and Gallery Portraits–in our view constitute a critical mass, they are far from complete. The curve of resource additions is asymptotic: it is likely that the plateau will be approached sometime in 2026, but further additions will accrue thereafter. So there is still much to be done and the IMiLI welcomes offers to get involved and contribute teaching resources.
Moreover, we do not pretend that the resources currently being created represent the best that can be devised: this is the initial iteration. Our notions of child/student‐centricity and what is societally relevant are certainly incomplete and the reader, end users of our resources and others, will have additional ideas, ideas that can flow into the dynamic evolution of the resources we envision. This is particularly true for changes that reflect cultural needs. Importantly, democratisation success will depend not only on creating teaching resources that fascinate learners and for which they provide positive feedback, but also stimulating them to explore and discover new topics that excite them and for which the IMiLI should create new teaching resources. Inherent in the exercise of creating new teaching resources will be a significant degree of autocorrection: authors will read their previous contributions and those of others and note mistakes/improvements that they hopefully will communicate to the IMiLI for correction.
Although ad hoc updating will occur continuously, at some point an IMiLI 2.0 will be needed that will add new materials to reflect changes in local and global situations, improve or delete some of the less useful materials and especially that will respond systematically to suggestions and critiques of educators, children and other end users (e.g., see Figure  ). Current formats may change. This will undoubtedly result in a revised and superior collection of teaching resources co‐created by creators–educators–learners. The current creators of the teaching resources–the hundreds of microbiologists, clinicians, ecologists, biochemists, immunologists, bioinformaticians, bioengineers and more, from all over the world–are also learners! Importantly, creators, educators and the taught are a single, interactive ecosystem that will naturally continue to seek to achieve the best solution for all. As Dieter Czeschlik of Springer Verlag once remarked to KT during a discussion about a handbook series: ‘the second edition is always significantly better than the first’! But, for the reasons stated above, we suspect that the teaching resources of IMiLI 1.0 are ground‐breaking and pioneering and therefore will have a special value for the first generation of teacher–learners who use them to learn societally relevant microbiology.
 

## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Kenneth Timmis created the various drafts of the manuscript. The other authors provided additional ideas and suggestions for improvements.

## Supporting information

Appendix S1.