pmcCBE Life Sci EducCBE Life Sci Educ421cbelifesci101269039lseCBE Life Sciences Education1931-7913American Society for Cell BiologyPMC12286629PMC12286629.112286629122866294015354510.1187/cbe.24-05-0150CBE.24-05-01501ArticleYours, Mine, Sometimes Ours: Uncovering the Experiences of Biologists Searching for Academic Jobs Together
SchusslerElisabeth E. aDepartment of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, The University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996Price,Rebecca M.Monitoring EditorConflicts of interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
*Address correspondence to: Elisabeth Schussler (eschussl@utk.edu).Summer0162025242493685ar22
2052024
1122025
2622025
010620252407202524072025© 2025 Schussler CBE—Life Sciences Education © 2025 The American Society for Cell Biology. This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell Biology under license from the author(s). It is available to the public under an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 3.0 Unported Creative Commons License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).2025“ASCB®” and “The American Society for Cell Biology®” are registered trademarks of The American Society for Cell Biology.Biologists pursuing faculty jobs are often married to other biologists who may also desire faculty positions. This increases the complexity of the job search, with little guidance for early career researchers about doing this successfully. Couples have been surveyed, but less research qualitatively investigates the lived experiences of couples seeking jobs together. These stories may inform professional development about navigating joint job searches. This study interviewed 18 biologists who were part of a couple who were currently or had sought jobs together. Interviews asked about the strategies and supports guiding their job search, their decisions and compromises, and the emotions they experienced. The transcripts underwent thematic analysis to identify six themes related to strategies (advice, hiding their partner, and searching for jobs), negotiations, compromises (types and tensions), apprehensions, reconciliations, and reflections. Communication to identify joint priorities informed the couple's choices and compromises during the search. There were many emotional burdens related to navigating together. The participants expressed their struggles to understand institutional practices on dual career hires, suggesting a need to provide professional development to early career researchers, particularly in the areas of discussions about job search expectations and potential outcomes, and anticipation of emotional reactions.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes

## INTRODUCTION
The difficulty of obtaining a faculty job is well known in academia, yet the challenge is compounded for individuals partnered with other academics who desire to live together (herein “dual career couples”). As institutions have sought to diversify their gender representation, dual career challenges have increased because women are more likely than men to be married to other academics ( ; ), and this is even more likely in the sciences. A 1998 survey of physicists found that 89% of the women respondents were married to other scientists, and of those, 45% were married to other physicists ( ). found that 50% of Asian science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) PhDs were married to other STEM professionals; indicates this number is 80% for female mathematicians and 33% for female chemists. These numbers likely underestimate the dual career couple challenge because not all couples are married or in heterosexual relationships, a fact that has not been fully explored in the dual career literature. Thus, dual career couples conavigating the academic job market, particularly in the sciences, is increasingly a feature of the system.
Job searches for dual career couples are difficult because of a limited number of professional positions in the same area. The uncertainty of professional outcomes for both members of the couple can take an emotional toll on their relationship ( ; ). One member of the couple may get a job at an institution and their partner (sometimes called the “trailing spouse”) may be offered a less than ideal job or no job at all; an inequitable outcome that can occur for dual career couples even outside of academia ( ). surveyed physicist couples and found that 60% indicated one of them took a less than ideal job to live in the same location, although it should be noted that these data were collected more than 25 years ago. “Less desirable” jobs may include temporary and/or low-paying adjunct faculty positions or teaching-focused non-tenure-track faculty jobs which, in some cases, can limit future opportunities for tenure-track faculty jobs and/or lead to an individual leaving academia, especially among women ( ).
Cultural expectations related to gender and family life also make the process challenging, a topic that has thus far been explored mostly for White, heterosexual couples. There can be assumptions that a woman's job is secondary to that of her husband's and/or that a conflict exists between a woman's career and raising children ( ; ). Many dual career couples acknowledge that having children affected their job choices ( ; ). Women who do not conform to cultural stereotypes (e.g., saying their career is more important than their husband's) generally have fewer positive outcomes in academic job-seeking than couples where a man says his job is more important or even egalitarian couples who see their jobs as equal ( ). Much of the literature on dual career couples centers on White, heterosexual couples, leaving the cultural constraints of different races, ethnicities, nationalities, sexual orientations and other identities relatively unknown ( ). Overall, those partnered and looking for jobs together in academia face a difficult journey imbued with cultural expectations, uncertain outcomes, and compounded emotional burdens, often with no formal guidance from departments or institutions about how to navigate the process for two travelers.

## Dual Career Job Search Tactics and Strategies
In academic science, the acquisition of a PhD rarely leads directly to a faculty position. About 60% of graduate students move into a temporary, research-focused postdoctoral scholar (postdoc) after acquiring their PhD ( ; ). Some academics in science may complete just one postdoc, while others move to successive postdoc positions, with most spending an average of 2.7 years as a postdoc ( ), and some even longer ( ). Experience as a postdoc is often in the hopes of acquiring the security and status of a tenure-track faculty job. found that 72% of the graduate students at their institution were considering a career as a faculty member. However, the overabundance of PhDs relative to the number of tenure-track jobs makes these positions highly selective. Between the years of 1960 and 1980, 42.8% of PhD graduates were in a tenure-track position at some point in their career; that number has shrunk to 25.2% between 2000 and 2013 ( ). Increasingly, academic institutions are hiring non-tenure-track or adjunct faculty members rather than tenure-track positions ( ). Thus, couples navigating together in the hopes of both acquiring tenure-track jobs at the same institution often make multiple moves with little assurance of success at the end of their journeys.
Academic job searches require strategic decision-making while going through a process that is stressful, time-consuming, and often opaque ( ). Certain strategies may increase the likelihood of a successful job search, yet there is no standard “playbook” for success, and luck is always a factor. Individuals decide on the types of institutions and jobs to apply to, what to include in their written materials, how to navigate an interview, and how to negotiate a potential job offer ( ; ). These steps are taken multiple times, with a typical researcher on the job market applying to a median of 15 positions in one academic job cycle ( ). Dual career couples tend to make job search decisions in tandem ( ), discussing where they will apply and whether to mention their partner in the application materials or job interviews ( ). If they receive an offer, they must decide whether and how to negotiate for a position for their partner, a stage that often disadvantages women in dual career couples ( ; ). Even the most egalitarian search strategies where each partner commits to equally supporting the other's job opportunities can still lead to unequal outcomes where one partner attains a more desirable position than the other ( ).
The search process is imbued with power dynamics, risk, and uncertainty, particularly regarding when or whether to reveal the existence of a partner ( ). Some advice columns suggest revealing a partner early in the process to give institutions time to arrange accommodations, while others say this decreases the probability of a job offer ( ; ). found that 50% of physicists in a dual career partnership revealed the need to accommodate a partner before or at the interview ( ). Likewise, found that 56% of 236 faculty from multiple disciplinary areas at seven universities revealed their partner status before a job offer. Even if partner status is not revealed voluntarily, sometimes inappropriate probing for marital status during job interviews occurs ( ). conducted a qualitative case study of hiring committee conversations and documented the discussion of partnered status of candidates and assumptions that a male partner of a candidate would be more likely to need an accommodation than a female partner of a male candidate. This confirms concerns that knowledge of partner status can create inequities in the search process.
Even when one partner has a job offer, negotiations for a second position can create new inequities. Individuals who revealed their partners during their job search thought it negatively impacted their salaries ( ). In a study where applicant materials were identical except for the insertion that one was a “trailing spouse,” chemistry department chairs indicated they would offer lower salary and start-up to the “trailing spouse” applicant than to the same application indicated as the “primary hire” ( ). Women who considered their job to be more important than their partner's (in terms of how they prioritized their positions) were more likely to negotiate for a position for their spouse compared with women who considered their job relatively less important ( ). Women were also more likely than a man to turn down a job offer if their partner was not offered a position, even if they considered their job to be more important than their partner's ( ). Thus, even when a job search for one member of the couple has been successful, there are still barriers for dual career couples.
Recognizing these systemic issues, some institutions have created dual career policies to guide more equitable outcomes, although these vary widely ( ). A survey of 360 Association of American Colleges & Universities (AAC&U) institutions found that only 24% had explicit dual career hiring policies; other institutions indicated they accommodated couples on an ad hoc basis ( ). Research universities were more likely than nonresearch universities to have a policy, with 15% of institutions overall indicating they would never accommodate a partner (also see ). found that public research universities were almost twice as likely to accommodate couples than private institutions. Universities situated in metropolitan areas were less likely to have policies ( ) and less likely to accommodate dual career couples than institutions in the South, Midwest, or West ( ). found that couples using university accommodation policies perceived positive outcomes of their job search, but the ad hoc nature of institutional accommodations makes it difficult to assess the effectiveness of institutional policies.

## The Need for Qualitative Explorations
Despite these struggles and risks, many dual career couples still want to work at the same institution. Couples who work at the same university generally are more satisfied with their work and are more egalitarian in their family life ( ). Therefore, research is often conducted to identify the factors that result in higher probability of dual career job offers or to identify the scope of the problem, and these are often conducted using large survey datasets. These studies have found several factors salient to the outcome of a dual career couple's search, including an individual's relationship with their advisor ( ) or whether the couple had children or were at different career stages ( ). ) found that trailing spouses were perceived to be of lower academic quality compared with the primary hire. found that couples perceived long-term work benefits related to productivity and promotion for revealing their spouse during their job search, but they also felt they sacrificed salary. documented that the existence of a dual career hiring policy at an institution was not a guarantee of an accommodation. While these results are exceptionally useful for finding patterns relevant to dual career searches, there is a surprising lack of research to explore the impacts of those patterns and processes on the couples themselves.
Qualitative investigations of dual career couple experiences, perceptions, and emotions during or after the job search provide needed insight into the couples’ lived experiences and can inform the advice needed to provide clarity to the process. interviewed 14 couples to identify their common job search experiences. They found that the couple balanced a need to advocate for their careers and the vulnerable feelings of uncertainty and powerlessness throughout the job search. The couples said outcomes often felt like luck more than planning. Couples also conveyed that the emotions of the search—distress, struggle, compromise, sacrifice—became a part of their relationship. described these couples as being “alone together” in terms of their job searches. interviewed 17 dual career couples to identify the joint storytelling they used to make sense of their career journeys. In this study, couples promoted the professional work of their partners to counteract inequalities and sacrifices that had been experienced, and reframed professional setbacks to maintain the value of their work. These two studies highlight the inextricable link between the personal and professional lives of dual career couples and how negative emotions generated from the job search can linger long after it is over. It also suggests a need to investigate the complexities of dual career job searches to identify how to help early career couples navigate these job searches with less emotional cost.

## Theoretical Perspective
This study was qualitative and took an interpretive phenomenology approach, which centers participant perspectives versus being guided by existing theory ( ; ). Phenomenology as a philosophy was developed by the Austrian-German mathematician and philosopher Husserl to reflect that individuals think about and make meaning from the world and research should work to describe how that meaning relates to the phenomena they experience ( ). In contrast to this purely descriptive process, Husserl's student Heidegger advanced the idea that researchers must both describe and interpret the meanings participants create from their experiences, in a process referred to as hermeneutic phenomenology, also called interpretive phenomenology ( ; ). Thus, this theory centers the “lived” experiences of participants in terms of how they make meaning from a particular phenomenon (in this case, academic job searches as a couple) and how the researcher interprets and describes the participants’ experiences ( ).

## The Present Study
Finding academic jobs as a couple is both personal and professional, and the bulk of the literature overlooks the lived experiences of couples navigating this process. Most studies have centered on analyses of institutional policies and practices or contextual factors that have impacted outcomes such as job acquisition or satisfaction (e.g., ; ; ; ; ). Many have used large datasets, quantitative approaches, or couple vignettes to understand factors that lead to favorable outcomes. However, there has been less focus on qualitative investigations of the job search process. The work of and demonstrated the lingering personal and professional impacts of these searches. However, these studies talked with both members of the couple together, which has the disadvantage of invoking shared narratives that may mask individual perceptions. This study focused solely on the perceptions and feelings of a single member of the couple who had navigated (or were navigating) the process of finding jobs with their partner, with the hope that these personal narratives would provide additional insight into ways to provide support to dual career couples. Specifically, the study asked:
What strategies and supports guided their job search approach(es)?
What decisions and compromises were made during the job search process?
What emotions were experienced during the job search process?

In asking these questions, the goal was to bring to light personal perceptions of the challenges inherent in a system not built for dual career couples. Unclear academic processes have cascading impacts on who ends up staying in or leaving academia; as such, providing support for couples seeking academic jobs together should be a priority for institutions. The results of this study can be used to frame professional development needs for early career researchers, for academic colleagues to better understand the challenges dual career couples face, and for administrators to consider the ways that institutional policies and values influence dual career faculty members’ professional and personal lives.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

## Methodological Approach
This study used interviews to explore the personal experiences and perspectives of PhD-level Biologists who were part of a couple seeking faculty jobs at the same institution. The analysis of these data was guided by interpretive phenomenological analysis ( ; ), meaning its intent was to examine, describe, and interpret how the participants experienced the process of searching for a job in tandem with their partner. The focus was not on the job search itself, but on the individual's reality of that phenomena. By its very nature, the study focused on the relational experiences of the couple, but from the perception of one member.

## Reflexivity
The author is one-half of a dual career couple; both attained faculty positions in Biology at one institution after a long job search process. She used these experiences to frame the interview questions and her interpretations of the participants’ lived experiences. In interpretative phenomenology, setting aside these experiences to be strictly objective is not the goal; instead, the researcher draws from their own experiences, while being aware of any potential biases, as they are analyzing the participant data ( ). The choice to focus on dual career couples in Biology was a conscious decision to keep the participants’ experiences as similar as possible to the authors’ own experiences as an aid to interpretation. The author's perceptions and interpretations were bounded by her own identities as a White, cis woman born in the United States and her experiences navigating with her White husband. She acknowledges that setting aside biases was likely not enough to fully understand the experiences of participants who differed from her. Throughout the manuscript the term “the researcher” refers to author E.S.; E.S. conducted all aspects of the study.

## Quality of Data
Qualitative research is often held to positivist standards of reliability and validity that are inappropriate for the methodology. Given that the investigator is the tool by which results are interpreted, and individuals differ in their perspectives, reliability as a strict measure of truth is inconsistent with qualitative methods. Qualitative researchers have dealt with these challenges by establishing standards appropriate to their methods such as truth value, applicability, consistency, and neutrality ( ; ). Truth value is the extent to which the reader believes that the participants were accurately conveying their experiences through the interview process. Applicability is the extent to which the results match the context and have meaning beyond just the sample. Consistency is not a mimic of reliability, but instead the perception that another researcher could follow the methods and achieve similar findings. Neutrality is not objectivity, which is not the goal in qualitative work, but instead is judged by the confirmability, or quality of the findings. Overall, the standard for qualitative work is rigor, often termed trustworthiness, and is conveyed through the thoroughness of data collection and analysis, thick description of methods and results, coherence, and sensitivity to context ( ). The researcher has conveyed this information through the methods and results so that the reader can judge the rigor for themselves.

## Ethical Considerations
All procedures were approved by the human subjects review board at the researcher's institution before the project began (UTK IRB # 20-06001-XM).

## Recruitment
Participants were recruited in November 2020 through an e-mail to the “ecolog listserv,” which is an e-mail distribution list to members of the Ecological Society of America. This venue was chosen because it is a large organization with an active listserv; in the personal experience of the author, emails are often forwarded to other individuals outside the society.
The e-mail introduced the purpose of the study, which was to conduct virtual interviews with participants to explore their lived experiences as part of a couple searching, or having searched, for faculty positions together. The researcher disclosed that she was a member of a dual career couple and indicated her status as an education researcher. Participation criteria were outlined in the recruitment email and included that the individual needed to be in a committed relationship (all gender identities welcome and no requirement to be married), that both members of the couple had PhDs in a Biological discipline (not necessarily the same field), and that the intent of the couple was to acquire full-time faculty positions at a university and live together. Furthermore, the couple needed to have experienced at least one job transition together, which may have resulted in them finding the desired jobs or not. Finally, the e-mail stated that both members of the couple did not need to volunteer for the study. Recipients of the e-mail were encouraged to forward the message to others beyond the listserv.
The criteria to have experienced at least one job transition as a couple was because the study was probing the experiences of searching for jobs together, whether successful or not. Although planning for a job search is part of the process, implementing that search and experiencing the outcomes was critical to the study. For some individuals, this transition was searching for postdoctoral positions together, but most participants were either seeking faculty positions or were retrospectively recalling their searches to acquire their current faculty positions.
Those interested in participating contacted the researcher by e-mail. The researcher verified that the individual met the criteria and then provided details about the participation process. Volunteers were asked to participate in one interview over zoom that would last for 60–90 min. Nineteen individuals contacted the author about the study; one individual did not meet the participation criteria, and 18 were interviewed. No incentive was given to the individuals for participation.

## Data Collection
Interviews were conducted via zoom in December 2020 (N = 10) and January and February of 2021 (N = 8). Participants were sent the consent form in advance of the interview as well as the following prompts that encapsulated some of the questions they would be asked:
What strategies and support guided your job search approach(es)?
What decisions and compromises were made during the job search process?
What emotions did you feel as you searched for jobs together?

The e-mail also reminded them that if their partner was participating (6 participants / three couples were part of the study), that they were separate participants and that their responses would not be linked or compared with their partner's responses.
At the beginning of the interview, the researcher read from a script that reviewed the goal of the study, provided an overview of the consent form, and asked for verbal consent to participate in the study and have the interview audio recorded. This consent was documented as part of the recording. Interviewees were also reminded that although they had consented to the interview, their partner did not, so they should not reveal anything their partner might not want others to know. This was to clarify that the interview was to record their personal perspectives, and not that of their partner.
Before starting the interview, the researcher asked for preferred gender pronouns for the couple, as well as the year they received their PhDs, their subdisciplinary areas, and whether they were currently living in the same location. Pronouns were collected only to refer to the individual and their partner the way they preferred during the interview, and the other information was for context. No other demographic information was collected (e.g., race/ethnicity, nationality, marital status) because the intention was to find commonalities in the participants’ experiences searching for jobs and not to infer how those experiences differed among demographic groups, which would be difficult with such a small sample. Given the small sample and the likelihood that the participants were representing majority demographics in science, however, even the commonalities of experience identified in this study do not represent the totality of experiences of academic couples in biology.
The interviews were semistructured in nature with the same questions being asked of each participant ( ), but with the flexibility to follow-up with additional questions or change the order as needed. These questions were created by the researcher and went through several rounds of revisions in consultation with other education researchers. They were lightly and iteratively edited throughout the interview process but remained largely similar from the start to the end of the process. The interviews always began with the same question which asked participants to “tell me the story of your dual career journey, starting from when and where you met your partner to where you are today.” This question elicited the narrative of their journey and allowed the researcher to focus future questions and ask follow-up questions as needed. Additional interview questions asked about strategies for navigation, support or advice they had received, difficult decisions they had made, compromises they had made, emotions they felt along the way, what impact being part of a dual career couple had on their career, and what they would change, if anything. At the end of the interview, they were given a chance to share anything else about their journey or any thoughts they wanted to share about dual careers in general. Interview lengths ranged from 45 to 150 min with most being less than 75 min.
 

## Data Analysis
The audio file from Zoom was downloaded and the associated video file was deleted. The audio file was uploaded to Otter.ai to generate the transcriptions. All audio files and transcriptions for each participant were stored under a pseudonym (Greek alphabet) and not the participant's name. A key linking the participant's name and their pseudonym was kept by the researcher in a secure location. The author edited the transcription as she relistened to the audio file, and then generated a blinded version of the transcript for use in the study. The blinded version removed any reference to specific institutions, mentor names, significant others’ names, etc. to deidentify information as much as possible. Specific topical areas of research were also blinded if they were a niche research area. These blinded transcriptions were sent to the participants so they could review them and tell the researcher if there were additional pieces of information to remove, which happened in one instance. This was one step of a process called “member checking,” which was intended to increase trustworthiness of the data ( ). After the transcriptions were confirmed, the audio files were removed from the author's computer and the transcription website.
Initial analysis proceeded as the interviews were being conducted to continually check the rigor of the interview questions and participant responses. These analyses included editing and blinding the transcripts, which usually took 1–2 d per participant. The analytic approach was thematic qualitative analysis ( ) where segments of participant interviews were categorized (or coded) as having similar ideas to other participants. To conduct this process, the researcher listened to each interview and edited the transcription while noting significant ideas being articulated. She then read the interview as she blinded information and again took notes on ideas and perceptions of that participant. Finally, she read through the transcript a third time and highlighted interesting or insightful segments of the interview. Through this process, the researcher created a document for each participant that summarized the interview information, highlighted interesting ideas from the interview, and included written notes. After analyzing the fourth participant interview, the researcher created and started adding to a separate document to compile initial code ideas for the dataset, drawing from her existing participant notes to create this initial list. Codes included in this document were ideas that were expressed by multiple participants. As she progressed through the participant interviews, these code ideas were continually added to, redescribed, and regrouped into broader ideas by reading and rereading the interviews and participant notes. The codes started to become similar after about the 10th interview, meaning few new ideas were being articulated. Traditionally, this is a point where the researcher could discontinue data collection because they have reached “saturation” of ideas, but additional interviews had already been conducted and scheduled, and some research has indicated a need to push past this point to reach saturation of meaning ( ). Thus, a decision was made to collect data from those participants and then stop recruitment.
After completing this stage of the analysis, the researcher uploaded the transcripts into NVivo software (13.0, QSR International) so that segments of the interviews could be sorted into the initial codes. These descriptions, names, and scope of the initial draft codes were edited iteratively as data analysis proceeded. This analysis resulted in 26 code categories in which quotes from the interviews were placed. The author then sorted and regrouped the codes, removing codes that were not prevalent among the participants, checking the placement of participant quotes within each code, and writing descriptions of the codes. This process resulted in six overall themes, two of which had subthemes. This process was completed in summer 2022.
An initial codebook with themes and quotes was compiled and sent to the participants to preview the results of the study, a second step of the member checking process ( ). All quotes were listed under pseudonyms, but each participant was given their own pseudonym to locate their data. The researcher asked them to make sure they agreed with the placement of their quotes in the codebook and make a final check for blinded information. None of the participants conveyed concerns. A streamlined version of the codebook containing these themes, subthemes and representative quotes is included as Supplemental Materials.

## RESULTS

## Participants
There were 12 participants who identified as women, and 6 who identified as men ( ). All participants indicated that their relationship was between a man and a woman (some were married, some not), and all participants were currently living in the same location as their partner, although many had lived apart at times. During the interview, 3 of the participants indicated they were born outside of the United States; additional identity information like this is not in , however, to avoid the tendency to infer and generalize experiences across subsets of a small sample. There were three couples in the dataset and each partner conveyed their own narrative. Nine of the participants had achieved tenure or had tenure-track positions at the same institution (or very geographically close institutions) as their partner (the desired ideal). Twelve of the participants had full-time faculty positions (tenure-track or non-tenure-track) in the same location as their partner. Six participants were still seeking full-time faculty positions.
 

## Themes
The six themes identified in the dataset were strategies, negotiations, compromises, apprehensions, reconciliations, and reflections (visually represented in ). The themes of strategies and compromises had subthemes. “Strategies” were how the participants described job search approaches that they thought would maximize the probability of finding jobs together; these strategies had subthemes of seeking advice from others, hiding their partner from institutions, and discussing as a couple how they would search for jobs. “Negotiations” were interactions between the institution making a job offer and the individual requesting a spousal hire as part of their job offer. “Compromises” were the things the couple or individual were willing to give up or gave up in order to live in one place; subthemes included the types of compromises as well as the tensions associated with the compromises. “Apprehensions” were the individual's description of the major emotions they experienced throughout the job search. “Reconciliations” were how the tensions related to the compromises were being experienced and processed. “Reflections” was their retrospective view of their journey and how they felt about the experience now. Additional descriptions of each theme are included in Table A in Supplemental Materials.
 A heatmap shows which participants expressed ideas that contributed to the description of the theme or sub-theme ( ). The theme with the lowest prevalence was “Reflections,” which had contributions from 11 participants. “Strategies - hiding” and “Reconciliations” were talked about by 12 participants. All other themes were informed by at least 13 of the 18 participants. The themes and subthemes are described in detail below with supporting quotes from participants. Quotes were lightly edited for clarity and “…” indicates a phrase was removed to link main ideas.
 

## Strategies (Advice).
Most participants had sought and received advice about how to navigate dual couple searches from a variety of external sources such as graduate student peers and/or faculty members (primarily advisors/mentors). A few participants explicitly said they had not sought advice and some indicated receiving advice they disagreed with, such as not looking for jobs together. The specific areas participants received advice on ranged from application and interview strategies, negotiation tactics, compromises they would need to consider, and the likelihood of finding jobs together.
Mu had a critical conversation with a peer that helped her understand the need to determine priorities, recalling,

She was like, you know, there was someone who was recruiting me to be a postdoc in their lab in [state]. And I told him, I wasn't going to go because my partner lived in [potential city]. And they thought less of me for that decision, right? Like, I didn't make the decision that was totally best for me professionally, I made a decision that was a little bit more holistic and understanding. … And you just need to like figure out what makes you happy and like, just be okay with the fact that people might not like it.

Beta focused on building a network of individuals who could advise her through negotiations, saying,

I've had enough friends who've gone through the negotiation process for getting your spouse or your partner hired. I know enough people who've gone through it, that I would instantly have people that I could talk to about the process.

Pi's advisor helped her understand the idiosyncratic nature of institutional negotiations, saying,

He was good about reiterating to me that, you know, sometimes the money's there and sometimes it's just not. Sometimes there's somebody up above who's open to the idea of another line, sometimes there just isn't. … It was helpful for me to have his perspective that… it wasn't that I wasn't doing enough or hadn't been likable enough during those interviews.

This reassurance and advice were lacking for some of the participants, however. When asked about advice or support she had received, Iota indicated that she had not sought out advice, saying,

Support? Not really. And that's partly because I didn't ask for it. Because I also didn't really feel like I needed it and that's kind of… that's on me.

Almost all the participants were thankful for the discussions and information they received, mentioning the value of having individuals they could talk with during the job search process. For many participants, advice from others informed the discussions they had with their partners to inform their job search strategies.

## Strategies (Search).
The participants relayed many job search strategies, including using positions to build skills for a future hire, even if it meant living apart, and ramping up productivity to increase negotiation power. Most of the strategies, however, centered on job applications, and these strategies often varied. Some participants applied to any job that looked reasonable to them, while others only applied to jobs at institutions where they thought a negotiation could be successful, where they wanted to live, or to institutions in larger cities where other positions might be available. Some couples made choices about who would apply to which jobs, while others would both apply to the same job. In some cases, the partner with the stronger record (e.g., more publications or grants) would explicitly lead the process, with the hopes that their perceived scientific success could be used to leverage a spousal accommodation as part of their hiring.
Epsilon indicated that early in their job searches they were not picky about where they applied, but as they navigated to a second institution, they were more selective. Her recollection was:

I think, initially, we would just apply to everything. And we both sort of just were like… hash it out on the back end. Like is this a place we would move, we don't take that into consideration, we just apply because what we've learned is that you can't be picky, when there's two of you. You have to just see what you get, and then work from there. I think over time, we've gotten more honed in that. …we were only applying to places where we were like, we would move there, right? Like, we like that there is a good department. It's a place we would live. That's, it's, you know, an R1.

The “apply to everything” strategy often led to exhaustion and exasperation, as articulated by Pi,

I have to apply to every position. Every time I'm offered a job, I have to say, can you find a position for my spouse? I don't have another move.

This is in contrast to Iota who had a strategy of only applying to a select group of institutions where she and her spouse would want to live and work, saying,

We were very, very strategic and planned our strategy… we identified a set of institutions that we would be willing to work in. Not because of the institution itself, but where they were located, and if they had the programs that we wanted.

Some couples were open to working at different institutions that might be within easy commuting distance, so they were also strategically applying to nearby institutions. Kappa indicated, for example,

So we were applying all over the place, and she was applying as well, I don't think in the same numbers. And our hope was to A. either stumble across two positions that we could both be satisfied with that were within an hour or so of each other, or B. be attractive enough at some institution where we could say, hey, I've got this partner and I want to try to see what the options are for them. … So, we were both trying that from both angles.

Some realized that there may be no use in applying to small, isolated schools that had little chance of being able to offer a second position. Sigma said that,

I know I just didn't bother applying at some places if it looked like there was no chance that it would work. If it was a tiny little school in the middle of nowhere that certainly wouldn't have a second position. I don't think I bothered applying to those. So we… if we had any strategy, it was to target larger universities, or universities in larger locations.

Finally, Zeta had a unique strategy among the participants where he and his spouse decided to be completely transparent about the fact that they both wanted jobs at the same institution. He indicated,

For us, our goal was always to try to live and work in the same place. To be able to interact on a daily basis. And we made that a priority. We made it a priority when we were looking for postdocs, by making sure we only targeted this one campus. … And then with looking for tenure-track jobs… we put [our dual career status] in our cover letters… we are going to be a unit. And we challenged the colleges and universities to come up with some solution to that.

For most couples, these strategies reflected the reality that finding one faculty job in academia is difficult, but that they were having to look for two jobs. Most of the individuals talked about these strategies emerging from discussions with their partner and individuals who had given them advice. In rare cases, the participant indicated that the couple did not talk or coordinate, they just assumed a default of applying broadly or that one would follow the other. Generally, these strategies emphasized the tensions of trying to look for jobs independently and together at the same time.

## Strategies (Hiding).
Despite being partners and navigating their careers together, almost all participants recognized that one strategy to foster success was to appear as though they were not a couple. This came up in two contexts: in research collaborations and during interviews. Several of the participants acknowledged that their research areas were similar enough to their partners’ that they could collaborate, however, most took steps to not publish together so that their research records would not overlap. Most stated that they did this because of a fear that during negotiations for a second hire they would seem too similar. Delta, Iota, and Nu, however, had collaborated and copublished with their partners and were now concerned that this was causing them issues in job searches or attaining tenure. On the other hand, couples who had strategically not copublished early in their careers felt free to do so once they attained tenure.
Delta indicated that she and her spouse shared the same last name and had published together, and this appeared to become an issue when she negotiated for a position for her spouse. She said,

I've got like a little over 20 publications right now. And I would say, like three or four of those, have [spouse] on them. … I think that was one of the comments from the department head here. When I gave her [spouse]’s application and asked, like, what can you do for him? Or can you do anything for him? Was that we were too similar.

Zeta stated that even though he and his spouse could have published together, they intentionally did not, explaining,

We deliberately did not put each other's names on papers, even if it arguably would have been the right thing to do. And you know, we each influence each other's work, we collaborated on a bunch of things, we cooperate on a bunch of projects. And we made an effort to keep our paper records very distinct. To make it look like if you're hiring two people, you're getting two distinct people.

Almost all participants mentioned the need to hide the existence of their partner during job interviews (including removing a wedding ring) because they had been warned about hiring bias. Some mentioned their discomfort with this act of hiding, and the difficulty of not mentioning their partner during the interview. One participant who decided to be honest about having a partner thought this lost them a job offer. Another explicitly decided to mention their spouse in cover letters and was transparent about the need for spousal accommodation.
Even though Pi played by the rules of not mentioning her partner on an interview, she struggled with it, expressing,

You are advised to take off your wedding ring. Don't mention your spouse, you know, don't even bring that into the equation. But I felt the entire time like I was lying. And I felt that they knew I was hiding something. Like, they didn't know what it was, but they felt I was not being completely open with them. And they were right, I wasn't.

Kappa on the other hand had decided to mention his partner while on an interview because it felt like the right thing to do, and he said in retrospect this had likely cost him a job offer, saying,

I probably preempted an offer by bringing up the fact that I had a spouse that I was interested in bringing along. And they said, well, we're not going to be able to find anything for her. And I said, well, it's kind of important to me that we can find something, and they said, well, okay, thanks for letting us know. And things were pretty promising until then. And so I think I just like, killed my chances at that point.

The reality that dual career couples often have to pretend to be independent because it may impact their abilities to get a job together was a frustrating part of the lived experiences of these participants. They felt it denied them credit for work they had accomplished (in the case of not publishing together) or the ability to be fully themselves on an interview. This step was seen as necessary by most, however, to get a job offer that would allow them to negotiate for their partner.

## Negotiations.
Spousal accommodation requests, where the partner with a job offer asks the institution to provide a position for their partner, were particularly challenging for most participants. Using a job offer to negotiate for a position for a partner is one of the bedrock strategies of dual career couples, yet the experiences of the participants indicated that it was a precarious path. Participants expressed frustration when institutions said that they should not have hidden the existence of a partner early in the job interview, despite the risk they had been told this could introduce to the process. Some institutions refused to even enter into negotiations when a partner was revealed, and participants commented that it would be nice for these institutions to say in the job ad that spousal accommodations could not be made. Other institutions offered adjunct positions or a series of temporary jobs that in some cases eventually led to a tenure-track or clinical permanent position. Stories where one person got a job, and the partner was immediately given a tenure-track job were rare among the participants.
Alpha reflected that when her husband's institution said no to their request, they were too afraid to push back and lose his job offer, explaining,

When my husband got hired, he tried to see if there was any way to hire me at the same time. And there was no way. … he could not just say, “Oh, you can't hire my wife, so I'm not coming.” I mean, it happens to some people I know. But for us, we were grateful one of us had a steady job. He just took the job, knowing that there was nothing for me, at least for now.

One of the surprising findings was institutions chastising the interviewee for not revealing their coupled status earlier. Epsilon recalled the reaction to her revealing her spouse at one institution as,

Are you interested and I said, yes, but I have a spouse. And I remember [search chair] being like, oh, oh… I was like, I know, I'm sorry. He's like, why didn't you tell us that? And I said, because that would hurt me. I'm sorry. it's painful for you now. But it'd be more painful for me to tell you and not get the job of my dreams. So then they came back and said, well, we can't offer [spouse] anything, there isn't anything.

Often, institutions responded by offering part-time or full-time non-tenure-track positions with the promise or hope of something more later. In the case of Rho, the institution offered several sequential positions that did lead eventually to a tenure-track position for him. He indicated the process as,

Initially there was no fixed position for me. They offered me a one-year postdoc position. And continuing that … it was a multi-step process towards eventually creating an ad hoc faculty position. And so, in that process, there was one year as a postdoc, followed by some teaching, and part-time teaching.

Very rarely, an accommodation was made at the time of the initial offer, as occurred with Zeta and his spouse who had put into their cover letter that they were a couple seeking positions at the same institution. He recalled,

I was offered the job, and told come back for your second interview, and that your spouse can come for the same trip. And she'll give a departmental seminar, but we already have a job lined up for her. So we came back here. … And the seminar went well, they offered her a job also and so we've had two tenure-track positions here for a while now.

Omicron described that when he held a tenure-track position and his wife was at a different institution, he sought another job and then used it to negotiate with his department for a tenure-track position for his spouse. He said,

I think it was just by circumstance of [spouse] just being so strong, and just so good. And me having built up a good amount of capital that I remember going and interviewing for a faculty position and getting the offer and telling [my current] Dean that I've gotten an offer. And there was a, I think, a three- or four-day turnaround, where the Dean approved the position for [spouse], the department interviewed [spouse], and [spouse] got an offer within a succession of about a week's time. And by the time that I was possibly thinking about taking this position elsewhere, we had secured a position for [spouse].

Overall, the negotiation responses from institutions were variable for these participants, creating confusion about how the process worked at different institutions. This led to a reliance on leverage or luck, and in some cases blind faith about future possibilities. Often it also required individuals to be willing or able to say no to a job when it was clear it would not work for both partners. Because negotiations rarely led to ideal solutions for the couple, the end result was often a compromise.

## Compromises (Types).
Participants recognized that trying to find academic jobs in the same location was incredibly hard and most knew that compromises would be involved. The types of compromises varied by couple and included living apart for periods of time, accepting a position that was not their ideal, having to take longer to find positions, and/or turning down jobs because of a lack of a spousal accommodation. Some couples had a “together or bust” approach. Often these couples had already lived apart for a time and were unwilling to do so again; this made them more open to accepting compromises. Couples sometimes had to turn down jobs when the institution would not accommodate their partner, and these situations lengthened the process of finding a job together. Other couples were willing to live apart for periods of time to build skills necessary to reach their ultimate goal of being together. They saw this as a “norm” of the dual career process but also thought of it as a temporary situation, such as Theta who said,

We sort of knew that we might have to be apart for a while … until we sort of could figure out where things would land. And I don't remember that being a hard decision to have to make. It was something we just sort of had seen and knew was probably an inevitable part of it.

Others took positions that were not their ideal jobs but recognized that if living together was a priority the position might not be ideal. Eta reflected that he had been focused on getting a research-focused job and eventually gave up that dream so that he could live with his spouse. He indicated,

I don't know if I ever really had dreams of being an R1 researcher but spending three and a half years as a lecturer pretty much kills that. I mean, your research program can't quite keep up. So, in that way, my career was affected… that I was kind of out of research for that time.

Several also mentioned that because finding jobs together was so difficult and often required multiple rounds of job searches, they were delayed in starting faculty jobs. Sigma mentioned,

It made it go on for at least an extra year. And then, you know, you're, you're worrying about not only your own prospects, but also those of your partner.

There was also the reality that individuals sometimes had to turn down a faculty job offer because the institution could not accommodate their partner. As Kappa said,

I had an actual job offer at another school. That would have been, this sounds bad, but it's the way I felt, so whatever. It was my job. I earned that job. The job that I had here was, eh… they're really giving me this job, because they want [spouse] to stay. It felt a little more legitimate that I had my offer, and it was a little more research focused, certainly far more research focused then being adjunct. Giving up that as a direction, that was a tough choice.

Overall, however, most participants were willing to compromise to stay together, as expressed by Nu,

You know, I just want one of us to find a position at this point, I'm willing to compromise, we both are willing to. One of us needs to find a long-term position. And the other, we'll figure out something.

These compromises were not without repercussions, however, and led to tensions that were felt by one or both members of the couple.

## Compromises (Tensions).
Often, participants talked about their perceptions and feelings related to the compromises they or their partner had made. These ranged from a tension that arose because of the compromise (e.g., living apart or getting less in a negotiation than your partner) to feelings of regret about what they had potentially lost (e.g., turning down a job or accepting a nonideal position) to feelings of guilt about what their partner had sacrificed. These feelings indicated an awareness and processing of the compromise that one or both of them had made to be together. These perceptions were particularly poignant when someone felt they had given up their identity as a research scientist to take a job that was less research-focused or were struggling with something their partner had given up. Some mentioned that it felt like a door had been shut on them, or that they were not living up to the training they had received.
Delta, for example, indicated that her spouse would not be able to advance his professional career in the same way she could in her new faculty job, saying,

Because it'll… with just his adjunct status. I mean, it's gonna make it infinitely harder for him to, like, grow in the same way that my CV will.

Participants sometimes talked about giving up something that was important to their identity, for example, Kappa talked about how he had to give up his ideal of a research job to take the job at his spouse's small liberal arts institution, indicating,

I feel obligated to premise this with, I'm really happy here. And I'm very grateful that I'm here… But it's not the place that I envisioned when I was a PhD student or postdoc. And it certainly, although I love it here, and I want to stay here, it's not my ideal job. No, but very few people get their ideal job, right? Would I be searching around for my ideal job in the meantime, if I was not in a dual career couple? Absolutely. Like I would have been applying for other places. So, there's certainly a lot of compromises that we've made along the way there, too.

In the case of Lambda, who had moved from a tenure-track position at her previous institution to take a non-tenure-track position at her spouse's institution, she struggled with the change in her job status, expressing,

The hardest part of making this compromise was the change in title. We have such an ingrained… Like the ethos of academia is the Golden Apple of tenure. And the fact that I will still probably always have a job here because of what I do, and you know, and that it will be permanent, and then it's probably just as secure, or at least almost as secure as a tenured job, doesn't… There's this part of me and this part of the culture that I find extremely difficult to process still. And there is an otherness that comes from it, that is much bigger than… I sort of told myself, it wasn't a big deal and living it, it is a big deal. And I think that's a very interesting element of the compromise.

Omicron found himself struggling with leaving an administrative position to take a position at another institution with his spouse where his salary and start-up were far less. He expressed,

And it was just like reimagining ourselves and reimagining the balance of what work was like and what family was going to be like. … And I'll say again, it's like, four years after the fact, where it's all misty… we'll say we negotiated that really well… And I'm like No, it was really tough.

For Rho, the tension was in leaving his postdoc position to be with and support his wife in her new faculty position. Even though he eventually got a postdoc position at his wife's institution, there were downsides to that decision, as he said,

And then I guess, for me, choosing to come to [current institution] and figuring out whether I should… try to stay for as long as possible in my postdoc before coming and, should I give up something that was not a permanent position, but at least a position? And not that this is a huge motivator, but take a massive pay cut, because the salaries in [country] are unionized and it was like a 40% pay cut.

Because compromises were often made in their professional lives, and even though the couples thoroughly discussed these decisions, the individuals in this study still expressed personal disappointment, sadness, and regret that lingered as part of the dual career job search process.

## Apprehensions.
Participants expressed a variety of emotions when discussing their job search navigations and the choices they had made, and although relief or excitement was mentioned when a job was found, most emotions were negative. These perceptions were elicited by an interview question asking them about emotions they had experienced during the job search experience (thus making these reflections more holistic than specific feelings about compromises they had made). The emotions they discussed often ranged from expressions of anxiety, stress, and worry, to desperation, devastation, grief, or guilt—hence an overall feeling of apprehension. Although these emotions can be experienced by anyone during any academic job search, the experiences of dual career couples are compounded by having the emotional experiences of two individuals to consider. In some cases, these emotions were in opposition, such as when one received a job offer but realized that their partner was not going to get an ideal opportunity. These conflicting emotions resulted in a later need to reconcile how they felt about the situation. Participants mentioned that many of their apprehensions took up mental space at times of career transitions or during job searches. The most anxiety-inducing situations were when both members of the couple had instability in their jobs.
Participants mostly acknowledged emotions taking up their mental headspace as they were searching for jobs. Kappa mentioned the constant unsettling feeling of not knowing whether his position at his wife's institution would be renewed again, saying,

I would get a contract that would go for two years, which said, we're probably not going to fire you over the next two years. And then next year, you get another one. That is, we're probably not going to fire you over the next two years. But there's no guarantees. Did you see the Princess Bride? I'm sure. You remember the whole Wesley story, like, gonna kill you tomorrow, but good night. That's what it felt a lot like. So, once I got to the tenure-track phase, there was a little bit of relief. But certainly not in the seven years before that.

Lambda talked about the emotion she continues to feel about leaving a tenure-track position to take a non-tenure-track at her husband's institution, and how much of that emotion is wrapped up in the loss of that identity for her, saying,

I'm sure there are other jobs like this. I think so. But we take it so… we are our jobs…. that's been like probably my biggest challenge since I moved and changed jobs is to try to say, well, I'm not just my job anymore. I used to be, but I feel like now I need to like not be just my job.

Theta expressed feeling guilty because she had found a faculty position before her husband, who had to subsequently compromise on many of his professional dreams. She described her feelings as,

one that I can think of, is, in some ways, feeling a little guilty, … because I've been more of the lucky one in getting stuff and so feeling like, maybe [spouse] was having to compromise more than me. And so that's been something I've kind of thought about and dealt with.

Nu mentioned feeling anchorless and worried about money and stability, saying,

I feel like if we were not dual career people then… maybe if he had a really good career, like a stable one, something that really, you would never have to worry about, money let's say. Then in a way it would be really nice for me because I knew there's one anchor point. And I can plan accordingly. It would make the decisions much easier. Because now we have two, you know, anchorless points. … I'd really like to have this one place to call home and not worry about the next grant that needs to come in and all of that.

Finally, Ksi expressed her emotion as a grief for the position and potential she felt she had lost, saying,

It feels like grief, and I feel sort of foolish saying that. Because there's much bigger grief in the world. And I'm really, really thankful I don't have them. And I have some griefs that are bigger than this one, right, like the loss of a loved one this year, but you know, it feels like grief, and it feels like this prolonged grief. And it's not. It's not what I would wish. It's not what I think all the people who are doing it would wish for us.

Participants often talked about the shared emotions that the couple felt, but in some cases, it was clear that the feelings they were expressing were not necessarily those they had shared with their partner. They were private feelings about the process. As much as partners navigate together, there were still emotional places of isolation.

## Reconciliations.
Almost all of the participants indicated that despite any compromises that had been made along the journey, they were happy with how things had worked out (notable exceptions were Ksi and Nu). All participants were currently living with their partners, which was their stated goal, and although they may not have achieved their professional ideal, their prioritization of living with their partner had been achieved. As they talked through their feelings about their current situation, they focused on the things they had gained from their experiences and expressed hope for the future.
Alpha, for example, talked about being thankful that she was exposed to other types of positions in academia and, despite her disappointment in her faculty application outcomes, she was thankful to be with her family, expressing,

So far, you know, I'm happy with my decisions. And even the hard decisions, like in terms of not taking this visiting assistant professor position…. But that means being apart again, and that is just out of the question. So no, I can't think of anything I would change. No.

Beta was hopeful about the potential for she and her partner to finally attain positions after their strategic moves to build skills, and she said,

All of this very detailed planning for, you know, a decade… actually paid off. I think it can pay off in other ways, like, I'm coming more to terms with accepting the idea that we may not both end up in academia. But I think no matter what, you know, we'll be using this decade of scientific skill development in whatever job we land together. And that to me is going to count as a success. And so, I think when that can happen, when we land those permanent or semi-permanent jobs at the same place at the same time, that's going to be great. We'll get a dog finally.

Even those participants who had taken less than ideal positions were focused on the reasons why they had taken the position and expressed a reconciliation that it was the right decision to make. Kappa said,

… if I think back to the time where I said, do I want to be a researcher first, or do I want to be an educator first? I would have said I made a sacrifice to be an educator to end up here. Looking back on it now, and I don't think this is just sour grapes, I think looking back on it now, I'm better off. I'm a better fit for where I am now than if I were at R1 kind of institution.

Lambda expressed that compromise is necessary and in the grand scheme of things, hers had been a good choice, saying,

I think there are people who would look at what I have done and consider me, not a failure, but like that I gave up too much or that I didn't, you know… I did something wrong, and that's why I'm in this spot. As opposed to, wow, like my supervisor said, you have a two-body problem and a 1.9-body solution. That's pretty good. You know, life isn't perfect. And I think compromise is part of the story. And I have seen other folks compromise in very different ways.

For the sake of being together at some point, participants often gave up something personal or professional, but they did this intentionally and often through discussion, and this seemed to allow them to process and accept that they had made the right choice as a couple, even if it would not have been the choice they would have made as an individual.

## Reflections.
Having started or gone through their dual career navigations, many participants had retrospective thoughts about navigating the process, advice they wanted to share with others going through this process, or advice they would give to institutions to help other dual career couples in the future. In fact, many participants said they volunteered because they wanted to contribute to something that would help others navigate this dual career struggle in the future. Many pieces of advice were specific strategies for applications or negotiations, or a general desire for people to know that there are many ways to make the process work. However, many lamented the lack of information on this topic and thought that there was a need to shine a light on dual career couple navigations instead of treating the topic as taboo. Participants felt generally frustrated by institutional inability to address spousal couple issues or to seeing these hires as something that was a problem instead of an opportunity. They advocated for more transparency and guidance at an institutional level.
The last question of the interview often elicited reflections on their navigations or what they would advise others to do. These were often informed by their own experiences, and thus served as a summary of what they had learned. Rho, for example, expressed that,

I think, given our experience, but also watching others’ experience, it seems like often things work out, but the pathways there can be really kind of idiosyncratic. And figuring out the context and what you want, and what your bounds are, and how you want to go through it, seems really important.

Omicron advocated for more information to be shared about the dual career navigation process so that couples would be aware of strategies and approaches. He said,

And there's just so much mystery to it. If light is shed upon it, and it becomes more obvious, I think it would advance the conversation and the dynamic tremendously. … if there was just more general knowledge about how this unfolds and what people's experiences had been.

Others talked about changes that institutions could enact that would ease the process for future dual career couples. For example, Epsilon wanted institutions to shift the way they see dual career couples, saying,

And what I'd love to see change in institutions is this idea of a dual career problem. I want it to be seen as a dual career opportunity. Because most women that have PhDs that are applying for jobs, have a spouse, you know, that has a degree. And if you want women, which is an opportunity, dual career should be exciting.

Zeta explicitly called out institutions for not having a plan for dual career hiring, saying,

And universities can't stick their head in the sand anymore. They know. They're going to be getting applications from dual career couples. It's inevitable. And they better have some plan for dealing with it, because it's going to happen.

These reflections expressed the frustration that these participants saw with the process of dual career couple hiring, but also that they were hopeful that the process could change to become easier for future couples.

## DISCUSSION
This study explored the personal experiences of biologists who were part of a couple seeking academic jobs together, providing insight into how the participants experienced and made meaning of this process. Although all of the participants were currently living in the same location as their partner, most articulated myriad struggles and compromises over their journeys; some were still midjourney and in the midst of these struggles. Despite their different journeys and outcomes, there were several commonalities among their experiences, including: the need to identify and enact strategies for the job search, the complexity of negotiating for a second job, the recognition of compromise as a central feature of the dual career experience, the emotional toll of the process, and the work to reconcile compromises. These represent both cognitive processes and emotional reactions. There was an overarching thread of confusion and frustration in navigating a system that was not built for two; and a desire for more clarity and guidance to support couples ( ). These findings may be starting points for professional development for dual career couples to help them better understand the problem-solving and coping skills that will support their job searches.
The themes of strategies, negotiations, and compromises reflected the cognitive processes couples used to guide their navigations and were often enacted via communication between the partners. This need for communication is a common recommendation for dual career couples ( ; ). Communication helped them set priorities for their personal and professional lives and decide on strategies to find jobs together. The participants in this study all wanted academic careers in the same location as their partner; most understood the challenge and used communication to optimize their job search strategies, advocate for themselves and their partner, and weigh compromises. Couples who did not communicate as effectively seemed to hit stumbling blocks by not seeking advice, not hiding a partner, or not discussing compromises.
The themes of apprehensions, reconciliations, and reflections suggested that affect was a common presence for these participants, resulting in uncertainty, worry, and feelings of instability as they searched for jobs with their partner. The need to cognitively manage the search together seemed to increase the emotional costs for many. Participants referred to the search as a struggle, fraught with unknown outcomes. They knew that they could do everything right and still not get jobs together. Those who successfully found jobs together often felt a sense of relief, although the need to attain tenure loomed. For many, finally achieving the jobs they wanted together took longer than they would have liked. And those who compromised professionally were sometimes still struggling with a perceived loss of their potential. Hardly anyone was untouched emotionally by the process and these feelings seemed to drive their perceptions that institutions needed to change to make the process less fraught for couples ( ).

## Individual versus Joint Narratives
This study intentionally interviewed individuals and not couples to get a single individual's perspective about the dual job search experience, as opposed to the joint perspectives collected by and . Despite this methodological difference, this study affirmed their findings that the process of going through a dual career search was cognitively and emotionally difficult, and explicitly conavigated. This cognitive collaboration is likely because of the need to align their expectations and search strategies and make joint decisions when offers were on the table ( ). Participants in this study told their individual story, but their partner was always part of the narrative. Although there is no way to know how the narratives would differ if the participants in this study were interviewed with their partners, the stories of six of the individuals who comprised three partners in this study were often unique perspectives of the same story; the journeys were the same, but the aspects they highlighted and how they felt about and reflected on those events was different. This suggests that each partner's narrative incorporates aspects of how they feel, what they know their partner feels, and how they think their partner feels, which introduces opportunities for divergence in the meaning they make from the same journeys. Therefore, more work should be done on individual versus joint narratives for dual career couples, and the extent to which couples share or hide aspects of their narratives with each other, and how other social systems influence this process.

## Advice for an Idiosyncratic System
In asking participants about the advice and supports they received, it seemed clear that information-gathering was a critical strategy. Peers and faculty mentors ( ) were the primary sources of advice, with many noting that there was little information to be found from other sources. Some also mentioned that advice from older faculty was not useful because the academic job search process for dual career couples has changed over time ( ; ). Although many received good advice that they discussed and used to inform their job search strategies, they were often confused by different standards across institutions that rendered the advice they had gotten useless. They were advised not to mention a partner until an offer was made, and then told by an institution that they should have revealed them sooner. The idiosyncratic and hidden rules were a source of frustration, especially regarding having to hide your partner, as has been noted by others ( ; ; ). Omicron called it “dual careers in the mist” because of the opaqueness of the process. Participants felt constrained by a system that sometimes indicated that one person giving up their professional potential was an acceptable sacrifice. Given that women are more likely to turn down jobs or have family pressures placed on them ( ; ; ) this has a potential for gendered outcomes.

## Stigma of Compromise
Besides the inherent uncertainty of the job search process, the major driver of emotion for individuals was compromise. Knowing cognitively that compromise might be required did not necessarily lessen the emotional toll it took when it was experienced ( ; ). These participants knew they were giving up something to be together with their partner, yet the word “but” lingered in the conversation. It is this aspect of the job search process that might be best probed in individual interviews versus both partners. The feelings of compromise were described as loss, not living up to your potential, giving up a dream. Some were still struggling with the loss, some were reconciling it, and some were satisfied with their choice. As much as couples talked about strategies for job searches and anticipated decisions, it seems that reconciling a compromise was not something couples talked about in advance. Perhaps this was because to discuss it would be to focus on the negative side of a positive outcome. Information and advice for couples about how to cope with professional compromise in the face of dual career job searches may be a critical point of professional development.

## Family Factors
No explicit interview questions asked about gender identity or family status as a factor in the job searches because it was not the intention of this study to explore those factors. However, some participants did mention children and family as part of their narrative. Some women mentioned that they were navigating together because they had or wanted children. Two women explicitly mentioned that children were “off the table” for them because it would make conavigating too difficult. Some chose job locations to be near parents or other family members. These mentions of children and family occurred more often for women participants, but there may have been disclosure bias because the interviewer was also a woman. In contrast to some findings ( ; ), this study did not identify differential outcomes that favored men, nor did women highlight perceptions of systemic bias in the search processes. However, the 3 participants who were most unsatisfied with their outcomes were women. Some participants mentioned assumptions that the woman was the “trailing” spouse, even if they were not, or biases in authorship contributions when copublishing; both were in situations where the partner was a more senior man ( ). The fact that family emerged without prompting in at least half of the interviews suggests that this is an additional consideration couples navigate during their job searches, a factor already prominent in the dual career literature ( ; ; ).
Further research is needed to explicate the cognitive and emotional factors related to families that compound the dual career job search. Research suggests that gendered and racialized norms assume family sacrifices by women ( ; ; ; ), yet there is not enough information about how these family sacrifices might explicitly be intertwined with sacrifices for academic jobs made during dual career searches. Surveys might suggest a link between having children and the likelihood of being a trailing spouse, but interview studies are needed to explore the extent to which family responsibility is an explicit factor discussed by the couple during a job search, and how it impacts navigations and potential sacrifices. This study also only talked with individuals in heterosexual partnerships, leaving open the question of whether sexual and gender minority couples might have talked about family in similar or different ways ( ).

## Implications and Path Forward
Many of the couples in this study were cognitively engaged in the planning, communicating, and problem-solving needed to navigate a job search for two. But not every couple had done that work, and there were situations that arose that stymied even those who had prepared themselves. Professional development for couples seeking jobs together could decrease the burden of preparation for this idiosyncratic process and help eliminate inequities between couples who receive advice and those without advice networks. Professional development programming could be offered by individual departments to serve both graduate students and postdoctoral scholars such as reading dual career literature and advice columns ( ; ). St. Clair and colleagues ( ) documented the link between career search self-efficacy of doctoral trainees and academic career trajectories and identified the need for career support at the institutional level, suggesting that graduate schools could also be a home for this programming. Certainly, mentoring and advising should also play a role, especially given the positive role of advisors in successful job searches ( ), but reliance on individuals could perpetuate a system of inequity of information.
Suggestions for academic job search programs often focus on aspects of cognitive reflection related to the job search, as well as emotional support through the uncertainty of the process ( ). Thus, professional development for graduate students or postdocs could easily include optional sessions for dual career couples that could provide cognitive guidance on the types of questions individuals need to ask themselves, questions couples need to discuss with each other, questions they can ask other dual career couples, and questions they can ask during and after the search process to support their career searches ( ). These sessions could include panels with recent dual career hires and focus on unveiling the level of communication and types of problem-solving couples will face. There also needs to be explicit focus on emotional support. Professional development about the types of emotions that will likely surface during dual career job searches could provide couples the tools to talk about and prepare for feelings of frustration, worry, anxiety, guilt that may emerge and how to cope with these feelings together ( ; ). In particular, couples need to address the specter of compromise and not only decide what compromises are acceptable, but how each might react to being the one who makes that compromise.
Finally, institutions also need to examine processes that create systemic burdens on couples. Particularly in the sciences, the need for spousal accommodations is very common and a response that differs from institution to institution (or even hire by hire) creates idiosyncrasies that leave individuals at a loss to understand the system ( ). Institutions need to build more clarity around these hiring processes, and transparently provide this information as they post the job ad. Institutions are of course run by people; and people who lack awareness of dual career challenges are unlikely to effect change. The stories from participants in this sample who were chastised or blamed for not revealing a partner earlier in the hiring process suggest that this lack of awareness creates the potential for stigmatization of the individuals in dual career partnerships. Therefore, more dual career couples need to tell their stories and advocate for their institutions to see couples as an opportunity instead of a problem ( ). These stories should articulate the ways in which dual career couples add value and are institutional strengths versus allowing the narrative to focus on perceived deficits and challenges. When it comes to negotiations for a position, a spousal accommodation should be viewed as a normal and reasonable request that is part of the conditions that will support the success of the candidate they are hiring. Just as academic institutions need to rethink how they frame problems such as student “achievement gaps” ( ), they also need to transform “dual career problems” into “dual career opportunities,” as voiced by Epsilon. Given this, raising institutional awareness centered on dual career hiring is a systemic need across the United States ( ).

## Limitations/Future Investigations
All qualitative studies are bound by the experiences of the sample. In this case, these stories of 18 individuals certainly do not represent the totality of all dual career couple experiences. Therefore, their experiences should not be generalized to all dual career couples. Some may worry that the inclusion of three couples may have created duplication of findings within the sample, but their stories were unique and if one member of each couple were removed, the thematic findings were robust across the participants. Even if a study was being conducted to explicitly compare the similarities and differences between the stories of a dual career couple, it would be almost impossible to disentangle why their stories were the same or different. For example, in this study, the fact that they knew their partner was also being interviewed may have influenced what they told me even though I emphasized that each story was being treated separately.
The biggest limitation of this study is also the area most open to future investigation: the inability to capture all demographic groups’ experiences. Only those in heterosexual relationships volunteered for the study, leaving a continued gap in the experiences of same gender partners in terms of dual career navigations ( ). This was curious given that the recruitment verbiage explicitly invited participants of all gender identities and marital status, with the only requirement being that they were in a committed relationship. Although identity data beyond preferred pronouns were not collected, there did not seem to be as much diversity in race, ethnicity, or nationality, as typically exists in the scientific field. These data were not collected, however, nor was there a way to ascertain hidden identities. The study likely represents a small subset of perspectives from those who have traditionally been in the majority in science. The need for a study on dual career experiences of those who are part of historically marginalized and stigmatized groups (of any types, including sexual and gender minority, race/ethnicity, nationality, disability status, etc.) may reveal differences in the experiences of these groups that would be important considerations for mentoring. Studies that investigate intersectionality of identities are also needed because there may be unique ways that these groups experience their career intentions and job searches that are not represented by looking at single identities only ( ; ).
Although this study was expansive in its invitation for participant couples, its sample hints at the need to advertise intentionally for more diverse perspectives. Using the listserv of a professional society to recruit may have biased the sample toward those in tenure-track research positions, and certainly may have excluded those who left academia or have academic positions focused on teaching. Recruiting from a professional networking site (e.g., linkedin) may be one way to avoid an academic bias in the sample. The method of interviewing participants also limited the sample, both in number, and perhaps also willingness to share experiences. Surveys can provide higher levels of confidentiality or even anonymity to reduce perceived threats of disclosing personal experiences. Surveys also have the advantage of collecting larger samples and providing opportunities for more generalizations across demographic groups. There is a great need to expand participant voice in studies on dual career couple accommodations so that what is “known to be true” does not unintentionally leave out groups who have been historically marginalized in science.

## Conclusion
This study identified several cognitive and emotional processes common to 18 biologists searching for an academic job in science with a partner. The need to mix personal and professional for these individuals added extra labor to an already difficult job search process. Participants found themselves trying to force a job search system designed for one, into accommodating two, with little understanding of the rules of the game. Many had to give up part of their professional aspirations to live together as a couple, although there were several stories of success. These results point to a critical need to educate individuals, couples, and institutions about the ways in which unclear practices and policies create differential burdens on this significant group of future faculty. Dual career couples are a reality in academia and institutions should work to clarify a path for them in the academy; as Zeta said, “it's not simple. It's not likely to ever be simple, but when it works, it's really rewarding.”

## Supplementary Material

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Many thanks to Dr. Maryrose Weatherton, Hope Ferguson, Bailey Von der Mehden, and Dr. Caroline Wienhold for edits and advice on this project and feedback on the manuscript. The author thanks her university for the professional leave that afforded her the time to complete the interviews and analyses. And to the participants who generously shared their experiences about their personal journeys; I wish you all personal and professional joy.