pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC10096233PMC10096233.110096233100962333704345810.1371/journal.pone.0284166PONE-D-22-319441Research ArticleSocial SciencesSociologyCommunicationsMarketingAdvertisingComputer and Information SciencesCryptographyPhysical SciencesMathematicsCryptographySocial SciencesEconomicsCommercePaymentPhysical SciencesMathematicsApplied MathematicsAlgorithmsResearch and Analysis MethodsSimulation and ModelingAlgorithmsSocial SciencesSociologyConsortiaSocial SciencesEconomicsCommerceVendorsSocial SciencesEconomicsHealth EconomicsMedicine and Health SciencesHealth CareHealth EconomicsComputer and Information SciencesData ManagementBlockTicket: A framework for electronic tickets based on smart contract
BlockTickethttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-9358-1323AldweeshAmjadInvestigationSoftware 
Affiliation College of Computer Science and IT, Shaqra University, Shaqra, Saudi Arabia
ShuaibMohammedEditor ]. Blockchain’s distinctive qualities as a functioning scheme include its immutability, timestamping, and the elimination of the need to trust a central authority.
Permissionless blockchains and permissioned blockchains are the two main architectural styles for blockchains. The public blockchain, which Bitcoin and Ethereum belong to, allows anybody with internet access to view and update transaction records in real time (i.e., there is no membership requirement). Permission blockchains [ ] are different since they are exclusive to a select group of people. A new block is confirmed by the network once it has been added to the chain according to a predetermined protocol. Various blockchains use different consensus protocols, each with their own unique implementation details (such as proof of work or POW). For instance, a consensus in a public blockchain may take the shape of a hash puzzle, the solution to which is locating a fixed hash value.
However, the increased security this consensus process provides to the chain comes at the expense of computational power and time (it can resist up to 50% rogue nodes). For example, Bitcoin can only handle 7 transactions per second at most, and obtaining final consensus can take up to an hour. Permission blockchains, on the other hand, use a voting-based Byzantine fault-tolerant algorithm as its consensus mechanism, such as Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance (PBFT) or Stellar Consensus Protocol (SCP), which avoids the need for computationally expensive hash puzzles. This results in a larger transaction throughput because consensus may be reached more quickly. However, permissioned blockchains typically necessitate the trustworthiness of more than two-thirds of nodes, as opposed to 51%. Consensus algorithms are discussed in greater depth in [ ].

## Electronic ticketing
E-ticketing systems were divided by Vives-Guasch et al. [ ] into those that used smart cards and those that didn’t. Ticketing services are restricted in the smart-card-based systems [ ], which rely on contacting and contact-less smart cards as the medium. For systems that don’t rely on smart cards, the user interface is typically a mobile phone, which is capable of a wider range of tasks than a smart card. This research focuses on the second sort of scheme, the ticket system. Issuer, user, collector, and a third-party supplier [ , , ] are the usual players in an e-ticketing system. The contents of a ticket are determined by the issuer, who then makes and distributes the ticket to the buyer. The user presents the ticket to the collector, who then transfers the items or provides the service to the user in exchange for payment. A ticket may be transferred between users, and the original purchaser and holder need not be different people.
A trustworthy third party is required to verify the issuer, user, and collector’s transaction in order to prevent fraud. The third party could be the platform’s host or it could just be in charge of verifying trades. Hu et al. [ ] suggested Uni-ticket, a unified electronic ticketing platform that supports several ticketing formats. The Uni-ticket system connects with both individual and corporate user ends, and it is built on a reliable third-party platform. Individuals can make queries and reservations via their smartphones, while businesses can distribute and manage tickets online. Every deal is handled by the master server and recorded in the master database. The system as a whole will be rendered inoperable if the main database goes down. Further, dishonest actors can accomplish their fraud goals by penetrating the system’s central database and altering the data there.
There is a lack of mutual trust in the ticket system, so a rigorous authentication procedure is necessary to ensure that ticket holders are who they claim to be. Multiple sources of verification for tickets ensures that individuals in need receive actual services. People can attend events with tickets issued by the government or non-profit organizations.
Given the complexity of the system and the number of entities involved, the question of how to foster trust among them is crucial. In the past, fraudulent agro-dealers had delayed payments to legitimate ones because they had defrauded the government’s monetary system [ ]. The administrative procedure is also slow because the authorized list must be shared among numerous industries. There is a problem with the e-ticketing system in that beneficiary lists are often submitted late, delaying the delivery and activation of e-cards [ ].

## Related work
This section provides a summary and analysis of existing blockchain-based solutions for E-tickets and Digital-contents, as well as an overview of the relevant work in this area.
There are a few distinct ways that distributed ledger technology have been put into use for decentralized e-commerce, e-government and e-contents. Distributed Hash Tables (DHTs) and the Inter Planetary File System (IPFS) [ ] on a peer-to-peer network are used by Open Bazaar (www.openbazaar.com), a decentralized access web, to store and deliver products to a searching user. Payments can be made with Bitcoin or Zcash thanks to the framework’s cryptocurrency support. Unlike other systems, Open Bazaar does not make modular distinctions between jobs. It is instead strongly integrated by a decentralized application. Prasad et al. [ ] proposed utilizing the Ethereum blockchain to record purchasers’ bids and automate the auctioning and payment processing in an eBay-styled auction use case. IPFS also serves as a repository for critical data and files. When using Beaver [ ], customers can shop in complete secrecy. The strategy utilizes a payment system and a reputation system to operate. Non-interactive zero-knowledge proofs [ ] and linkable ring signatures [ ] are used in a secret-keeping manner to connect the entities supplying a reputation assertion to the statement itself. This strategy treats customers and sellers in a different way. More nuanced role distinctions are not made.
Access between users and a public pool of critical data is made easier with the blockchain-based paradigm presented in [ ]. The basic goal of the approach was to provide a safe means of sharing data while keeping its confidentiality intact. There was a lack of clarity regarding the protocols and algorithms required for inter-entity communication and authentication. In order to protect patients’ confidentiality, the authors of [ ] proposed a blockchain-based system for exchanging health records. The authors used cloud storage and blockchain indexes to get around the centralized data storage issue. To protect users’ anonymity when exchanging data, we employed a signature technique for extracting relevant information and an attribute-based access control approach. In addition, smart contracts were outlined to specify permissions and provide secure data access. The authors of [ ] suggest a system for the safe exchange of PHI that is based on the blockchain. An enhanced capacity for medical diagnosis inspired the development of this paradigm. Specifically, private and consortium blockchains are used in the work suggested. The former is employed for the actual storage of PHI, while the latter is employed for the maintenance of indexes to such data. Protected health information (PHI) and patient identities are secured with a keyword search method employing public key encryption. When applied to medical diagnostics, the provided methodology guaranteed enhancement. However, we don’t utilize a system that looks for conjunctive keywords.
Authors in [ ] developed a blockchain-based paradigm for safe data sharing in V2V networks (VANETs). The suggested framework is referred to as a consortium blockchain-based data storage and sharing system. Digital signatures and bilinear pairing methods are used to guarantee the authenticity and consistency of the data in the proposed model. Vehicles that take part in data sharing are rewarded with “data coins” for reliable data transfer. With the proposed model, securely sharing and storing data was guaranteed. However, verification of the cars’ authenticity is ignored. On order to ensure the safety of data exchanged between vehicles in a network, the authors of [ ] implemented a consortium blockchain model. A reputation-based methodology is employed to ensure that only high-quality data is shared. The reputation system described uses a three-weight subjective approach for management. Security analysis is also carried out in the planned task, which helps to spread safety and trust.
A blockchain-based paradigm for cloud service providers to share data was proposed by the authors of [ ]. The proposed architecture made use of smart contracts and an access control policy to efficiently track the actions of data owners and revoke access in the event of rule and permission violation. With the suggested approach, cloud service providers could safely accomplish data provenance and auditing, and users could safely share medical data without worrying about the privacy of their data.
In [ ], authors presented a data-sharing platform that integrates IPFS, Ethereum’s blockchain, and ABE to secure and share data. The model’s primary goal was to enable secure, granular data access management. Finally, the issue of the cloud server not delivering the correct search results was fixed, and a keyword search feature was added to the cipher text of the distributed storage system. The system lacked, however, the definition of the mechanism by which user permission revocation to update access policy might be implemented. In [ ], the authors suggested a system for mobile crowd-sensing that combines blockchain technology with deep reinforcement learning for secure data gathering and sharing. Distributed ledger technology (blockchain) was implemented to allow for data sharing amongst mobile terminals with varying levels of security.
In [ ], the authors recommend using a system called MedBlock to manage all of the patients’ personal information. To implement the proposed concept, blockchain and distributed ledger technology were utilized. The suggested approach used a consensus mechanism to decrease both energy use and network congestion. When it comes to securely transmitting sensitive medical information, the authors state that MedBlock was a crucial component.
In [ ] order to address these concerns, the developers of Privacy-Preserving Auction Scheme [ ] suggested a solution (PPAS). Two separate entities—the auctioneer and the intermediate platform—form the third party in the proposed concept. In the suggested paradigm, an auction is conducted utilizing homomorphic encryption. An improved approach, Enhanced PPAS, is presented to further strengthen security (EPPAS). The robustness of the two proposed methods is evaluated against a variety of attacks. To ensure the practicability of the proposed methods, extensive performance evaluations were conducted. To ensure the safety of Lightweight Clients, the authors of [ ] devised a secure service provisioning approach (LCs). Using blockchain technology, the network is protected and users’ personal information is kept private.
For e-government, real estate and e-cities, blockchain has been deployed to solve different issues. The real estate industry is invaluable to a country’s economy and society [ ]. Registering property and assets is one of the emerging uses of Blockchain technology in e-governance [ ]. Smart contracts on the blockchain allow for instant, verifiable transactions between parties. More and more people in the research and development communities are interested in designing and coding frameworks and infrastructures for land registry systems that utilize Blockchain technology [ ]. These safe and open systems support the transfer of ownership and mortgage registration. Land records kept with Blockchain technology are more trustworthy and reliable, contributing to the growth of national wealth [ ]. The real estate industry is notoriously slow, but blockchain technology may help speed things up by replacing time-consuming human processes. There is no need to stress over document duplication, or loss [ ]. Blockchain technology can significantly lower the cost of asset registries since it eliminates the need for middlemen [ ]. More importantly, Blockchain technology can be used to detect and halt unlawful or shadow real estate transactions [ ].
Recent years have seen the introduction of blockchain technology in E-Ticket systems, which brings with it the benefits of decentralization, security, and trust. To stop “ticket theft from posted photographs” from disclosing vital information about tickets, the author of [ ] examined E-Ticket systems in a narrow context and proposed a blockchain-based solution. Using a smart contract, we were able to implement the ticketing system. However, the organization retains discretion over the final ticket status. Using Ethereum and smart contracts, the author of [ ] developed a protocol for blockchain-based E-Ticket systems, and implemented a blockchain-based BTS for electronic ticketing.
In addition, the authors of [ , ] investigate the use of blockchain technology and cloud hosting in an electronic ticketing system. The author modified the previous blockchain protocol in [ ]. The upgraded Rollerchain uses the sharding technique and PBFT algorithm, resulting in a blockchain protocol with high efficiency, slow cubical dilatation, small capacity expansion, and good scalability; this protocol is called pruneable sharding-based blockchain. With these alterations, blockchain may become even more useful to us. In addition, in [ , ], the authors analyzed a variety of topics based on characteristics of the e-ticketing system. Invaluable advancements have been made in the computerized ticketing system thanks to each of these works.
The paper [ ] addresses the knowledge acquisition bottleneck in traditional expert systems by incorporating the artificial neural network theory into its development. The paper offers a realized electric operation ticket expert system based on back propagation network. A type of automated ticket sales and distribution system is analyzed in [ ].
In addition, [ ] investigates reliable NFC ticketing. However, questions about users’ privacy still need answers. Authors in [ ] discuss the use of blockchain technology and digital wallets to manage e-prescriptions in a secure and efficient manner. The authors propose a system that ensures the privacy of patient data while preventing double-spending, which is a common problem in the healthcare industry. The proposed system uses smart contracts and permissioned blockchain to enable secure transactions and ensure the integrity of the data. The authors conclude that blockchain-based e-prescription management can improve the efficiency and security of healthcare systems, but further research and development are needed to overcome the technical and regulatory challenges. With the goal of assuring adherence to COVID-19 health protocols, [ ] offers an enhanced design for a multi-sport event ticketing accounting information system that includes RFID and blockchain technology. The suggested solution aims to improve the accuracy, efficiency, and transparency of ticket sales and management while avoiding physical contact among stakeholders, limiting virus propagation, and protecting the system against fraud. However, all those paper used permissioned ledger.
Even though a significant amount of research has been done on both E-ticket system and digital content, none of that research has investigated preventing blockage of the E-ticketing system using the public blockchain technology. In addition, there are several limitations to the related works discussed. For instance, there is a lack of clarity regarding the protocols and algorithms required for inter-entity communication and authentication, as well as the mechanism by which user permission revocation to update access policy might be implemented. Verification of the authenticity of the cars is ignored in some cases. Some systems do not make nuanced role distinctions between customers and sellers, and more importantly, these solutions do not seem to have been widely adopted. present a comparison of our proposed framework to recent frameworks published between 2020 to 2022.
 

## Methodology
The development of a blockchain-based E-ticketing framework is a complex and demanding process that requires extensive preparation and research. To achieve this, a systematic and rigorous approach was undertaken, consisting of the following measures:
Firstly, a clear definition of the problem was established to determine the desired outcomes of the blockchain-based E-ticketing framework. This enabled the focus of the project to be narrowed down, and the parameters of the project to be defined more precisely.
Secondly, an analysis was conducted to identify the key stakeholders who are likely to benefit or be negatively impacted by the blockchain-based E-ticketing framework, including attendees, event planners, and ticket vendors. Their perspectives, wants, and concerns were taken into consideration in the design process.
Thirdly, an assessment of the current state of the art was performed to gain an understanding of the functioning of existing E-ticketing frameworks and to identify any potential limitations or issues. This allowed for improvements to be made to the current methods.
Fourthly, a comprehensive review of the requirements for the blockchain-based E-ticketing framework was conducted, based on research and discussions with relevant parties. Key considerations included safety, scalability, price, and convenience.
Fifthly, a model of the blockchain-based E-ticketing framework was created based on the identified needs. This involved the development of a design paper and a working prototype utilizing blockchain technology.
Sixth, as part of the iterative process, prototypes were tested and feedback from stakeholders was gathered. Criticism and feedback were incorporated into future iterations of the blockchain-based E-ticketing framework’s architecture. Finally, upon completion of the E-ticketing framework built on the blockchain, procedures for regular maintenance and any necessary updates were implemented in order to ensure optimal performance and longevity.
In summary, the blockchain-based E-ticketing framework was made using a strict and organized process. This process included a thorough analysis of key stakeholders and their needs, as well as the use of current state-of-the-art technologies and iterative design processes to make sure the end product was effective and efficient.
We adhere to this technique to make sure that our blockchain-based E-ticketing architecture is well-researched, well-designed, and suitable for all parties involved.

## BlockTicket proposed framework
In this section, we go over the specifics of our framework, which is based on the Ethereum blockchain and is designed to validate the delivery of E-tickets. This solution enables the secure delivery of E-tickets without relying on a central authority, as well as automatic payment and resolution of any disputes that may arise. Blockchain technology, Ethereum smart contracts, and optionally distributed Peer-to-Peer files system are all integral parts of this solution. depicts the flow diagram of the proposed framework.
 The proof of the transmission of E-tickets between two parties is the primary focus of the suggested blockchain system. All the entities involved have Ethereum addresses and take part in the conversation between the blockchain, the smart contract and in some cases with distributed Peer-to-Peer files system. Also, all parties involved initially sign a formal agreement form. As such, the formed contract includes a hash of the terms and conditions agreement stored in advertisers’ side, such as, the Inter Planetary File System (IPFS) [ ]. IPFS is a peer-to-peer, distributed file system that can efficiently store massive amounts of data. As a result, the blockchain is only utilized to keep the meta data that the IPFS offers for a saved E-ticket on the advertisers’ sides [ ] and if and only if the size of the E-ticket manageable on the blockchain, as storing chunks of data there is too expensive. If both parties are in agreement, the transaction will proceed, and the advertiser and the buyer will be debited the agreed-upon deposit amounts. The roles in the proposed framework include:
E-tickets: that would own and/or offered for sale by buyers. Buyers: one or multiple users who can own E-tickets by making a request via the smart contract. Buyers who accept terms and conditions, they can make a request for E-tickets in exchange for the cost of that ticket and a deposit that will be held as an incentive for trustworthiness. After that, Advertiser:, which could be one or multiple, who collect tickets and offer them for sale. would put up the same amount of deposit. Next, the contract will immediately provide the buyer a fresh digital-currencies. Digital-currencies: the user might then use this digital-currencies to safely download their tickets off-chain (i.e., advertiser side). A successful transaction requires that the buyer check their ticket before the digital-currencies expires. When a buyer successfully retrieves the ticket from a advertisers’ sides, they will notify the smart contract. Once the buyer confirms the transfer was successful, the transaction is complete and payment is made. As soon as the Tickets issuers:, who is a company or person who has legal possession of E-tickets, and the advertisers’ are compensated, the deposit is restored to all parties. In the event of a disagreement, the Auditor:, who confidence in the Auditor is shared by E-tickets issuers, advertisers, and buyers. would attempt to check the same ticket as buyers by exchanging their digital-currencies for the buyers’. A reimbursement could happen depending on the auditor’s conclusion. depicts the entities and the blockchain interactions with one another.
 

## Implementation and evaluation

## Implementation
Using the Remix IDE, the smart contract is developed and then put through its tests. An environment for building smart contracts in Solidity [ ], as well as an environment for testing and debugging the written contracts, is made available by Remix. The details of the implementation and the testing are the primary emphases of this section.
It all starts with a ticket issuer informing the advertisers about an event or anything that requires a ticket to attend or watch. Next, advertisers execute a function on the smart contract to announce that event as well as its terms and conditions. Then, a buyer requests to buy an E-ticket through the smart contract. As soon as a buyer submits a request, it is assumed that they have read and accepted the terms and conditions of the contract, and that they have already deposited the required deposit. The same sum would be deposited by the advertiser as stated above.
This ensures that all entities involved have the same amount of power and serves as an incentive for everyone to be honest. After the buyer makes a request for a certain ticket, the contract will generate a digital-currencies for them automatically. The advertiser would then make it possible for the buyer to use their digital currencies for a safe download/view of that ticket. The advertiser would then trigger a smart contract function to verify the download/view. When a buyer receives this message, it means they have successfully downloaded their ticket from the advertisers’ side. With the download confirmation result, the buyer could then trigger a function to confirm.
In the event that the buyer is content, the transaction is finalized, and the deposit is returned. The cost of the item would be split between the ticket issuer and the advertiser. If the buyer is not, however, the Auditor will use the buyer’s digital currencies to view or download that same ticket. Whether or whether the buyer is eligible for a refund depends on the decision of the Auditor. If the advertiser has not yet deposited its deposit, the buyer can request a refund through the system.

 illustrates steps that take place in each of the scenarios described above (i.e., Success, Unsuccess and Discontent), respectively. The flow chart presents the whole procedures, beginning with the distribution of tickets and ending with the final payment. Both the advertiser and the buyer verify that the download was completed successfully in the first scenario, which is depicted in the diagram as having denoted by Black color arrow. Choosing one of the other two scenarios, on the other hand, will result in the advertiser reporting that the buyer has downloaded the item, despite the fact that this is not actually the case. In this particular situation, the Auditor steps in, the buyer sends the same digital currency to the Auditor, and then they examine the availability to download and/or view, as depicted by the denoted by Green color arrow in the diagram. The remainder of this section will go into detail regarding algorithms that are employed throughout the implementation of the smart contract.
 

## New tickets generation/announcement
After the ticket issuers have created new electronic tickets for an event and written their terms and conditions for requesting tickets and attending the event, the tickets are distributed. The following entities are included in every event:
Ticket ID
Numbers of Available Tickets.
Date and Revenue of the event.
Price of Tickets
After these entities have been specified, ticket issuers sign each ticket with their Private key see , which we assume all ticket issuers have a pair of Public and Private keys, then, issuers of tickets will notify the advertisers about the event. After that, they trigger a function of the smart contract to make an announcement regarding the occurrence. This function includes an element that maintains the particulars of the event and makes a note of the buyers see Algorithm 1.
 SignTicket=Encrypt(TicketID,Privatekey).
(1)
Algorithm 1: New Tickets Announcement
input : EncryptedTicket, EventName, EventDate, EventLocation,NoTickets,Price, Addresses, Status, T&C
output : Ready

Addresses: Array of authentic ticket issuers addresses

Access only for authentic issuers, msg.sender ∈ Addresses

if msg.sender ∉ Addresses then
 abort

else

 EvN ← EventName
 EvD ← EventDate
 EvL ← EventLocation
 nT ← NoTickets
 P ← Price
 EncTicket ← EncryptedTicket
 tc = T&C
 status ← Ready
Trigger
event(Ready to process requests)

## Tickets requesting
Algorithm 2 demonstrates the process that the buyer goes through to request electronic tickets. Initially, the buyer will examine the terms and conditions by utilizing the retriveTC() function contained within the smart contrac, full implementation Available on https://github.com/mjod89/. Next, the buyer submits a request to obtain E-tickets by putting down a deposit in addition to the tickets’ price. The advertiser must then make an equal deposit after this process has been completed. Later, the contract will produce its own digital currency. After the advertiser has given the client authorization to download/view their E-tickets, the customer will utilize the token, which can either be used off-chain or within the contract, to do so safely.
Algorithm 2: Ticket Requesting
input : Buyer, Deposit, Price, Status
output : Ready

Buyer: Array of authorized buyer addresses

Only authorised buyers, msg.sender ∈ Buyer

if msg.sender ∉ Addresses then
 abort
if msg.value == Deposit + Price then
 if Status == Ready then
  subtract msg.value
  generate digital currencies
  status ← ReadToDownload
 else
  Abort

else

 Abort
Trigger
event
(request received & Digital currencies generated)

## Tickets collection success/unsuccess
When the buyer downloads/view their E-tickets from the advertiser sides, in this case it could be on peer-to-peer server or on the contract itself based on the size of the tickets, which determined by the ticket issuers at the beginning, the advertiser obligated under the contract to carry out a specific function, which notifies all parties involved that the buyer has successfully downloaded/view their E-tickets.
The specifics of a successful download/view are displayed by the Algorithm 3, which then leads to an arrangement of payments but only if the buyer has given their E-tickets and is satisfied with them. As a direct consequence of this, the buyer is obligated to provide a response that attests to their level of contentment. If the buyer is content with their collection, the payment is considered to have settled, and the transaction is considered to have been successfully completed. The advertiser, as well as the buyer, would each receive the return of their deposits. In addition to this, both the issuers and the advertiser would receive a portion of the payment based on their agreements.
Nevertheless, if the buyer cannot download/view their tickets, this ultimately leads to the discontent of the buyer scenario. As a result, the only circumstance in which the auditor is requested to step in is the current one. When a buyer is displeased with their collection, Algorithm 4 explains in depth how a dispute might be addressed.
The auditor would try to retrieve the same E-tickets from the advertiser side or from the contract using the same digital currencies that was previously used. If the auditor was successful in downloading/viewing E-tickets, then the buyer’s claim is unfounded, and the payment will be handled as though the transaction was successfully finished. All of the deposits are returned, and the issuers as well as the advertiser each receive compensation based on their relative agreements. However, if the auditor is unable to download/view E-tickets, the buyer will be issued a refund, and all deposits will be returned.
Algorithm 3: Tickets Collection success
input : Addresses, status, hash of Digital currencies (H),
output : Done and pay both advertisers and issuers/ Discontent

Addresses: Array of buyer and advertiser’s addresses

Only authorised advertisers, msg.sender ∈ Addresses

if msg.sender ∉ Addresses then
 Abort
if H == keccak256(Digital Currencies)
then
 if Status == ReadToDownload
then
  Status = Confirm by advertisers
  generate an event (to buyer and issuer)
  waiting buyer to confirm
 else
  Abort
 if
buyer confirm their download/view
then
  return deposit
  pay costs
  status = Done
 else
  Call Auditor
  Status = Discontent

else

Abort
Trigger
event
(Download/view Success & Costs paid)
Algorithm 4: Tickets Collection Unsuccess
input : Addresses, Digital Currencies, Status
output : Issue resolved

Addresses: Array of buyer’s, Advertiser’s and Auditor’s addresses

Only authorised Auditor, msg.sender ∈ Addresses

if msg.sender ∉ Addresses then
 abort
if Status == DiscontentCheck then
 Check ← Auditor uses digital currencies to download/view E-tickets
 if Check == valid then
  Refund buyer
  status = Resolved
 else
  pay advertiser and issuer
  status = Resolved

else

 Abort
Trigger
event()
(Resolved)

## Evaluation
An empirical analysis of the complete framework is presented, including information on how effective it is, how secure it is, how effectively it protects users’ privacy, and how much it costs. This section provides an introduction to that evaluation.

## Security model
Since the suggested method is based on the digital signature cryptosystem, it will be difficult for an attacker to decrypt the signer’s private key using only the signer’s public key and the master domain settings. To solve this problem is similar in complexity to the RSA discrete logarithm problem. The signer’s signature cannot be used by an adversary to obtain the secret key either. This is due to the fact that the signer’s private key is inextricably linked to their public key via cryptography.

## Security analysis
In this section, we analyze the security benefits and drawbacks of the provided BlockTicket system.
The Ethereum Virtual Machine and the different client applications both contribute to the platform’s overall security. The network will not recognize the illegal transaction until at least 50% of the nodes in the network respond in an honest manner, but a rogue node can still cause trouble by acting dishonestly. That way, the system can operate as intended. Since it is possible for a smart contract deployed inside a blockchain to have a bug or be the target of an attack, it is crucial to adhere to the security rules established by Solidity.

## Software vulnerability
During smart contract development, we comply with the Solidity security patterns. And since the Truffle framework was explicitly made for testing smart contacts, we have put it through its paces with several different test cases, and it has always succeeded.
Furthermore, Slither [ ] was fine-tuned to perform vulnerability detection with a low error rate and a minimum completion time of less than 1 second per contract. However, the complexity of the audited smart contract has a significant impact on this estimated time. A thorough audit of more complex smart contracts could take more time.
Slither can examine smart contracts written in solidity versions as low as 0.4, making it compatible with many different kinds of code. To further enhance its automation and developer friendliness, Slither may be readily linked into a CI/CD setting. Moreover, slither can unearth source code quality concerns and code optimizations that may affect gas costs.

 shows the Slither security assessment report that was performed on our smart contract code. The code does not appear to have produced any reports of any of the security flaws or serious problems that it was intended to check for.
 

## BlockTicket against security features
We outline potential attacks and risks to the entire presented framework and how those aims can be secured below. The blockchain’s built-in security measures are incorporated into our system directly. Trust, integrity, non-repudiation, and availability that is not centralized are all part of these characteristics. Using the smart contract’s limit modifiers, our system manages authentication and access control, ensuring that only authorized parties can carry out the contract’s specified actions. Since each message exchange is cryptographically signed and time-stamped, the framework also naturally prevents Man-In-The-Middle (MITM) attacks and replay attacks. Without the legal private key, an attacker cannot forge a signature by substituting his own Ethereum address and public key for that of the original ticket holder.
Confidentiality Using a private or permissioned blockchain, such as the one created by Hyperledger or one of the private Ethereum blockchain networks, it is possible to fulfill the criterion. In our case, the system is accessible to members of the general public as well as any other customer. As a result, we decided to use the public Ethereum blockchain, which is a distributed ledger that stores and transmits transactions in an open platform.
Integrity is an essential component that prevents any data change from taking place, which is a safeguard for essential information. Logs give users of the proposed framework the opportunity to look back through history and locate specific events. The immutability of blockchain guarantees the authenticity of all of the messages that are passed back and forth between the various participants, in addition to the logs that are created and the events that are produced. E-tickets are also held within the smart contract as well as the advertiser’s side to guarantee that the one the customer downloads or views is the same as the one that is solely kept by the issuers. This is done so that the client’s experience is a positive one.
Availability It is important to remember that once our smart contracts are put to the blockchain, they will always be accessible by the relevant parties. The availability of services is thus guaranteed at all times. Additionally, the system is safe against DoS attacks because all transactions are recorded and saved on the public Ethereum ledger in a decentralized and distributed way, making it impenetrable to hacking, failure, and tampering. Due to its decentralized, worldwide nature, the Ethereum public ledger is extremely secure and impervious to DDoS attacks. This is ensured by the tens of thousands of mining nodes that host identical records and data with a very high level of authenticity and reliability.
Non-repudiation Transactions on the Ethereum network both blockchain and its associated events are components of logs, in which calls are logged and the caller’s identity is revealed and can’t be swayed in any way There is, therefore, no way to dispute because everything they do is tracked in tamper-proof logs In addition, if an intruder tries to impersonate a legitimate buyer in a transaction between a buyer and an advertiser, they will be exposed since they lack the necessary keys.
Privacy Since a user’s true identity is not public knowledge on the blockchain, this application allows them to buy tickets without disclosing any personal information about themselves other than their addresses. However, similar to the Bitcoin protocol, entire anonymity is not feasible within Ethereum. This is because Ethereum cannot guarantee unlinkability, and anyone with access to the blockchain could theoretically link any Ethereum account to any transaction made using that account, thereby learning at least some details about the real user’s identity.

## Performance evaluation
Several evaluation metrics were utilised to determine the efficacy of the proposed framework for a secure and efficient electronic ticketing system. These evaluation measures were selected to examine the system’s efficacy, reliability, and security.
A transaction’s completion time was one of the metrics utilized in our study. This metric is essential since it measures the system’s efficiency and the speed at which transactions may be performed. A shorter time for transaction completion would imply a more efficient system that is capable of processing transactions fast, which is essential for a ticketing system that can process a high volume of transactions.
Accuracy was another metric utilized in our evaluation. Accuracy is a crucial parameter for evaluating machine learning models, and in our instance, it indicates the system’s capacity to detect fraudulent transactions with precision. A high rate of accuracy indicates that the system is effective at detecting fraudulent transactions and can lower the incidence of ticketing system fraud.
We also examined the system’s security by analyzing its resistance to assault. The threats we considered were based on the Consortium Blockchain-based Secure Electronic Ticketing System [ ]. These assaults were tested against our system, which was determined to be resistant. This demonstrates that our system is secure and resilient, able to survive all forms of attacks.
To sum up, the evaluation measures we utilized were chosen to analyze the system’s performance, precision, and security. These metrics were selected because they are essential for determining the efficacy of the BlockTicket, and they provide insight into the its efficacy, precision, and security. The outcomes of our evaluation indicate that BlockTicket is efficient, precise, and secure, and that it can detect and prevent fraudulent transactions with precision. It is clear from looking at that our method is resistant to the specific attacks described in [ ].
 

## Cost evaluation

 lists the corresponding execution and transaction costs in units of Gas. According to the table, GetTicket() has a larger execution cost than the other functions because it uses the SLOAD, SSTORE and LOG instructions to store a new request in memory and storage. These instructions utilize considerably more Gas units than a hash function. SLOAD, SSTORE and LOG use 200, 20,000 and 375 Gas units, respectively, according to the Ethereum yellow paper [ ], whereas Keccak256 (hash function), which is similar to SHA3, consumes only 30 Gas units. Hence, according to the table the smart contract costs for the proposed framework seem reasonable and affordable.
 

## Conclusion and future work
In this article, we provide a blockchain-based solution and framework for distributing and trading of electronic ticket. Sale and distribution of electronic ticket are governed by smart contracts built on the Ethereum public blockchain. E-ticket downloads/views occur on-chain and off-chain according to the ticket size. The Ether (ETH) payments, the resolution of any disagreement that may arise, and the imposition of any necessary sanctions to encourage truthful behavior were all programmed into and thoroughly tested as part of the smart contracts. Smart contracts may make use of the decentralized peer-to-peer file system to ensure the confidentiality of the parties’ agreement in its final form.
In this paper, we detailed the process of creating and testing a fully functional smart contract. With the help of a security analysis, we proved that there are no exploitable security flaws in our smart contract code. We also demonstrated that our method is secure against widely used techniques.
While our proposed framework is new, it does have limits. One drawback is that the framework has only been tested on the Ethereum blockchain; additional testing on other blockchains such as Hyperledger and Avalanche are required to evaluate its performance and interoperability with other blockchain technologies. Also, the framework is confined to a specified amount of e-tickets and may not be suited for large-scale events or other sorts of digital assets other than tickets.
Another limitation is that, while the smart contracts have been extensively evaluated for security, there is always the possibility of unknown flaws or exploits, especially when new blockchain technology and attack vectors develop. Additionally, while we have explored the issue of dispute resolution in the framework of the smart contract, it may be more complex to address conflicts that are not simply quantifiable or programmatically enforceable.
We aim to overcome these limitations in future work by implementing the framework into additional blockchains, improving the functionality of smart contracts, and researching dispute resolution processes further. Overall, our architecture represents a promising approach to the distribution and trading of electronic tickets, but more research and testing are required to fully assess its potential and limitations.

The author would like to thank the Deanship of Scientific Research at Shaqra University.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0284166.r001Decision Letter 0
ShuaibMohammedAcademic Editor© 2023 Mohammed Shuaib2023Mohammed Shuaibhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
8 Dec 2022

PONE-D-22-31944BlockTicket: A Framework for Electronic Tickets Based on Smart ContractPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Aldweesh,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
==============================
This paper proposes an E-ticketing framework that utilizes blockchain technology. By separating users’ credential information from financial transactions, the blockchain-based electronic ticketing model reduces the risk of data leaks and enhances privacy as well as removing third party involvement.Further there are some major parts that are missing in order to accept the paper.
1. the related work section is very weak, i recommend the author should include the tables for the related review from year 2021-22.I recommend the authors should do a critical analysis of the problem, available solution, drawbacks in current framework  for which author have written manuscript. Also used the latest research articles form 2021 & 2022 for performing related work. 
2. The abstract needs to be rewritten more precise and concrete. Including, Introduction,Objective,Method, Results, Conclusion. Please improve the abstract, it should list all the contributions made very clearly.
3  The manuscript lack in detailed description of methodology section and a flow diagram of the work. The methodology section is the core of the work, so it must be very well explained, there can be no doubts. The author must include separate methodology section and present a flow diagram of the work.
4. Manuscript lacks in comparison of the results obtained with state of art methods or models. 
5. The results section is very week to support the claim made by authors.
6. The conclusion section needs to elaborate more by discussion the disadvantages of the developed framework & discussion on the results obtain. The author should also include the future work section. 
==============================
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jan 22 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Mohammed Shuaib
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1.  Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf  and

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. Please note that PLOS ONE has specific guidelines on code sharing for submissions in which author-generated code underpins the findings in the manuscript. In these cases, all author-generated code must be made available without restrictions upon publication of the work. Please review our guidelines at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/materials-and-software-sharing#loc-sharing-code and ensure that your code is shared in a way that follows best practice and facilitates reproducibility and reuse.
3. Thank you for stating the following financial disclosure:
“The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.”
At this time, please address the following queries:
a) Please clarify the sources of funding (financial or material support) for your study. List the grants or organizations that supported your study, including funding received from your institution.
b) State what role the funders took in the study. If the funders had no role in your study, please state: “The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.”
c) If any authors received a salary from any of your funders, please state which authors and which funders.
d) If you did not receive any funding for this study, please state: “The authors received no specific funding for this work.”
Please include your amended statements within your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
4. In your Data Availability statement, you have not specified where the minimal data set underlying the results described in your manuscript can be found. PLOS defines a study's minimal data set as the underlying data used to reach the conclusions drawn in the manuscript and any additional data required to replicate the reported study findings in their entirety. All PLOS journals require that the minimal data set be made fully available. For more information about our data policy, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability.
Upon re-submitting your revised manuscript, please upload your study’s minimal underlying data set as either Supporting Information files or to a stable, public repository and include the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers within your revised cover letter. For a list of acceptable repositories, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-recommended-repositories. Any potentially identifying patient information must be fully anonymized.
Important: If there are ethical or legal restrictions to sharing your data publicly, please explain these restrictions in detail. Please see our guidelines for more information on what we consider unacceptable restrictions to publicly sharing data: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions. Note that it is not acceptable for the authors to be the sole named individuals responsible for ensuring data access.
We will update your Data Availability statement to reflect the information you provide in your cover letter.
5. Please remove your figures from within your manuscript file, leaving only the individual TIFF/EPS image files, uploaded separately. These will be automatically included in the reviewers’ PDF.
Additional Editor Comments:
This paper proposes an E-ticketing framework that utilizes blockchain technology. By separating users’ credential information from financial transactions, the blockchain-based electronic ticketing model reduces the risk of data leaks and enhances privacy as well as removing third party involvement.Further there are some major parts that are missing in order to accept the paper.
1. the related work section is very weak, i recommend the author should include the tables for the related review from year 2021-22.I recommend the authors should do a critical analysis of the problem, available solution, drawbacks in current framework for which author have written manuscript. Also used the latest research articles form 2021 & 2022 for performing related work.
2. The abstract needs to be rewritten more precise and concrete. Including, Introduction,Objective,Method, Results, Conclusion. Please improve the abstract, it should list all the contributions made very clearly.
3 The manuscript lack in detailed description of methodology section and a flow diagram of the work. The methodology section is the core of the work, so it must be very well explained, there can be no doubts. The author must include separate methodology section and present a flow diagram of the work.
4. Manuscript lacks in comparison of the results obtained with state of art methods or models.
5. The results section is very week to support the claim made by authors.
6. The conclusion section needs to elaborate more by discussion the disadvantages of the developed framework & discussion on the results obtain. The author should also include the future work section.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: N/A
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: In this research, the authors proposed an E-ticketing framework that utilizes block chain technology. By separating users’ credential information from financial transactions, the block-chain-based electronic ticketing model reduces the risk of data leaks and enhances privacy as well as removing third party involvement. The work is solid and substantive, but there are some points in the purpose for improvement.
1. In the introduction part, the strong points of this proposed article should be further stated.
2. The quality of some figures needs to be enhanced. The author(s) must redraw them with high quality. Some text on figures is difficult to read.
3. More details are needed about the experimental setup.
4. Many abbreviations are used without declaration. Abbreviated terms must be fully defined first, and then the acronyms are used.
5. The quality of the language changes depending on the sections. The authors of this article did a very good job writing it, but it could be improved.
6. The limitation and future scope of the work should be defined in the conclusion section.
7. The references are not as per the format. Some references are incomplete. Use proper complete recommended format.
Reviewer #2: The author utilizes blockchain implementation for the E-ticketing framework. The proposed approach improves throughput, decreases redundant work, and increases consensus efficiency. Also, the analysis of experimental data demonstrates the framework's benefits, which include fast ticket holding times, high throughput, and flexible scalability. The overall quality of this paper is acceptable, but I have the following comments for improvement:
1. The introduction part is not complete yet.
2. The author should elaborate more on the motivation and contribution in this part.
3. In the related work section, the authors missed many state-of-the-art works.
4. The reviewer will not name any here, but the author should carefully check and revise the work before resubmitting.
5. Presentation of the algorithm need to be improvement.
6. Presentation of the solution evaluation must be extended and much more detail
7. Conclusions must be extended and much more detail
8. English required more improvement.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0284166.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
16 Jan 2023

Dear Editor,
We would like to thank the reviewers for their diligent and thorough reading of this paper, as well as their intelligent comments and helpful suggestions, which helped to improve its quality. We are pleased to notify you that we have updated the manuscript in response to the reviewers' recommendations. We believe that the updated manuscript is in much better shape after incorporating the feedback. We appreciate the reviewer's forthright comments: we recognized that some crucial paragraphs of the original article lacked clarity, with ambiguities that led to reader misunderstandings. We have now updated the manuscript's organization and included more paragraphs. More , we agree, clarify the description. The references have been updated in the new version. We have finally completed a thorough editing and formatting process. This update, we believe, improves the manuscript's readability. The reviewer's comments are addressed in detail below.
We hope that these revisions improve the paper such that the reviewers now deem it worthy of publication in your esteemed journal. For the reviewers' convenience, we have followed their comments by our response below. The uploaded copy of the original manuscript marked with all the changes made during the revision process. The new text is highlighted in "red colour". 
Thank you
Amjad
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0284166.r003Decision Letter 1
ShuaibMohammedAcademic Editor© 2023 Mohammed Shuaib2023Mohammed Shuaibhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
13 Feb 2023

PONE-D-22-31944R1BlockTicket: A Framework for Electronic Tickets Based on Smart ContractPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Aldweesh,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
==============================
please incorparate the comments and suggestions given by the reviewers
==============================
Please submit your revised manuscript by Mar 30 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Mohammed Shuaib
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (if provided):
please make the updation based on the comments from reviewers
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #3: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #4: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #5: (No Response)
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
Reviewer #5: Partly
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: N/A
Reviewer #5: I Don't Know
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
Reviewer #5: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
Reviewer #5: No
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #3: Kudos in the good work. Nevertheless, the authors can further explain more about the data (or dataset) used (such for verification and validation) to support this research. With the dataset used for evaluation being highlighted, this would substantiate all data underlying the findings.
Reviewer #4: The paper is improved since last revision. Some minor points still need to be addressed.
In table 1, use the name of the framework instead of ours.
The visibility of Figures is low, Figures with better quality should be included.
Algorithms and figures should be referred in text close/near to Figures and Algorithms.
Reviewer #5: Overall, the idea of manuscript is average, furthermore, the contribution is not adequate at the moment. The manuscript needs significant work.
1. What are the limitations of the related works?
2. Are there any limitations of this carried out study?
3. How to select and optimize
4. the user-defined parameters in the proposed model?
5. There are quite a few abbreviations are used in the manuscript. It is suggested to use a table to host all the frequently used abbreviations with their descriptions to improve the readability
6. Explain the evaluation metrics and justify why those evaluation metrics are used?
7. Some sentences are too long to follow, it is suggested that to break them down into short but meaningful ones to make the manuscript readable.
8. The title is pretty deceptive and does not address the problem completely.
9. The related works section is very short and no benefits from it. I suggest increasing the number of studies and add a new discussion there to show the advantage. Following can be added:
10. Use Anova test to record the significant difference between performance of the proposed and existing methods.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #3: Yes: Dr. Sin-Ban Ho
Reviewer #4: No
Reviewer #5: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0284166.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
24 Feb 2023

Dear Reviewers, 
I appreciate your valuable comments and I uploaded my responses as attached with the submission. 
Regards
AttachmentSubmitted filename: ResponseR2.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0284166.r005Decision Letter 2
ShuaibMohammedAcademic Editor© 2023 Mohammed Shuaib2023Mohammed Shuaibhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
12 Mar 2023

PONE-D-22-31944R2BlockTicket: A Framework for Electronic Tickets Based on Smart ContractPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Aldweesh,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
==============================
a few areas can be improved.
1) Introduction: The introduction should provide a clear and concise overview of the research problem, its significance, and the research questions/hypotheses addressed.
2) Methodology: The methodology should explain the data collection and analysis methods used in a clear and detailed manner, allowing for replication by other researchers.
3) Figure 1: Redraw Figure 1 to make it clearer.
4) Typos and Grammar: Address any typos or grammatical errors.. 
==============================
Please submit your revised manuscript by Apr 26 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Mohammed Shuaib
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Additional Editor Comments (if provided):
a few areas can be improved.
1) Introduction: The introduction should provide a clear and concise overview of the research problem, its significance, and the research questions/hypotheses addressed.
2) Methodology: The methodology should explain the data collection and analysis methods used in a clear and detailed manner, allowing for replication by other researchers.
3) Figure 1: Redraw Figure 1 to make it clearer.
4) Typos and Grammar: Address any typos or grammatical errors.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #5: (No Response)
Reviewer #6: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #5: No
Reviewer #6: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #5: No
Reviewer #6: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #5: No
Reviewer #6: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #5: No
Reviewer #6: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #5: The quality of work is still very poor, I am not able to do further evaluation in its current form. The manuscript needs huge work to do.
Reviewer #6: This study proposes utilizing blockchain technology for E-ticketing to enhance privacy and remove third-party involvement. The experimental data highlights that this framework offers advantages such as high throughput and efficient ticket holding times. While the work is solid and substantive, a few areas can be improved.
1) Introduction: The introduction should provide a clear and concise overview of the research problem, its significance, and the research questions/hypotheses addressed.
2) Methodology: The methodology should explain the data collection and analysis methods used in a clear and detailed manner, allowing for replication by other researchers.
3) Figure 1: Redraw Figure 1 to make it clearer.
4) Typos and Grammar: Address any typos or grammatical errors.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #5: No
Reviewer #6: Yes: Prof. Ammar Almomani
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0284166.r006Author response to Decision Letter 2
Submission Version3
16 Mar 2023

Dear Reviewer, 
Thank you for your comment on the importance of a clear and concise presentation in research writing and figure quality. I completely agree with you that the introduction is a critical component of any research paper as it sets the stage for the entire study as well as the methodology and the quality of figures. We have addressed all your valuable comments, please refer to the updated manuscript. 
Comment (1): Introduction: Your introduction should provide a clear and concise overview of the research problem, the significance of the problem, and the research questions or hypotheses that you are trying to address.
Reply: We would like to thank the reviewer for their valuable comment, we have improved this section kindly refer to updated manuscript line [44-52].
Comment (2): Methodology: Your methodology should describe the methods you used to collect and analyse your data. It should be clear and detailed enough to allow other researchers to replicate your study.
Reply: We appreciate the reviewer comments, we would like to inform you that the methodology section has been rewritten in an academic style to meet your valuable comment. 
Comment (3): Figure 1 show be redrawn to be clearer.
Reply: We thank the reviewer for this comment which indeed improve the final presentation of the paper, the figure has been updated. 
Comment (4): Some typos and grammar mistake that need to be addressed.
Reply: We have proofread the full paper and we believe it now looks better. Appreciate your comment. 
Regards,
Author
AttachmentSubmitted filename: plosone revi.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0284166.r007Decision Letter 3
ShuaibMohammedAcademic Editor© 2023 Mohammed Shuaib2023Mohammed Shuaibhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version3
27 Mar 2023

BlockTicket: A Framework for Electronic Tickets Based on Smart Contract
PONE-D-22-31944R3
Dear Dr. Aldweesh,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Mohammed Shuaib
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Dear Author,
I am pleased to inform you that your paper entitled “BlockTicket: A Framework for Electronic Tickets Based on Smart Contract” has been accepted for publication in PLOS ONE. After careful review, the reviewers and I have found your work to be of high quality and significant value to the scientific community.
Your research provides valuable insights and we believe that it will make a significant contribution to the field. We appreciate your hard work and dedication
Thank you for considering PLOS ONE as the venue for your research. We look forward to working with you in the future.
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #6: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #6: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #6: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #6: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #6: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #6: Dear Author,
Thank you for your prompt and thorough revisions in response to the comments provided. We appreciate your attention to detail and your efforts in addressing each of the concerns raised.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #6: No
**********
10.1371/journal.pone.0284166.r008Acceptance letter
ShuaibMohammedAcademic Editor© 2023 Mohammed Shuaib2023Mohammed Shuaibhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
30 Mar 2023

PONE-D-22-31944R3 
BlockTicket: A Framework for Electronic Tickets Based on Smart Contract 
Dear Dr. Aldweesh:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Mohammed Shuaib 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE