3815pheelsevierLibrary & Information Science ResearchLibr Inf Sci ResPMC1016726810167268101672683720055210.1016/j.lisr.2023.101248Innovative public library services during the COVID-19 pandemic: Application and revision of social innovation typology
SynSue Yeon SinnDonghee KimSujin aDepartment of Library and Information Science, The Catholic University of America, 620 Michigan Ave., N.E., Washington, DC 20064, United StatesbCollege of Emergency Preparedness, Homeland Security, and Cybersecurity, University at Albany, 135 Western Ave., Albany, NY 12222, United StatescDivision of Biomedical Informatics, College of Medicine, University of Kentucky, 725 Rose Street, 208H, Multidisciplinary Science Building, Lexington, KY 40536, United States⁎Corresponding author.
952023453101248101248952023© 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.

## Abstract
Public libraries needed to quickly address the new challenges brought by COVID-19 to continue their services. This study aimed to understand innovative public library services during the pandemic and provide a typology that represent their services. Twitter messages of 12 large public libraries were analyzed to identify library services. A total of 751 Tweets were coded with thematic tags by service types and innovative approaches. Using the social innovation typology by Winberry and Potnis (2021), their typology was revised to show public libraries' innovative services under the emergency circumstances. The findings suggested significant differences within social innovation categories and newly emerged themes. The revised social innovation typology developed from Twitter data during the pandemic includes nine major categories of public libraries' innovative service types and provides updated insights into how public libraries continue to serve as important community resources using innovative approaches. The revised typology will be useful for future research in describing future innovation and assessing the endurance of pandemic-era service innovations.
Keywords: Innovative public library services, Public library services, Library innovation, Innovation typology, Twitter

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Nov 14; Revised 2023 Mar 21; Accepted 2023 May 6; Issue date 2023 Jul.

1.

## Introduction
Public libraries have adopted innovative services that enhance service values by promoting new ideas, technologies, and resources. defined innovation in libraries as “every action undertaken by librarians to improve the quality of service by either providing qualitatively new types of services that were previously unknown or could not be implemented, or by providing well-known services in a new interesting way on the conceptual level or with new tools (p.142).” stated that “public libraries have a strong tradition of innovation, transforming their services (p. 331).” introduced specific examples of innovative library services, from services involving technology such as “technology petting zoo” and “digital media lab,” to one-on-one customer services such as customized reading recommendations and online research assistance, to partnerships such as collaborating with schools for literacy efforts.
Innovation can be further triggered when it comes to unprecedented events such as COVID-19. When COVID-19 hit in 2020, the whole world including the US was locked down and lost its way. Many were not ready for the newly required work modality, especially those organizations that interact with the public. However, public libraries creatively and innovatively transformed their services for their users and communities. As public libraries needed to be more innovative in providing their services and finding working solutions to help their community, the COVID-19 transitional period was considered as an opportunity to investigate empirical cases of public libraries' innovative services.
Social media has been popularly used by public libraries to communicate with the public. The capability of immediate communication for announcements and promotions of services and programs has attracted many libraries to Twitter. For this reason, Twitter has been used to observe how libraries communicate to their users about their services and how such services evolve over time ( ). For example, compared tweets from different types of libraries to examine types of services. categorized innovative services through a content analysis of innovation centers' Twitter messages. Social media services were especially useful to learn about the activities of organizations during the pandemic because the instant nature of social media communication was useful to announce continuously changing service circumstances during this time. As such, social media was considered to be an effective tool to investigate the pandemic responses of public libraries ( ).

2.

## Problem statement
Public libraries serve the needs of their communities. As communities evolve, library services evolve with the community needs. Understanding the nature and scope of library innovations during the pandemic can provide libraries with inspiration for future innovations. It can also provide important data for tracking trends in library services over time. However, there is limited literature identifying innovative services in library and information service settings. Recent studies discuss library innovation in the aspects of innovative services with emerging technology (e.g., ), innovation associated with community issues and support (e.g., ; ), issues related to leadership and administration in providing innovative services (e.g., ; ), issues related to library staffing for innovative services (e.g., ), or challenges and best practices for implementation of innovative services (e.g., ; ). While they provide insights into the current libraries' innovation to some extent, the discussion is often limited to certain aspects such as technology or administration rather than the scope and characteristics of libraries' innovative services. A few researchers provide categories and types of innovative services in libraries ( ; ) which could be potential foundation for identifying libraries' innovative services.
This study explored the types of innovative services that public libraries provide by identifying novel services during the COVID-19 pandemic. Using the typology of social innovation by , this study investigated if the existing patterns of innovation can be applied to the innovations initiated by the pandemic. This study assumed that the pandemic has uplifted public libraries to implement innovative services. While social innovation typology was a useful model to identify types of innovative service categories, it was modeled in the pre-pandemic environment and was designed based on academic articles. Therefore, this study collected data from Twitter that reflects the most current and improvisatory innovative services.
Based on application of typology, this study aims to suggest a revision of typology that provides additional categories to represent types of innovative public library services during the pandemic. The research questions of this study are: (1) What innovative services do US public libraries provide, particularly during the pandemic?; (2) Does the existing typology explain the types of innovative public library services of the pandemic times?; and (3) How do the innovative services change for the two different time periods?

3.

## Literature review
3.1.

## Innovation in public libraries
There is relatively little empirical research on innovation in public libraries. Some studies about library innovations include exploring trends of public libraries' innovative services ( ), suggesting the procedure of designing innovative library services ( ), examining the perceptions of public library administrators regarding innovation ( ), and identifying public libraries' innovative service typology ( ). articulated the trends of innovative services in five areas including: library services for the promoting patron participation (participation); offering libraries' spaces and equipment for creative and making skills (making & creating); developing accessible learning places for the community through lifelong learning and educational programming (learning); adopting new ways to conduct outreach and expanding their reach to a wider community (new outreach); and collaborating with various groups with a broader definition of partners (partnership). proposed five main steps for designing innovative information services in libraries. The first step is diagnosis of the current state to learn the current users' needs and quality of service. The second step is for designing the general direction of changes and choosing the type of innovation. The third step is to choose the sources of the innovation such as technology and service design methodology. The fourth step is to determine the structure of innovation in the aspect of the benefits for the library and the users. The final step is designing desired user behavior that is closely related to designing services as a unique and memorable experience for users. examined types of innovations in public libraries from an administrators' perspective and identified four areas of innovation: program, process, partnership, and technology. defined program innovation as “a new initiative designed for the needs of a specific user population.” Process innovation is defined as “a novel combination of actions, routines, or procedures for serving patrons.” Partnership innovation is “a novel integration of resources that are contributed or shared by organizations or units within a single organization.” Finally, saw technology innovation as “a new initiative driven by the features of technologies.” While these studies provide important foundational understanding on this topic, little has been explored with empirical data that examine how innovation appears in actual public library services.

3.2.

## Twitter for public library services
Many studies analyzed Twitter data to explore public libraries' services, as Twitter has been a popular outlet for libraries to communicate with the public. compared tweets from a public library and an academic library and demonstrates that Twitter data reflects the different nature of messages by the types of libraries where the audience, mandates, and services are different. analyzed 2174 tweets from 26 university innovation centers and identified 14 innovative service categories, including education, showcase, community building, competition, and more. While their research focus was not on public library services, their findings provide useful insights on how Twitter data can be used to identify types of services from information service organizations. Researchers also used libraries' Twitter accounts to see the changes in services, particularly during a crisis or emergency situation. analyzed Twitter messages throughout the phases of Hurricane Florence in 2018 and found that the messages before, during, and after the disaster contained different types of information to reflect the needs of the users in those situations. The Twitter messages demonstrated how libraries switched their roles to an emergency information hub as the disaster situation was affecting the communities. used Twitter data from public libraries that were impacted by Hurricane Sandy to examine the use of social media in monitoring the situation, integrating media into emergency plans, and building social cohesion and therapeutic initiatives. This study highlighted the use of social media relating to the library's mission for information access and community building.
Twitter data were also utilized to explore library services during the pandemic. analyzed 11,867 tweets and retweets from 56 academic libraries based on ad hoc thematic categorization. Their categories are dissemination of collections and online resources, maintenance of university activity, contextual information, dissemination of cultural and educational activities, reliable scientific information on the Coronavirus, misinformation, and miscellaneous. conducted a content analysis on 1981 tweets and retweets from 57 public libraries during the closure of physical libraries. They reported that the majority of the content addresses library services, library operations, and community-related information. Their results show that by sharing library events, programs, and activities, Twitter could be used as a part of promoting public libraries' missions. analyzed 9450 tweets from 38 New York City public libraries between December 2019 and April 2020. They found that 14.5% of the tweets were related to COVID-19, including remote library services, socially supporting messages, and health and financial support available to the community. As such, Twitter messages illustrate how public libraries continued their usual business to bring a valuable feeling of normalcy to their communities during the closure.

3.3.

## Social innovation typology
The social innovation typology designed by provides a model of innovations in the context of libraries. Through a review of 42 library and information science articles on social innovations in public libraries, this typology offers an analytic framework to identify categories for social innovations in public libraries. This is the most recent study that provides a typological model of public libraries' social innovation. argue that social innovations impact public libraries in that they can benefit the members, for example, by driving social changes and serving marginalized and underserved populations. The typology provided in their study consists of six innovative service categories that are lifelong learning, emergency response, civic engagement, economic development, health, and diversity and inclusion. According to , the lifelong learning category in the typology indicates “a means for meeting ongoing information literacy training;” emergency response is “the library's role in disaster response and recovery efforts;” civic engagement involves promoting “civic engagement through public interaction with stakeholders and institutions;” economic development “stimulates financial growth in the communities;” health encourages “a community's desire to increase physical and mental well-being;” and diversity and inclusion involves providing “support for social groups that may not have adequate support in community.” 
provides structural representation of the six types of social innovations by . This study will adopt the social innovation typology as a typological model in analyzing public libraries' Twitter data in identifying innovative services.
 

4.

## Research methods
4.1.

## Data collection
To identify various types of innovation in libraries during the pandemic, Twitter messages posted by 12 public libraries in the United States were collected in two time periods (April 1 to 14, 2020 and September 1 to 14, 2021). These two milestone periods were intentionally selected to see if there were any changes in library service programming patterns. April 2020 is a period just a few weeks after the COVID-19 outbreak and when an active lockdown was placed in the United States. September 2021 is a period when COVID-19 vaccines were widely available and public schools began to return to in-person teaching. Since Twitter would be the venue where they communicate with communities about their services and programs, it is likely that innovative services and programs can be easily identified from this source. The 12 public libraries were selected based on their service population from the 2019 American Library Association ( ) data. The list of public libraries and their Twitter accounts is shown in 
. All 12 libraries used Twitter frequently during these time periods. A total of 751 tweets were collected, 402 tweets from April 2020 and 349 tweets from September 2021.
 
4.2.

## Data analysis
4.2.1.

## Coding process
The tweets included not only the service and program announcements but also other forms of information. Thus, in the analysis process, we categorize tweets in their various categories, including innovative, conventional, and other miscellaneous announcements. As previously mentioned, in the library context, innovation is actions librarians take to improve the quality of service with new types of services or by providing existing services in a new way ( ). This study defines innovation in a broad sense that includes any actions that have been adopted to improve the quality of services beyond the typical library services with information as well as any efforts to address the novel challenge of COVID-19. Many new types of services are identified, but also many existing services that were repurposed or newly emphasized with or without the challenge of COVID-19.
The analysis process was partially a priori coding. The existing typology by is used as a priori scheme ( ). However, the typology is not based on the actual library services but on the evidence from the literature. Thus, their typology provided categories at a higher level without detailed cases provided. The categories and sub-categories were expected to be different in the data since they were empirically identified from Twitter data. Therefore, the coding process was checking categories in the social innovation typology and adding and expanding categories by providing thematic tags based on the content of tweets.
As foreseeable, tweets include simple announcements or library programs that are considered conventional services, such as educational classes and book recommendations. From 751 tweets, a total of 168 tweets were excluded for this reason. The data analysis with coding was performed by all three authors. Among the tweets from the 12 public libraries, those from six libraries were reviewed and agreed for categories by all three authors together. This process allowed the authors to have the same understanding of the coding scheme and the attribute of each category. The coding for the tweets from the remaining six public libraries were reviewed by at least two authors. While it was difficult to measure the intercoder reliability statistically such as using kappa scores for this type of data, the process of agreement among the coders was used to ensure a higher level of intercoder reliability. All 751 tweets were assigned with thematic tags for categories including conventional services and simple announcements to identify the ones that are innovative per the definition. The thematic tags were used to build the coding scheme and develop a revised typology.

4.2.2.

## Typology design processes
All 751 tweets were coded with thematic tags, and 168 tweets were excluded because they were simple library announcements (e.g., reopening, event announcement), retweets of other users' tweets, and conventional library services. The examples of conventional services include eBook and audio book recommendations, digital resources promotion, and story times. However, there are conventional services that include certain aspects of innovation. For example, story times were turned into a virtual or outdoor event or book talks were held on Facebook live or other streaming services to avoid social contact, and those were considered as innovative with the change of modality. Also, it should be noted that certain tweets were coded with multiple tags if they included information about multiple services or multiple aspects of innovation. For example, a tweet about a webinar on COVID-19 relief for small businesses was included in both the Emergency Response category and the Economic Development category. With this coding process, thematic tags were gathered and analyzed to understand the types of innovative services. A typology was developed from the tags in a hierarchical structure. As with the priori coding, the tags began from the categories of social innovation typology but new tags that were grounded in data were added and reflected in an expanded typology. This will be explained in the next section in detail.

5.

## Findings
5.1.

## Public libraries' innovative services evidenced from Tweets
 presents the distribution of the number of tweets by library and time period from the 751 tweets. Overall, libraries shared 62.58 tweets on average (33.50 tweets in the first two weeks of April 2020 and 29.08 tweets in the first two weeks of September 2021, or 2.24 tweets per day). Among 751 tweets coded, we focused on the 583 tweets identified to be innovative for further analysis. All 12 public libraries provided innovative services during the pandemic. The specific innovative services will be presented in the later part of the findings section. 
presents the number of tweets for each category of innovative services both in the existing typology and the newly added categories.
 
5.2.

## Public libraries' innovative service categories
Twitter data demonstrates the answer for the first research question: what innovative services US public libraries provide. They show libraries' innovative services in nine categories. The six categories of typology were further expanded, and three additional innovation categories emerged. The nine innovative service categories are as follows.
5.2.1.

## Lifelong learning
 typology has only two subcategories in the lifelong learning class including digital literacy for youth and for adults. This study identified diverse services in three subcategories. Typical library programs such as educational classes were not included as innovative services, but some of them were included as innovative if they were improvised due to the pandemic. These include converting existing programs to virtual or outdoor settings. The typology from our data for lifelong learning (subtotal of 271 tweets) appears with three subcategories: general education (105 tweets), literacy (163 tweets), and digital literacy (3 tweets). The general education subcategory includes services such as virtual or outdoor classes, digital or in-person exhibits, student support for schoolwork, educational events like sky gazing, virtual book talks, and podcasts. Educational classes and exhibits are the two types of services that were communicated the most in this subcategory (34 and 42 tweets, respectively, among 105 tweets). Literacy services include virtual kid programs, virtual or outdoor story time, virtual reading and writing programs, virtual literacy community clubs, providing literacy related information, customized reading recommendations, and self-publishing resources. Story time (virtual or outdoor) is the type of service that has the most tweets (57 tweets), followed by literacy related information (55 tweets) in the literacy subcategory (163 tweets). The digital literacy category includes digital literacy services for kids and adults, such as a workshop about video conferencing. In the lifelong learning category, the majority of the services existed already but take a different modality, that is virtual. A lot of digital and virtual learning resources and events were shared on Twitter, but there were no significant differences in the patterns between April 2020 and September 2021 (136 and 135 tweets respectively). The virtual modality of services became settled as a continuous delivery mode while COVID-19 was still a risk. Since lifelong learning is the major public library mission, it is not surprising that there are predominantly more tweets in this category than in any other categories.

5.2.2.

## Emergency response
 typology includes natural disaster related programs within the emergency response category. There are a total of 25 tweets in this category. As expected, the subcategories in the study are closely related to COVID-19 responses, and our data presents five subcategories: providing emergency information (3 tweets), providing emergency relief related support, such as support for the CARES Act (or Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act) during the COVID-19 pandemic (2 tweets), offering space for vaccine clinic (3 tweets), supporting first responders, such as by making PPE using 3D printers (4 tweets), and supporting community, such as by providing or expanding free Wi-Fi services and documenting COVID-19 experiences (13 tweets). As the pandemic and the social responses change over time, tweets related to emergency responses appear differently. Sharing information on COVID-19 and relief support, as well as offering support for the first responders, took place in April 2020, and tweets in the other categories (vaccine sites, documenting experiences) were shared in September 2021. This is one of two areas that shows the differences in the patterns of tweets between two time periods.

5.2.3.

## Civic engagement
The existing typology presents two types of social innovation in the civic engagement category: public discourse programs and building community service capacity. This is the category in which the least number of tweets was identified (16 tweets). There are tweets for the public discourse programs category (e.g., a town hall meeting about the 28th amendment of the Constitution), and a new subcategory was suggested, support for civic services that includes helping with the citizenship (naturalization) process, promoting the Census (particularly in April), and other civic programs (e.g. supporting city tree stewardship program). Since do not provide specific cases for the categories in this typology, it was difficult to determine what the building community service capacity category means. Thus, a new category of community development was devised from the data, which will be discussed later in this section. Thus, there is a chance that innovative services in the category of community development and its subcategories may overlap with the building community service capacity category of .

5.2.4.

## Economic development
The existing typology includes economic gardening and small business development as subcategories of economic development. Economic gardening can be understood in a local community context; that is, efforts to support the local economy. Then, there seem to be shared values between the economic gardening subcategory and the small business development subcategory. Similar services regarding local economy support and small business development were included in our local business support subcategory. There are nine tweets about local business support (e.g., promoting local businesses, COVID-19 related small business support, helping small businesses with legal processes). The tweet messages also include services for additional categories: career development and reemployment support (e.g., resume workshops, career classes, job announcements) (19 tweets), and financial literacy (e.g., virtual finance classes) (7 tweets). It was observed that September 2021 showed more career development and reemployment support related messages (7 vs. 12 tweets). This may reflect the economic context that was affected by COVID-19.

5.2.5.

## Health
 typology presents exercise classes and training programs for specialized medical conditions as subcategories of health. As expected, the majority of health-related messages (a total of 27 tweets) shared on Twitter are closely related to COVID-19. There are many tweets on mental health during the stressful time of the pandemic. In fact, most exercise classes introduced are yoga, meditation classes, and virtual therapy dog sessions. Tweets are grouped in three subcategories: exercise classes (15 tweets), health literacy classes (3 tweets), and health information (9 tweets). Exercise classes and health literacy classes (e.g., classes about wellness and healthy cooking, nutrition, etc.) were held virtually (in both April 2020 and September 2021) or outdoors (in September 2021). While health literacy classes focus on skills and knowledge development for information use, health information is to promote library resources on health. Regarding health information, libraries recommend specific services that they subscribe to for users to access health and wellness information or create their own web pages with health information (e.g., COVID information, information about balancing screen time for kids, help with transitioning to in-person work).

5.2.6.

## Diversity and inclusion
From typology, immigrant and native discussion groups and programs for LGBT+ people were included in diversity and inclusion services. 57 tweets were identified in this category. In addition to the services that support immigrants and minorities (16 tweets), our data presented additional subcategories such as introducing diverse cultures (e.g., a Black heritage talk series, Hispanic Heritage Month events, meeting with authors from diverse ethnic groups) (9 tweets), providing information or services in foreign languages, including tweets in non-English languages (e.g., Census support in Spanish, story time in Chinese) (21 tweets), information, services, and events supporting social justice (e.g., a public input session for racial justice, youth clubs for social justice) (5 tweets), and introducing world literature (6 tweets). Information shared with foreign languages or services in foreign languages were the most popular tweets in this category (21 out of 57 tweets). Comparatively, the tweets regarding minority support were more frequently shared in September 2021, in conjunction with the Hispanic Heritage Month celebration. In the collected data, there are no tweets regarding LGBT+ related programs.

5.2.7.

## Community development
Community development is one of the newly emerged categories for innovative services, and it is one of the frequently announced service types on Twitter (83 tweets). The subcategories are identified as community events (49 tweets), community support (14 tweets), and local history (20 tweets). Community events include library events for community engagement such as virtual trivia events, virtual book or literary quizzes, social media challenges, live game times for kids, bookmark or library card design contests, hosting community events (e.g., 9/11 commemoration event via podcast, invited talk by a NFL football player of a local team) as well as collaborating with local organizations for their community (e.g., providing a space for exhibitions for local art schools or fashion schools). A number of tweets were about 9/11 related events virtual and in-person with library resources and other cultural elements (e.g., food, exhibits); not surprisingly, these tweets are from September 2021. In the community support category, there are tweets about local businesses and community clubs. Examples in this category include offering home delivery of library materials, hosting social movement groups (e.g., library clubs for Black Lives Matter or LGBTQ+), and supporting local farms and businesses in conjunction with library resources. Libraries also support and document local stories and history: there are tweets about neighborhood storytelling, featuring local authors, introducing the history of local places, and local Black history in conjunction with their digital collections, in collaborating with a radio station or an investigative news agency, or as a city-wide project. For example, City of Chicago and Chicago Public Library had a project called “One Book One Chicago” with a book by a local author about a local neighborhood and they have a variety of activities in this project, even offering a playlist in Spotify to listen to while reading the book. Public libraries were keen on encouraging community members' engagement. social innovation typology does not have a community related category, but community development is a repeated theme which is identified as an area of innovation in other studies ( ). Community has long been a central theme for library services, and continued to be so during the pandemic. The innovation occurs around the community even when the library buildings were not available to their communities. Virtual space, digital communication, and social media played a significant role for this purpose.

5.2.8.

## Leisure
Leisure is another category that newly emerged from the tweet messages (80 tweets). Leisure has two subcategories including services for hobbies (26 tweets) and for entertainment (54 tweets). Services supporting hobbies include hobby related classes such as chess, cooking, photography, and dance; hobby related clubs such as Lego clubs, knitting clubs, gaming clubs, or movie clubs; and hobby related resource recommendations such as online tutorials. Even while communication was virtual, community members continued their clubs and were encouraged to interact with others who have similar interests virtually. Entertainment includes virtual or outdoor concerts and sharing online resources or streaming services for music, movies, and other entertainment. Due to the lockdown, many messages were tweeted to encourage users to utilize library resources for entertainment.

5.2.9.

## Library operation
The third innovative service type that emerged from the Twitter data is related to library operation (19 tweets). With libraries' closure during the pandemic, public libraries adjusted their services, including applying policies and services with maximum flexibility. Twitter was used to share the updates about these changes with users. The subcategories of the library operation are policy and service. Innovation related to policies include automatic extension of borrowed materials and providing extended services with unlimited access to electronic resources (10 tweets). The service subcategory includes curbside pickup, bookmobiles for Wi-Fi services, book delivery services, library mobile apps, and e-reader apps (9 tweets). Tweets for the library operation category exemplify how innovatively libraries responded to COVID-19 for their users. Schools offered classes virtually, causing Wi-Fi broadband access to become major social capital during the pandemic and exacerbating the digital divide. Public libraries responded to this problem with novel ideas, such as using book mobiles for Wi-Fi services.

5.3.

## Public library innovative services typology
The second research question is to examine if the existing typology explains the types of innovative services during the pandemic. While typology provides a good foundation for innovative services, there are more types of services that appeared during the COVID-19 period. With the newly emerged types of innovative services from the Twitter data, the expanded and revised typology of public library innovative services is shown in 
. Some general types of innovative services from typology remain, especially for the top level of categories. However, the subcategories of the existing typology are extensively expanded with more detailed cases from the Twitter data. In particular, lifelong learning expands to include more subcategories. In addition, the emergency response category shows more types of services, most of which are relevant to the COVID-19 context. It is also worth noting that the diversity and inclusion category is much more diverse in the Twitter data than in the existing typology demonstrating services to various population groups as well as cultures. The types of innovative services which were added to the typology are community development, leisure, and library operation. Both community development (13.54%) and leisure (13.05%) show a significant number of tweets, following the lifelong learning category (44.21%). The notion of public libraries as community centers was confirmed through analysis of the tweets. Public libraries provided innovative services to the community when they were unable to serve in their usual way due to COVID-19.
 
5.4.

## Changes in innovative service in public libraries in two time points of the pandemic
To answer the third research question, we collected tweets from two different time periods (April 2020 and September 2021). Based on the number of tweets in these two periods, there was no significant differences (294 and 319 respectively). presents how tweets are differently categorized by different points of time. There are a few categories that show different patterns in number and content: emergency response, civic engagement, diversity and inclusion. These are the categories that reflect time sensitive matters. COVID-19 responses appeared differently in the emergency response category. Tweets about COVID-19 information sharing and supporting first responders appeared in April 2020. Vaccine clinics at libraries appeared in September 2021 instead. Similarly, Census related services were observed in April 2020, while there were tweets about the 9/11 commemoration in September 2021. Women's History Month related tweets also appeared in April, and Hispanic Heritage Month related tweets in September. While there exists some differences for time sensitive matters, there were no clear differences in terms of the types of innovative services between these time periods. This might indicate that libraries' innovation in their services continued as a steady pattern in all areas of library programs, though their modalities may have shifted with different formats and technology.

6.

## Discussion
The tweets that were posted by large public libraries show that they did not stop their services despite the lockdown caused by the pandemic. COVID-19, in fact, forced them to find a way around to continue their service with physical constraints because of social distancing. Thus, more diverse innovative services had to be implemented in public libraries. All 12 public libraries provided their services and programs in innovative ways, and among the 751 tweets analyzed, a majority of 583 tweets talked about such services. While some innovative services reflect what was happening at the time the tweets circulated (e.g., 9/11, Hispanic Heritage Month, the Census), many tweets demonstrate how public libraries adapted their regular services to meet users' needs during the pandemic. For example, many innovative services categorized as lifelong learning are related to providing virtual classes and resources. Since educational services are already an essential part of library services, such services were changed to a virtual format or utilized emerging technologies such as social media live streaming, letting users continuously benefit from library services. Public libraries took this opportunity to promote various electronic resources as well. It is worth noting, however, that the Twitter data was collected from the largest libraries in the U.S., which may have resources allowing them to utilize technologies or have benefits of a considerable number of digital resources and services and can swiftly adapt and provide new types of services. Not all public libraries may have that level of digital resources, and perhaps small public libraries where budgets and resources are not abundant may show different patterns of innovation. Further research is warranted in this regard.
This study applied the social innovation typology by as a foundation for analysis of innovative services. This typology was developed from literature that was published prior to the pandemic, and the identification of unique approaches that libraries take to cope with COVID-19 challenges would be different from the pre-pandemic era. The social innovation typology indeed offers the basic categories for the Twitter data, especially for the top-level categories. Twitter data shows various services in these categories. In addition to the categories of this typology, emerging categories were identified from the Twitter data, including community development, leisure, and library operation, so the typology was expanded and revised with additional diverse subcategories.
Since tweets from the pandemic were examined, some innovative services are specifically related to COVID-19. Libraries have provided information about COVID-19 to different audiences (adults and kids), offered face shields created from 3D printers to first responders, allowed users to use Wi-Fi services from the parking lot or offered bookmobiles to deliver Wi-Fi broadband access, helped patrons with the Emergency Broadband Benefit program, extended dues for borrowed materials or waived library fines during the lockdown, to name a few. These services represent the roles and contribution of public libraries to their communities.
Further observations were made in responding to the second research question. The findings show that public libraries were committed to continue to serve the community even under the emergency situation. Service continuity was a major motivation for their innovative services during the pandemic. As digital resources are available even when the library buildings are closed, library services could continue with existing digital and electronic resources and services. In addition, libraries revisited previous virtual events and programs, providing them as a way to continue their services and to even offer additional innovative programs. In-person activities were quickly transitioned to virtual events via Zoom, Facebook Live, Twitch streaming, and other technologies. Story times in libraries were held virtually and later outdoors and with such changes, the frequency of story time events was not reduced. Thus, innovation seems to happen in a way that ensures service continuity.
The analysis of tweets represents the characteristics of innovative services US public libraries provide during the pandemic. Information in the tweets reinforced “community” as a focal point for library services. Libraries played important roles during the pandemic in building a strong community. They continued to support their communities with various methods, such as hosting large or small events to bring the community together, providing information and resources, and documenting community experiences. Indeed, public libraries served as an important community resource to build strong and resilient communities during these difficult times. Twitter data shows that public libraries not only shared tweets to promote their resources, events, and community activities, but also made an effort to ensure that community members were provided opportunities to get engaged and were not left alone, particularly during the time of isolation. A lot of events and activities during the pandemic were designed to encourage community members' participation at various levels, from offering quizzes regarding their community via Twitter, to community conversations with local restaurant owners, to inviting a professional football player to a story time, to creating collaborative reading lists among teen users, and to bringing community members to virtual places to participate in group events. A similar discussion regarding community engagement during a disaster was presented in prior research ( ), in case of Hurricane Sandy. These cases demonstrate how public libraries play an important role in their community during an emergency.
Another characteristic of public libraries' innovative services is that public libraries are public educational centers. But public libraries also offer valuable resources for diverse leisure opportunities for their users: including opportunities for relaxation, activities without financial constraints, socializing with community members, and so on ( ). This aspect of the public library's role in the community is again reflected in the Twitter data. The data includes tweets about helping users develop hobbies so that they have activities to entertain themselves while staying at home. There are tweets to promote fee-based streaming services which are freely available with a library card. Libraries also organized virtual or outdoor concerts in partnership with other organizations.
There is another aspect that was discovered from the tweets: many efforts of libraries to collaborate with other institutions. For example, classes were offered in collaboration with other organizations (both for profit and non-profit). Exhibits were developed in partnership with museums, college classes were offered at the libraries, community literacy programs were created in collaboration with the city that the library belongs to, literacy related talks were offered in collaboration with a radio station, and local community stories were promoted in partnership with news reports. While the social innovation typology does not include collaboration, other studies mentioned partnership as an approach for innovative services ( ; ). The collaborations appear broadly throughout the categories in the Twitter data. Thus, this study's typology does not have a particular category for collaboration, but the data clearly reflects the trend identified in these studies.
6.1.

## Limitations
There are some limitations regarding the use of Twitter. The Twitter data primarily pertains to services for the community, as the main purpose of using Twitter is to communicate with community members. Thus, innovations in administration, staffing, operation, and programming may not be fully captured in the data. Another conceivable limitation of this study is that the Twitter data was collected only from large public libraries. Our initial assumption was that these libraries would show more flexibility and innovation because they have a larger population to serve and more resources to work with. Twitter data from the large libraries showed that they do indeed have more resources for providing digital content and services, which might be the main reason that many tweets on this topic were observed. Small libraries with limited resources might have to be even more creative and innovative to survive during difficult times, and so they may offer even more diverse, innovative efforts to observe.

7.

## Conclusion
This study applied the social innovation typology to 12 large public libraries' Twitter messages during the pandemic to identify current innovative services provided by public libraries. Through the analysis, a revised typology with nine innovative service categories is suggested. The proposed Public Library Innovative Services Typology will be useful for future research in describing innovation and assessing the service innovations during the pandemic. Moreover, this study successfully demonstrated that efforts for innovative services were continuously made by public libraries. While the major values of library services in education, communities, and collaboration would be maintained, it is expected that with changing needs, circumstances, and emerging technology, innovative services will evolve. Therefore, for future research, investigation of the evolution of innovative services with a longitudinal study design would be valuable. As library services continue to grow, the Public Library Innovation Service Typology is expected to evolve as well.

## Biographies
Sue Yeon Syn is an associate professor of Department of Library and Information Science at the Catholic University of America. She earned her PhD in information science at the University of Pittsburgh. Her research interests focus on user information behavior in the aspect of users' involvement in information creation and sharing on social web. Her current research projects include investigating health information behavior and communication, personal history archiving and management behaviors, and data management. Her research has been published in various library and information science journals including Library & Information Science Research, Journal of Association for Information Science and Technology, Journal of Documentation, Journal of Information Science, Health Information & Libraries Journal, and Aslib Journal of Information Management.

Donghee Sinn is an associate professor in Information Sciences and Technology, College of Emergency Preparedness, Homeland Security, and Cybersecurity, University at Albany, New York. She had her Ph D in library and information science at the University of Pittsburgh. Her current research interests include personal digital archiving, disaster responses in cultural institutions, and archival documentation and appraisal in government context. She received her PhD degree in library and information science at the University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Previously, she worked in the National Archives of Korea. She has published in Library and Information Science Research, Journal of Association for Information Science and Technology, Archival Science, American Archivist, Aslib Journal of Information Management, Information Research, etc.

Sujin Kim is an associate professor of Division of Biomedical Informatics at the University of Kentucky. She earned her PhD in library and information science at the University of Pittsburgh. Her current research includes clinical health informatics, personal health information management, and health information seeking behaviors. She uses clinical natural language professing techniques and survey methodologies to better understand patients' health knowledge and their health information uses and behaviors. Her recent publication appears in Patient Education and Counseling, Journal of Medical Internet Research, Western Journal of Nursing Research, Rheumatology, and Information Research.

## References