pmcInt J Disaster Risk ReductInt J Disaster Risk Reduct3815pheelsevier101613236International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction2212-4209pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleElsevier - PMC COVID-19 CollectionPMC10284614PMC10284614.110284614102846143736024810.1016/j.ijdrr.2023.103817S2212-4209(23)00297-21038171ArticleRisk communication and community engagement with vulnerable groups: Perceptions of social-services CSOs during Covid-19
WojczewskiSilvia GrohmaPaul KutalekRuth aDepartment of Social and Preventive Medicine, Center for Public Health, Medical University of Vienna, AustriabDepartment of Primary Care Medicine, Center for Public Health, Medical University of Vienna, Austria∗Corresponding author. Kinderspitalgasse 15, Vienna, 1090, Austria.8202322620239443875410381710381722220238520232062023220620232206202327062023© 2023 The Authors2023Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.Risk communication enables people to be prepared, respond and recover from public health risks which can only be realized with a considerable amount of community engagement. Enabling community involvement is necessary in order to reach and protect vulnerable people during epidemics. In situations of acute emergency, it is difficult to reach everyone, which makes it necessary to work with intermediaries such as social and care facilities and civil society organizations (CSOs) who work to support the most vulnerable in our societies. This paper analyses the perceptions of experts working in social facilities or CSOs of Covid-19 RCCE efforts in Austria. It starts from a broad understanding of vulnerability which combines medical, social and economic determinants. We conducted 21 semi-structured interviews with CSO and social facility managers. The UNICEF core community engagement standards (2020) were used as a framework for qualitative content analysis. The results show that CSO's and social facilities were essential for allowing community involvement of vulnerable people in Austria during the pandemic. For the CSO's and social facilities participation of their vulnerable clients was a real challenge especially because direct contact was difficult and public services were switched to digital only. Nonetheless, they all put a lot of effort into adapting and discussing Covid-19 regulations and measures with their clients and employees which in many cases led to acceptance of public health measures. The study gives recommendations on how community engagement could be enhanced especially from government actors and how CSO's could be addressed more as essential partners.

## Keywords
Public healthCommunity involvementEpidemicPandemicCrisis responseParticipationVulnerabilityMarginalizationIntersectionalityInequalitypmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes

## What's known and where is the gap?

•There are many studies on the effectiveness of community engagement for improving the acceptance of public health measures during epidemics - yet there is a lack of studies focussing on community engagement in high income countries and with socioeconomically vulnerable groups

## What's new?

•In Austria social facilities and CSOs play a key role in risk communication and community engagement with vulnerable groups and communities during the Covid-19 pandemic
•The study starts from a broad understanding of vulnerability which combines medical, social and economic determinants of vulnerability
•We highlight best practice examples of how community engagement can be implemented even during a pandemic and how CSO government partnership can look like

1

## Community engagement and vulnerable groups
Acute health crises affect the most vulnerable and marginalized groups in a society – socially, economically, and medically. Often, these groups are difficult to reach, they lack representation and rarely have a seat in decision making bodies [ , , , , ]. Enabling community involvement is especially important in order to reach and protect vulnerable people [ , , , ]. Community engagement is also important because it reaches beyond the immediate crisis and is a tool for crisis prevention [ ]. However, vulnerability in Public Health crises has often been limited to including medically vulnerable groups. Yet, what is needed for successful community engagement in a crisis is a concept of vulnerability which is relational and includes social, economic and individual factors of well-being [ , ].
In Austria for example Covid-19 risk groups were defined according to vulnerability stemming from physical (and to a lesser extent mental) health conditions, leaving aside social and economic factors (see 
). Yet amid the Covid-19 crisis, a group of scientists called to redefine vulnerability: “Certainly, amid the Covid-19 pandemic, vulnerable groups are not only elderly people, those with ill health and comorbidities, or homeless or underhoused people, but also people from a gradient of socioeconomic groups that might struggle to cope financially, mentally, or physically with the crisis.” [ ]. 
Very often though, people are not only vulnerable in one respect, but in often multiple ways – socio-economically as well as medically. For this study we define vulnerability broadly as vulnerability to the health crisis and vulnerability to policy responses to the crisis. This indeed adds socioeconomically deprived people and people with mental health problems to the spectrum of groups in need of support due to the crisis. Another vulnerable category that was rarely considered during the pandemic was children and youth.
There is evidence that the Covid-19 crisis affected vulnerable populations to a greater extent than the general public [ , , ]. There are, however, few studies comparing impacts of Covid-19 between vulnerable versus non vulnerable groups. One systematic review compared the impact of Covid-19 on mental health of vulnerable versus non-vulnerable groups: It found that people with chronic diseases or people with severe mental illnesses showed significantly higher depression symptoms than a healthy control group [ ].
Although the importance of community engagement during Public Health emergencies has been widely recognized it has been largely employed in contexts of the Global South, or in low-income countries [ , , ]. Studies on community engagement during Covid-19 in high income countries note two things: First, community engagement was more difficult due to Covid-19 measures because direct contact and access to public spaces (e.g. day-care centers, schools, open spaces from CSO's such as Cafés or community spaces, libraries) was severely restricted, two aspects which are important especially to engage with more vulnerable groups such as socioeconomically deprived people or people with mental health problems [ , , ]. Second, Covid-19 was an opportunity for new ways of community engagement for health, such as for example digital community engagement or an increased role of citizens in municipal health councils [ , , , ].
1.1

## Risk communication and community engagement (RCCE) during a pandemic
Risk communication enables people to be prepared, respond and recover from public health risks which can only be realized with a considerable amount of ownership, empowerment and participation [ ]. Community engagement is therefore an essential tool for risk communication, and many organizations such as [ ] or [ ] have developed specific RCCE guidelines for dealing with the Covid-19 pandemic. Many health researchers agree that adequate communication strategies should include all vulnerable groups and be based on principles such as dialogue and contextualization, principles that are part of the UNICEF Minimum Quality Standards and Indicators for Community Engagement [ , , , , ]. The UNICEF defines six “Core Community Engagement Standards”: Participation, empowerment and ownership, inclusion, two-way communication, adaptation & localization and local capacities (for details see in results). The UNICEF core standards should apply to all phases of risk management including risk identification, assessment, implementation of measures and evaluation. However, risk communication has been a major challenge in many countries since the beginning of the pandemic and has not been able to meet the needs of everyone [ , ].

1.2

## The role of social sector CSOs in a crisis: the Austrian case
In situations of acute emergency, it is difficult to reach everyone adequately, which makes it necessary to work with intermediaries such as social sector civil society organizations (CSOs) who work to support the most vulnerable in our societies [ ]. More than 3.000 CSOs in Austria (over 30% of all CSOs) work in the social services sector which comprises health, residential care, and social work [ ]. The social services sector is the CSO sector that cooperates most with the government. In Austria there is a strong partnership between different government levels and social sector CSOs, in particular in elderly care, child care and social work. Almost 80% of revenue for social service CSOs (including church-based organizations) come from government funding, mostly on a regional level [ ]. The government pays the CSOs to provide certain social services. Hence many CSOs depend on government support. This traditionally strong dependence of CSOs on federal and local governments bears considerable risks: on the one hand, close ties can exist between political parties and CSOs and on the other hand, public authorities have a considerable influence on whether a CSO will be funded or not and hence will further exist or not.
During the Covid-19 pandemic, social sector CSOs in Austria faced major challenges due to increased costs and changing and increasing demands from clients and the government despite a special fund of 700 Mio Euros put in place from the federal government for all CSOs [ , ]. At the beginning of the pandemic both provincial and federal governments installed emergency task forces where they invited certain CSOs to participate. Overall, CSOs played a major role in protecting vulnerable clients and employees during the pandemic. At the same time, CSOs especially in social services are faced with high employee shortage especially in the healthcare sector, not only since Covid-19.
This paper analyses the perceptions and experiences of experts working in social facilities or engaged in CSOs with Covid-19 risk communication and community engagement in Austria. It inquires how vulnerable populations were included in risk communication and community engagement (RCCE) during the pandemic, and it investigates the gaps in RCCE as perceived by social sector CSOs. We used the UNICEF core standards as a framework and starting point, specifically how they were considered in risk communication and community engagement.

2

## Material and methods
2.1

## Data collection and analysis
This study was conducted in the framework of the research project CAVE “Community Engagement and Vulnerabilities in Coping with Epidemics”. It used an exploratory qualitative research design. We conducted 21 semi-structured interviews with persons in management positions working in social facilities and CSO's. We included CSOs from the social service sector, in particular elderly care, child care and social services. We chose to focus on the social sector CSOs as they are particularly involved in protecting vulnerable people [ ]. Another selection criteria was to include very small CSOs as well as large CSOs. Besides our focus on organizations working with socially, economically and medically vulnerable groups, the selection of CSOs accounted for a balanced geographical distribution within Austria's federal provinces, which reflect local differences in working conditions, as well as demographic and socioeconomic dynamics.
2.1.1

## Selection process
We began with an internet search with key words such as “nursing homes Corinthia” or “people with disabilities Burgenland”. From the available pages we distinguished between governmental (federal, provincial and city level), private, or church-based organizations. Based on these three types of organizations we created a list of possible interview partners working in the social sector for each Austrian region (nine provinces) with a total of 33 organizations. We contacted the organizations from the list via telephone or email to inquire whether someone from their organization would be available for an interview, asking for a contact person. 21 organizations agreed to take part. We included organizations working with the following groups who are usually vulnerable on more than in one respect, socio-economically as well as medically:-Organizations for people with physical and cognitive impairments (4)
-Mobile healthcare services (including psychiatric care) for elderly people (4)
-Organizations working with socioeconomically disadvantaged adolescents (3)
-Organizations for homeless people (3)
-Organizations working with refugees (2)
-Daycare centers for elderly people (1)
-Social counseling organization for socioeconomically deprived people (1)
-Association for family caregiver (1)
-Association for migrant live-in caregivers (1)
-Association offering meals to socioeconomically disadvantaged people (1)

The interviews took place between February and April 2022. All interviews were conducted online using Webex except for one which was conducted in person. They lasted between 40 and 75 min, were recorded, transcribed verbatim and anonymized. Two researchers conducted the interviews (PG, SW). Prior to the interviews a guideline was drafted (PG) and discussed within the team. The interview guide included questions on how social facilities and CSOs defined vulnerability in the context of Covid-19, as well as how they perceived communication with governmental partners, employees and clients (see translated interview guide in supplementary file). The data was coded with the Atlas.ti software for qualitative content analysis (SW) [ ]. Codes were defined inductively (for example “communication_challenges” or “vulnerability_socioeconomic aspects”), and in addition six codes were deductively added from the core principles of the UNICEF Standards (2020). These were applied to analyze the engagement of state institutions and social facilities/CSOs with vulnerable communities. We then analyzed how these groups were or had been vulnerable in relation to Covid-19 according to the social services CSO's.
The code matrix was discussed with team members (RK, SW and PG) and both SW and RK conducted qualitative analysis. Three drafts of the paper were circulated within the team, commented by the co-authors and adapted accordingly by the first author.
Ethical approval was obtained prior to the study from the Ethics Committee of the Medical University of Vienna (EK 2218/2021). All participants provided informed consent after they received information on the study design, aim of the research and the recording of the interview.

2.2

## Funding
The CAVE project has received funding from the KIRAS programme. KIRAS is a research, technology and innovation funding programme of the Republic of Austria, Federal Ministry of Finance. The Austrian Research Promotion Agency (FFG) has been authorised for the programme management.

3

## Results
We interviewed experts of social facilities and CSOs from all over Austria, ranging from small self-organized associations to large social and care organizations and facilities. Ten organizations were based in eastern Austria (Vienna, Lower Austria and Burgenland), nine in central and western Austria (Salzburg, Vorarlberg, Tyrol, Carinthia, Styria) and two organizations worked on a national level. All organizations work with physically, mentally and/or socially vulnerable people. Clients as well as employees were therefore at higher risk of contracting Covid-19 or suffering from the effects of Covid-19 measures. The social facilities and CSO's we interviewed worked with the following groups of people (see 
): 
The results are divided into the UNICEF Core community engagement standards (see 
). We adapted the order of the six standards according to our study outcomes: Inclusion and participation comes together at first, then two-way communication, adaptability and localization, empowerment and ownership and building on local capacity. 
3.1

## Inclusion and participation
With regards to Covid-19 management we asked the CSO's and social facilities how they felt vulnerable groups had been included in risk management, what hindered the inclusion and participation of vulnerable groups and what it would need for a successful inclusion and participation.
Most of the 21 interviewed experts felt that government failed to adequately address the needs of many vulnerable groups. They had the impression that official definitions of vulnerability to Covid-19 infections did not include all people at risk but was restricted to elderly and to people living in retirement homes. Organizations catering for the needs of for example homeless or socioeconomically deprived people, people with physical or cognitive impairments, refugees, or informal caregivers would have wished for more specific information on how to handle their work during the pandemic.“I believe thinking about vulnerable groups from the very beginning would be a good objective. It often took a long time to come up with special explanations/regulations for vulnerable groups. We could do better if we were aware from the beginning that there are a few areas that are particularly affected, and from my point of view, I think it was clear to everyone that this was the health sector. But (…) there was too much focus on hospitals and care homes. And the other social and care organisations were a bit forgotten.” (Participant 9, Organization working with Homeless people) 

The CSO's and social facilities on the other hand tried to include their vulnerable clientele as much as possible in their Covid-19 management from the start. For example the manager of an organization for refugees explained that they adapted their health measures always according to the most vulnerable in their organization – in their case people who suffer from trauma due to escaping their country of origin, people with preexisting illness and the manager also identified employees who are mothers of small children as particularly vulnerable. Therefore the measures they took for their employees and clients were stricter than the official ones, for example allowing home office for everyone. This is something that many organizations and CSO's reported: in order to protect the most vulnerable in their team they issued measures which were stricter then usual, hence the rules that applied to the most vulnerable were the rules for everyone.Many CSO's and social facilities also reported that clients and employees had a lot of experience with crises and precarity, as this was a status quo for many of their clients living under difficult circumstances not only since Covid-19. Yet the difference to other crises was the lack of social contact during Covid-19 – an aspect that often made the socio- economic and mental health situations for vulnerable groups more difficult than for the general population. Employees of CSO's were often the only contact with the outside world for many highly vulnerable people such as frail older adults living at home or people with severe mental health illnesses.

CSO's and social facilities tried to include their clients and employees in crisis management in very different ways and with diverse levels of participation.
Participation of vulnerable clients: One association providing personal assistance for people with disabilities invited their clients to share stories and photographs on how their lives had changed during the first Covid-19 lockdown. This initiative allowed involvement as well as communication with and by clients and contributed to good mental health of clients as it worked against the feeling of isolation and loneliness. In this same organization clients were all individually consulted on how to handle personal assistance arrangements during Covid-19. That way the clients could decide whether they wanted to continue (in accordance with the assistants) receiving personal assistants and how to arrange for that by, for example, meeting outside. This way the association made sure that the health needs were assessed by their clients and not by the association. The mental and physical health priorities were set by the clients themselves.
Participation of employees within CSOs: An organization working with refugees established an internal “Pandemic Team” consisting of six employees from different work areas, including management functions as well as other levels representing the whole organization, in order to achieve broad acceptance of measures. This team met bi-weekly and adjusted official health information for the organization's different units. In addition, a Covid-19 email address was created for queries, messages, wishes and recommendations. Each of these six unit representatives took turns to manage the account on a daily basis. Adapted Covid-19 risk information was also sent out to employees through this address. The decisions made in this team were based on consensus.
Participation of CSOs on local government level: Another example comes from an organization for homeless people. This organization initiated a helpline called “health phone” to provide medical assistance for like-minded NGOs. Staff members of the homeless aid, refugee aid, disability aid, women's shelters could call medical doctors if they had questions in dealing with Covid-19, but it also served to report infected cases to the authorities. This initiative was a close cooperation between the organisation for homeless people and a municipal health authority and took only a few weeks to be operational during the first Covid-19 lockdown in spring 2020. It shows that close cooperation between CSOs and local government partners can work fast and well when the government quickly supports local initiatives and works with key stakeholders.
The organizations self-initiative was quickly supported financially and logistically which made it possible to own the initiative and to offer the services to include more vulnerable groups and organizations working with them.

3.2

## Two-way communication
In this section we will present findings on how two-way communication has worked out on different levels: 1) between the government and CSOs; 2) between CSOs and vulnerable clients 3) as well as within the CSO structure itself.
In general, very small CSOs had a difficult time communicating and networking with others. They were not able to re-allocate resources nor did they have regular contact with state officials before Covid-19, which made communication during the pandemic difficult. Larger CSOs could more easily re-allocate resources and personnel and often created crisis teams quickly. Also, the larger CSOs had contacts to government officials already before the crisis. During Covid-19 it was easier for CSOs who worked with recognized risk groups as they had clearer public rules to follow. Others like Youth Organizations had almost no regulations that were particularly shaped towards handling their day to day work with the clients, as they were not officially recognized at risk. Moreover, organizations working with people who do not speak German well had a considerable amount of extra work due to translation, although other CSOs also put a lot of effort into that aspect, e.g. translating into easy language.
3.2.1

## Communication between political decision makers and CSOs
CSOs often perceived official Covid-19 risk communication on the national political level as one-sided and top down without options for dialogue, or only accessible on the organizations' own initiative. On a regional level CSO's had very different experiences ranging from frequent communication to none at all with regional government institutions. In particular the communication with the municipality of Vienna functioned well, with longstanding and clear partnerships, according to the experiences of CSOs. Organizations of mobile care services often complained that there had been a lack of adaption of regulations to mobile care services. In particular organizations in Tyrol found that communication with the provincial government was difficult because it was not clear who was the appropriate contact person.
Within the CSO's and social facilities most designated a contact person or contact point (Covid Team, Crisis team) for queries within the organization. Such contact points were very relevant for sorting and translating official risk communications for the respective working units of the organization and helping to integrate government decrees into daily working routines; they proved to be very effective. Those intermediaries could partly enter into a two-way communication with authorities by requesting additional information or by searching a variety of official websites.“M. X was the contact person with the City, he received the information. And the management edited and filtered the information and passed them on to us. (…). So we actually have a group that adjusted the whole information and then distributed it to all the facilities. (…) We then received the adjusted information, and some of us also received posters that we could pin to the boards in the residencies. We then simplified it again for specific target groups, if necessary in the wording, and formulated it a bit more simply, so that it would be understood.” (P4, Management, Organisation for homeless people)

Yet, it is important to stress that such facilitation was done aside other tasks of CSO and social facility managers and would require additional personnel in a crisis. It was also felt by the managers that official risk communication on Covid-19 argued with imminent dangers to promote protective measures, thereby causing fear.“I believe that the whole communication strategy was very much based on fear of the virus, in order to get people to go along with unpleasant measures. But what I observe is that a relatively large part of the population, (…), is very susceptible to anxiety disorders (…) At first, there was too much fear and panic, and now they are still trying to get people to do something by inducing fear. (…) And the psychological component has not been considered at all in the communication of measures and about the virus. I don't think mental health experts were ever included in decisions about public communication.” (Participant 2, Team leader, work with autistic people)

CSO's often felt they had to clean up the mess from the public communication of the government. They felt public communication did not only not help with the communication with their clients, but it made it even worse:“After the first summer our government leader basically said the pandemic was over. Whereupon we again had to do a lot of awareness work when the next wave came in autumn. The communication from the government was not beneficial, because the government minimized it (Covid-19). “(P7, health management, social security)

3.2.2

## Two-way communication between CSOs and vulnerable clients
Some Covid-19 measures were perceived as complicating access to health and social services, especially regarding the switch to digital communication to reduce physical contact. For example unemployment- or health care services became even more difficult to access for disadvantaged groups, such as non-German speakers, people with cognitive impairments, and educationally disadvantaged people. Many of these groups are neither equipped with digital tools nor do they have a sufficient level of computer literacy and as most digital services were only available in German access was difficult for non-German speakers. For example respondents involved in youth counseling reported that many of their young clients had problems with managing documents online or had no other digital tool then their cellphone which made looking or applying for jobs very complicated. The Youth counseling organizations here were very important as they were able in many cases to provide laptops but also to provide support with filling out documents and finding adequate information.Many organizations have set up their own initiatives to be able to continue engaging regularly with employees and clients and thus to make two-way communication possible. Most organizations made great efforts to facilitate direct contact as much as possible, mostly under very strict conditions on the one hand (e.g. wearing masks and PPE; meeting outside premises), and with a great flexibility on the other hand (adapting schedules, meeting more often than usual). In many cases, when people were dispaired or suffering from isolation and loneliness, CSOs even intensified care services during lockdowns, either by telephone, or by meeting at their doors for a chat. Most CSOs moved back from online/telephone to face-to-face contact as far and as soon as possible. A significant amount of time and energy was invested to facilitate personal contact, as many target groups had difficulties with remote access to services, particularly people with hearing or visual impairments, people with dementia or other cognitive impairments and people with a lack of knowledge of the German language.

“There was for a long time a deficit when it comes to well-prepared, easily accessible and multi-lingual information from the city. It took too long and we contributed here to fill the gap with our offers, for example we work for many years already with video interpretation, that was very important in the beginning of the crisis. Before it officially started with (Covid-19) aid campaign we were already out there with medical doctors, a laptop and video interpretation and talked with the people to educate them, and to give people the opportunity to ask questions and get answers.” (P9, Organisation for homeless people)

3.2.3

## Two-way communication between CSOs and their employees
Whereas the switch to digital communication was often difficult for the clients of different CSOs, many organizations had positive experiences switching to digital with their employees. Many employees as well as managers could see the potential of having online meetings and allowing more home office. Organizations which had a hard time switching to online contact only were those were employees worked in shifts, such as for example mobile care services. Managers here stated that it was impossible to organize team meetings with everyone for example. One organisation offering mobile care therefore used an online programme 
with chat function to be in contact with employees more regularly and to convey important documents and regulations.Internal communication – concerning health measures for the personnel as well as routine work communication – was conducted in such a way that management and employees kept regular contact through video team meetings, telephone, or chat. This allowed employees to ask questions about regulations and to give feedback on regulations that were not well adapted to their working conditions for example. Also in some cases, managers reported that employees were able to call them as much and whenever they wanted if they encountered problems. Still, there was also a lot of one-way communication too through emails, newsletters, and weeklies. As mentioned above, official risk communication and decrees required being “translated” hence adapted and specifically prepared for employees and different work areas so that they could be understood and implemented properly. The CSO's and social facilities all felt a crisis team was important to adapt and adjust regulations, to make communication transparent and to have a stable crisis communication structure that employees can rely upon for information but also for engaging in two-way communication.

3.3

## Adaptability and localization
In general, the CSOs and social facilities wished to receive information, which is more specifically adapted to their working realities and the needs of their clients. Many respondents found that risk communication channels were not adapted to different vulnerable groups. Rather, they experienced official Covid-19 information being transported via state media channels and campaigns addressing the population as a whole. Respondents reported they could not recognize efforts of state authorities to explore or exploit existing channels used by their clients (e.g. social media platforms that are popular and trusted among certain migrant groups or people with disabilities).
For example, in order to reach young people and different national/ethnic communities faster and better, social media and video should be used more to inform about the measures in a way that speaks to them but also to promote organizations where they can seek help in case of a psychological problem; this was suggested especially from the respondents working with socially and economically vulnerable young people and those working with refugees and migrant communities. Young people were usually not hit hard by the illness Covid-19 but suffered a lot from the measures taken such as social distancing or distance learning. In the case of older people living in rural areas, mobile care services we interviewed suggest that community structures should be involved more in disseminating information, for example at senior citizens’ meetings, church congregations/mosques/temples or through their community leaders.
Respondents criticized a lack of multilingual information. In urban regions like Vienna efforts were made from the city government to translate leaflets and videos, but they arrived very late, not systematically and did not target specific groups. In other regions translations were sometimes missing altogether. People who do not speak German (well) often belong to medical and socio-economically vulnerable groups in Austria for various reasons, for example people with refugee experience often have socio-economic problems but also face mental health problems due to anxiety or distress. Organizations with staff, including volunteers, who understood and spoke the languages of their clients, had a clear advantage as they could easily enter in a dialogue with their clients and explain measures being culturally sensitive and clients had the opportunity to ask questions or express their doubts.“In our house we have personal advisors for the residents, and the advisors really spoke with the residents for hours and hours in order to explain and discuss (Covid-19) measures. We had educational programmes in which the course instructor took the whole class to the vaccination centre in order for the participants to get to know how the procedures there work.” (Participant 21, Managing director of an organization for people with refugee experience)

Much effort was put into explaining and adapting the information about Covid-19 and Covid measures to their clients. Several respondents underlined that simple information material was not enough for their vulnerable clientele, they needed to be in direct contact with them for explaining and adapting the information to their needs and to have room for discussions.

3.4

## Building on local capacity
CSO's and social facilities which for example include employees from the vulnerable group itself had several benefits during the crisis: they were able to reach their clients more easily as they spoke their language and they also knew on which media they could best reach them. For example an interest group for migrant live-in caregivers. Live-in caregivers were very socially and economically vulnerable during Covid-19 as they often had to stay with the caretaker longer than agreed upon because borders were closed and many caregivers come from Slowakia or Romania; also there often is a language barrier which makes it difficult for them to know about their rights or the regulations in Austria. Here the interest group was very quick in responding to the challenges: they gave legal advice directly in Facebook groups (which is were many cargivers organize) in Slowak and Romanian for example and quickly knew about the specific problems of their target group. An organization for refugees as well as a big care organization employs many native speakers of the different languages migrants and refugees speak which was very important for explaining and discussing Covid-19 measures to be able to take the fear away.
A positive support mechanism by the government was mentioned by an organization working on reintegration of young people into the labor market. The public authority which funds the organization pilots a project as a result to Covid-19 where youth counseling organizations get support by psychologists who offer counseling to the young people. This is a capacity building skill for the organization as they can offer much needed psychological support directly in their house. The young people do not have to go elsewhere for counseling and they do not have to pay. This is a way to strengthen the resilience of the young people and reduce psychological and financial stress.

3.5

## Empowerment und ownership
Due to the strict Covid-19 measures many CSOs and social facilities felt limited room for adapting the measures to their contexts. The fact that health regulations were communicated through legally binding decrees, which could be executed against CSOs, deterred organizations to adapt the enacted measures to their needs or to their clients wellbeing. And yet many organizations have empowerment and ownership at the heart of their work. For example by trainings for the trainers:“We actually put empowerment of the employees on the map from day one. That was our guiding principle. In other words, make them competent in dealing with the virus, then they can also act competently and pass on something competently and, above all, they will not be anxious at work, but will have things under control.” (P7, health management, social security)

Another example for empowerment and ownership is the interest group for migrant live-in caregivers. The goal of the group is to empower the group by providing legal and other information on their profession as well as individual counselling because they work in a very vulnerable setting: their workplace is also their residency in Austria, they work with a very vulnerable group itself, which is frail people of older age and they are very often dependent on their placement agencies which negotiate their work placement:“These mechanisms, these dynamics in the industry exist – that the placement agencies often exert pressure. But in this Covid pandemic context, that was the first alarm signal. There were many live-in caregivers who were threatened that they would not get the money if they went home. Our first communication strategy was to deconstruct that discourse, because the placement agencies were doing a lot of emotional blackmail through social media, where they were accusing the caregivers of just being inhumane if they were leaving the clients alone right now. (…) And what we tried to do in our communication is to draw this line: this is work. And there is no emotional commitment.” (P14, Interest group for live-in caregiver)

Another positive aspect that should be considered around empowerment and ownership is the strengthening of inter-organizational cooperation: Many CSOs and social facilities reported to cooperate and communicate horizontally with other like-minded organizations, regionally and nationally in order to coordinate their Covid-19 strategies. For example, the health telephone for assisted living facilities (see Participation) cross-linked different care providers with communal politics. Other respondents who communicated with similar regional or national organizations was a Youth counseling organization and a mobile care organization.
What made empowerment and ownership difficult for socially and economically vulnerable groups was that many community spaces which are free of access did not exist anymore, spaces that normally serve people to come together and support each other. An organization providing long term shelter and health support for homeless people in Vienna reported they had to close their common spaces in the living houses during Covid-19. These safe spaces usually functioned as a venue to hold community meetings or just to hang out. The closure prevented empowerment, as no dialogue could take place among residents themselves which took away the possibility of helping each other in case of personal problems. One organization working with migrants and refugees reported their clients had difficulties to get adequate information on Covid-19, because many public spaces that migrant groups usually use to come together, as cafés, parks or sport facilities, were not available anymore. It became more difficult to self-organize and share information with each other.

4

## Discussion
In a pandemic, public health measures need to happen fast and require understanding of complex correlations, which makes participation in risk communication a challenge, especially for vulnerable people who are not easy to reach (e.g. people with cognitive impairment). Therefore, it is necessary to work with CSOs and social facilities who support participation of such groups, as they can assess in dialogue with their clients what way of involvement is feasible for them. In this study we analyzed community engagement efforts in Austria during Covid-19 with a focus on social sector CSOs and analyzed their experiences with regard to the six UNICEF Core Community Engagement Standards (see results). The CSOs identified gaps in the government's RCCE efforts especially regarding inclusion of vulnerable groups in crisis response as well as two-way communication with governmental bodies (see 
). 
Our study shows how important it is to define vulnerability on different levels from the very beginning of risk communication: vulnerable in relation to the public health threat (medically vulnerable (physically and psychologically) and vulnerable in relation to the public health measures taken by the government (social, economic and cultural determinants of health) [ , , , , , ]. In Austria vulnerable groups to Covid-19 were defined on a medical basis including mostly people of older age as well as people with certain chronic diseases – people with mental illness for example were defined as risk group only later on during the pandemic (in march 2021). Through the interviews with the CSO's and social facility managers we gained considerable knowledge on who else should be considered vulnerable during the Covid-19 pandemic especially with regards to social and economic vulnerability – an aspect that has long been neglected. Our findings suggest that vulnerability of some groups has increased (in comparison to the general population) because of Covid-19 measures: for example for people who do not speak German well and who did not have access to information or social services; for people who already have to deal with fear and anxiety before the pandemic; and for young people who have learning impairments and could not be in regular contact with their youth counseling organizations.
In Austria community engagement happens especially through CSO's and social facilities because they have the direct contact to the vulnerable groups. During the pandemic, it was foremost CSO's and social facilities who did the mediation and translation work: explaining measures in such a way that clients would understand them, doing awareness work for the Covid-19 vaccine, using appropriate dissemination channels, entering in dialogue with the vulnerable clients, asking about their needs. Our study also shows that in Austria – a high income country – there is much room for improving community engagement in risk communication, especially at government level.
Our results in relation to improving risk communication with vulnerable groups on governmental level is also supported by surveys with the general population in Austria on crisis communication: The Austrian Corona Panel Project from the University of Vienna did several surveys in the general population. In a survey in December 2021, for example, they asked Austrian residents how satisfied they were with the crisis communication of the federal government. Half of the respondents stated that they did not get adequate information from the government. For 40% the decisions of the government were not transparent [ ].
What our study suggests is that especially for vulnerable groups it was the CSOs who filled the gap of providing adequate, transparent and translated information to their clients as well as employees.
Establishing a solid basis for risk communication with vulnerable groups and CSOs should be understood as a long-term process where capacities of vulnerable groups and organizations working with them are strengthened to be able to face a crisis and protect themselves at best. In Austria emergency task forces with participation of social sector CSOs were created by the federal and provincial governments during the pandemic. Studies suggest that relations between CSOs and different government levels is already working well in many aspects [ ]. In a quantitative study with CSOs in Austria nearly half of the respondents report being satisfied with the government's support measures during Covid-19 with 35% reporting being neutral [ ]. The dissatisfaction is higher with CSOs working with children and youth, a finding that our study can support: the CSOs from our study had a difficult time translating government regulations into their own specific measures to keep on working with their young clients, especially because the public RCCE did not include specific rules and measures for children and youth. Children and youth – not only in Austria – were not defined as vulnerable groups or group at risk during the pandemic [ ]. Another study on the role of social sector CSOs in Austria that takes place regularly every few years found that the public communication during the pandemic was better than in 2019 where many reported a negative political climate for CSOs [ ]. Many CSOs even reported that they felt more appreciated than before the pandemic because Covid-19 made the important role of CSOs clearer than ever before [ ].
Yet, a study on Austrian CSOs by Meyer and colleagues (2021) supports the argument that emergency task forces should move on to work beyond the crisis. The more trust has already been established the better will the cooperation be in a crisis. The Austrian government involved in particular the Austrian Red Cross in their crisis management, yet in order to adequately represent the whole spectrum of vulnerable groups, smaller and medium sized CSOs should also be involved.
The layers of federalism in Austria were the source for discontent from many CSOs. It was often not clear which level would be responsible for funding or for providing tools and protective gears. Also it was often uncertain which level would be responsible for issuing standards and regulations. Communication with local or regional government bodies sometimes worked well, especially when there was longstanding contact beforehand. In our study this was particularly the case for the municipality of Vienna as well as the provincial overnment of Vorarlberg, though our results are not representative in this regard, as we interviewed a small sample. Another study on experiences of social sector CSOs in Austria found that a preexisting network with government bodies was an important factor contributing to resilience of CSOs. They found that communication worked well in the Province of Upper Austria for example [ ].
Many studies comparing community initiatives during Covid-19 in high-income countries confirm that community-based organizations play a crucial role for health promotion for vulnerable groups [ , , ]. Most community organizations reacted very quickly to the pandemic and they were able to repurpose activities, coordinate volunteer work and act as food suppliers. More studies found that CSO's were successfully engaging with physically, socioeconomically and psychologically marginalized people online, for example many CSOs adapted their websites and made information available in an easy-to-read language and accessible user-interface [ , ]. One of the challenges for the CSO's of this study were to enable participation despite social distancing and the resulting lack of direct contact. Digital solutions could be found in some cases yet face-to-face contact was the most effective way of including their clients in crisis management. Studies about digital participation during Covid-19 confirm that along new ways of digital community engagement during epidemics the more traditional approach of face to face contact remains important [ , ].

5

## Limitations and further studies
The study did not work directly with vulnerable people on risk communication during Covid-19. This aspect is the topic of another sub-study of the CAVE project. Nonetheless more studies should be done which include the experiences and voices of community members who belong to vulnerable groups themselves.
This qualitative study focuses on CSO's experiences and perceptions of the government's risk communication. Therefore, government actors were not included as interview partners. However, this limitation is addressed by including several literature sources and surveys on the government measures during Covid-19 in order to create a more balanced picture. As this was a qualitative study there is no comparison group in the general population in the data collection; however some secondary data was included about experiences of the general population with government risk communication. During the interviews some CSOs mentioned some especially hard to reach groups such as people affected by homelessness and suffering from severe mental health illnesses. Our study was not able to additionally include CSOs that cater for the needs of these especially hard to reach groups as time restraints made it impossible to increase the number of interview partners. However further studies should focus on these especially hard to reach groups and on pathways of inclusion of those. There were a few groups on the list which we were not able to contact due to time and resource limitation: people living with HIV/Aids, people who are incarcerated, women who live in women's shelters.
An aspect that this study was not able to include because it focused on risk communication between CSOs and the government was the role of partnerships with local businesses for providing all kinds of services for vulnerable people. This should be the topic for further studies.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

 

## Data availability
Data will be made available on request.

1The quotes were all translated from German to English by the first author.
2https://mocca-one.com.