pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosoneplosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC11670971PMC11670971.111670971116709713972424210.1371/journal.pone.0309205PONE-D-23-411621Research ArticleResearch and Analysis MethodsMathematical and Statistical TechniquesMathematical ModelsComputer and Information SciencesData ManagementOntologiesPhysical SciencesMathematicsApplied MathematicsAlgorithmsClustering AlgorithmsResearch and Analysis MethodsSimulation and ModelingAlgorithmsClustering AlgorithmsBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGene Identification and AnalysisGenetic NetworksComputer and Information SciencesNetwork AnalysisGenetic NetworksMedicine and Health SciencesDiagnostic MedicineComputer and Information SciencesNetwork AnalysisProtein Interaction NetworksBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryProteomicsProtein Interaction NetworksResearch and Analysis MethodsMathematical and Statistical TechniquesStatistical MethodsForecastingPhysical SciencesMathematicsStatisticsStatistical MethodsForecastingPeople and placesGeographical locationsNorth AmericaUnited StatesColoradoHypothesis generation for rare and undiagnosed diseases through clustering and classifying time-versioned biological ontologies
Hypothesis generation for rare and undiagnosed diseaseshttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-1451-8105BradshawMichael S.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisMethodologySoftwareVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing GibbsConnorInvestigationMethodologyWriting – review & editing MartinSkylarSoftware FirmanTaylorData curationResources GaskellAlisaData curationResourcesSupervision FosdickBaileyConceptualizationSupervisionWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5823-3232LayerRyanConceptualizationFunding acquisitionSupervisionWriting – review & editing 
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO, United States of America

2
Department of Statistics, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, United States of America

3
Precision Medicine Institute, Children’s Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO, United States of America

4
Department of Biostatistics & Informatics, Colorado School of Public Health, Aurora, CO, United States of America
SteinGary S.Editor ].
Living with a rare disease is extremely challenging for patients and their families. Even getting a diagnosis takes, on average, four to eight years—if they get one at all [ – ]. To receive a diagnosis, at least a partial understanding of the disease mechanism is required, but because these conditions are rare, they are often precluded from getting a diagnosis because of these criteria. In this diagnostic odyssey, patients often endure extensive testing in hopes of finding a connection between their observed genetic variants and apparent phenotypes. Given the difficulty of studying rare genetic diseases, the literature is often limited, and in many cases, there are no known connections. Online platforms such as Matchmaker Exchange [ ] and MyGene2 [ ] have made great strides in making rare diseases easier to study by connecting rare disease families and growing cohorts, but many cases remain unsolved.
For the families still waiting for a diagnosis, we propose expanding the scope of a patient’s medical history to uncover latent interactions that could help guide a diagnosis. Using the STRING protein-protein-interaction (PPI) network [ ], we can extend a patient’s variant-harboring genes to include all other genes with known protein interactions. Using HPO, we can expand the patient’s assigned phenotypes to include all closely related phenotypes and diseases. By connecting STRING and HPO [ ] with the gene-to-phenotype (g2p) connections from Orphanet [ ] and OMIM [ ], we can then look for indirect associations between the patient’s assigned data points. For example, MyGene2 patient 1930 has variants of uncertain significance (VUS) in the gene NBEA and pseudo gene SSPO. ( , dark red circle) and presented with Seizures, Myoclonus, Gait ataxia, and 14 other phenotypes ( dark blue). Due to a lack of understanding of their VUSes, compounded with no known connection between their phenotypes and affected genes, patient 1930 remains undiagnosed. The next steps for this case would involve experimentally exploring the relationships between the patient’s VUS and presenting phenotypes. The amount of time and money required to explore all possible combinations between these two genes and the 17 presenting phenotypes make this task likely unfeasible, necessitating a different approach.
 In the expanded gene ( , light red circle) and phenotype ( , light blue square) sets, there are multiple connections between NBEA and Seizures. Each of these connections represents a potential path toward diagnosis.
While STRING, HPO, Orphanet, and OMIM bring power to these analyses, they also add complexity. In particular, integrating these networks creates a large graph with approximately 35,000 nodes (genes and phenotypes) and approximately 6,000,000 edges (a connection between two nodes). In such a densely connected network, there are relatively short paths between all genes and all phenotypes. For example, while only 25% of genes have a known disease association, in the integrated graph 50% of genes are only one hop from an HPO term. In the case of patient 1930, their VUS harboring gene, NBEA, is connected to all of their phenotypes by paths of length 1 for a majority of cases and never more than a path of length 2. With the scale and connectivity of this network, simply having a path between two entities is not necessarily meaningful. But if we can identify regions with the graph where nodes are highly related and interconnected, like that shown in , between NBEA’s neighbors and Seizures, the connections between them can be meaningful. We show that we can find regions like this in the graph using network clustering algorithms and accurately predict which clusters are most likely to harbor latent gene-to-phenotype (g2p) connections. Genes and phenotypes that co-occur in these clusters are more likely to be connected in the near future. This is not the same as a diagnosis or solving a case but it can greatly reduce the number of gene and phenotype combinations that need to be experimentally confirmed, expediting the diagnostic odyssey of people like patient 1930.
It has been repeatedly observed and validated that gene products that interact with each other (e.g., have an edge between them in a PPI network) are more likely to share function [ ]. This principle is called guilt-by-association and is the key assumption of virtually all network biology methods. Under this assumption, groups of nodes that are densely connected to each other in the network indicate some higher-order relationship between them, be it proteins belonging to the same pathway, genes pertaining to a complex disease module, or genes/proteins all targetable by the same drug. Such groups of nodes like this can be identified using network clustering algorithms.
Network clustering, also known as module detection or community detection, is a valuable technique in various fields, particularly in the analysis of complex systems like biological networks . Within biological networks, a variety of clustering algorithms can be used for many purposes such as disease module detection [ – ], identifying gene regulatory network [ – ] and identify functional modules [ ].
Clustering algorithms are versatile, and the same algorithm is capable of answering questions in various situations. This is exemplified by similar classes of algorithms being applied repeatedly over the years in different studies and on different datasets (1). Thus, even though most of these studies are not focused solely on rare diseases, their ability to work on many biological networks opens the possibility of applying them to the study of virtually any disease or class thereof.
There is a trend toward using an ensemble of methods or methods capable of using higher-order patterns and integrating multiple types of networks ( ). In the early days of clustering biological networks, the trend was to use a single algorithm and a relatively small PPI network. Over time, many more types of algorithms were introduced; some were quickly abandoned, and others were used for a decade or more. In recent years, new tools have focused on using ensembles of popular tools of the past or new methods capable of leveraging higher-order patterns on their own.
 But just because a method is old does not make it obsolete; one of the first clustering tools ever published, WGCNA [ ], remains an extremely popular tool and was even included in a more recent ensemble method [ ]. Markov models were considered old and were being replaced by affinity propagation in network science as a whole back in 2009, yet proved superior on PPI networks [ ]. More recently, Markov models remain relevant due to their ability to use higher-order patterns, as [ ] point out.
The desire for using more and higher order patterns is exemplified by paper since using ensemble methods [ , ] and the return of Markov models [ ].
Similar to the diversification of clustering algorithms, the underlying networks employed have grown in size and complexity. These networks are constantly being expanded, and as shown in , the networks used in these studies have slowly transitioned from simply PPI or co-expression networks to those of highly heterogeneous nature—multilayer networks and the logical next step knowledge graphs (KGs) as taken by [ ].
We expand upon the work of clustering biological networks using an ensemble of clustering tools and a heterogeneous KG combined with a predictive model. To find new and meaningful clusters of genes and phenotypes in a densely connected network, we developed the biological ontology cluster classification (BOCC) tool. BOCC is a series of network-science-based methodologies that identify relevant clusters from a heterogeneous network comprised of HPO, STRING, OMIM, and Orphanet. We take advantage of previous versions of these data sources to create a network time series by generating yearly snapshots of the network from 2019–2022. We apply a suite of network clustering methods to all. Then, in each cluster from yeart, we quantify the number of g2p edges added during yeart+1 where both nodes co-occur within that cluster and call these rediscoveries.
By comparing the number of rediscoveries in each cluster to a null model, we calculated an empirical p-value for each cluster. We deemed those with small p-values significant, containing notably more rediscoveries than expected by chance. Year after year, there were few significant clusters. To identify which present-day clusters were useful for future discovery, we needed a way to predict which clusters likely contained new g2p edges in the near future. We trained four XGBoost models on biological and network topology features to accomplish this. Each of these four models performed binary classification to predict if a cluster satisfies a certain p-value threshold: p < 1.00, p < 0.35, p < 0.10, and p < 0.05 (one model for each threshold). Area under the curve (AUC) on a held-out test set for these models was 0.82, 0.80, 0.75, and 0.71, respectively.
These clusters predicted to be significant by the models contained between 2.35 and 8.72 times as many edges with inferred existence based on known drug interactions and their insignificant counterparts. These clusters also contained g2p connections known in mice but not yet shown in humans. Working with the profiles of 721 patients with rare diseases from Children’s Hospital Colorado, we found a significant number of potential novel g2p co-occurring pairs for 38 patient profiles. Additionally, BOCC provided potential g2p connections for 14 of 111 patients with no connection between their genes and phenotypes from the MyGene2 website. These co-occurring pairs are promising hypotheses for clinicians and researchers in these patients’ diagnostic odysseys.
BOCC is freely available as a command line tool at https://github.com/MSBradshaw/BOCC and as an interactive web application at https://ryanlayerlab.github.io/BOCC/.

## Methods
BOCC aims to identify g2p associations that have not been documented in the literature but can be inferred through existing knowledge bases. The approach involves creating clusters in a hybrid network—which is a network with nodes representing multiple types of biological entities, genes/proteins, and phenotypes in this case—and looking for genes and phenotypes that co-cluster but are not directly connected ( ). Each co-clustering, unconnected gene/phenotype pair represents hypothetical g2p associations. To evaluate the plausibility of those associations, we use historical data to create a time series of networks from 2019 to 2022. The presence of future edges in past clusters compared to a conservative null model provides a powerful training dataset to model edge-rediscovery as a function of biological and network topology features for training our model. By analyzing clusters corresponding to a patient’s medical history, BOCC can help generate new hypotheses about the architecture of their disease.

## Network construction
Our hybrid network combined the protein graph from STRING and the phenotype directed acyclic graph (DAG) from HPO using g2p edges from Orphanet and OMIM ( ). STRING has approximately 20,000 nodes that correspond to proteins/genes and approximately six million edges to represent their interactions. For example, STRING connects NBEA to GRIN1, GRIN2B, DLG4, DLG3 and more, all of which are to participate in the assembly and cell surface presentation of NMDA receptors. HPO organizes phenotype nodes into a hierarchical, tree-like structure, where edges indicate an “is a” relationship so that phenotypes become more specific deeper in the tree. For example, the leaf node Nocturnal seizures has an edge pointing to the Seizures (indicating it is a type or subclass of seizure) node which itself is a distant child of the Phenotypic abnormality node (the root of the tree as utilized here). Edges connecting STRING and HPO originated from OMIM and Orphanet and are made available as annotations to HPO by The Monarch Initiative. These edges represent causal relationships. For example, Seizures are known to be caused by a variant in GRIN2B, thus there is an edge between the two nodes. Prior to constructing the network, we removed all non-phenotypic-abnormality nodes from HPO. The full network contained non-phenotype hub nodes such as Autosomal recessive inheritance (HP:0000007) and Autosomal dominant inheritance (HP:0000006) that drastically reduced the distance between many nodes of the graph, making it difficult to infer phenotype similarity from the network topology.
Network change and growth: These data sources are continuously growing as new discoveries are made, leading to the addition and removal of edges and nodes in the network. An example of the change in size of HPO and STRING from 2019 to 2022 is shown in . Historical data about these biological networks can be used to create dynamic networks—a network whose structure changes over time. For example, the 2019 versions of STRING, HPO, OMIM, and Orphannet produced a 2019 network. This process was repeated for each year from 2019 to 2022 ( ). Prior to 2019, the recording and versioning of HPO and the g2p files were unreliable. The study of dynamic networks is fairly recent [ ] and its application in biology is yet to be seen though ripe with applications [ ]. One advantage of using a dynamic network is that when it comes to graph learning and link prediction a dynamic network creates a more realistic evaluation by capturing the temporal dynamics and dependencies present in biological systems. By incorporating the time series of the network for training and evaluation the models can leverage the knowledge of the recent past and its future to make predictions, mimicking the real-world scenarios where network structure evolves over time. This realistic evaluation allows for a more accurate assessment of the predictive models’ performance in biological networks.

## Clustering
Clustering has several advantages. First, clusters are interpretable. The algorithms are simple and mathematically explainable, and co-clustered nodes offer some detail as to how the unconnected genes and phenotypes may relate. Second, clustering is unsupervised. The limited information available about rare and undiagnosed diseases makes it nearly very difficult to create a labeled training dataset that is large enough to be helpful for most machine-learning methods. Clustering does not require labeled data and can find new patterns among human physiology and disease networks and ontologies.
We used four clustering methods to identify related, but not necessarily connected, genes and phenotypes. These methods were selected because they were based on different algorithmic approaches that included greedy modularity maximization that maximizes dense connections between the nodes [ ], walktrap which uses a random-walks-with-restart [ ], infomap which is based on ideas of information theory [ , ], and CESNA which forms communities from edge structure and node attributes [ ] ( , S1 Table) (see ).
Our goal was to find sets of genes and HPO terms that were useful to clinical researchers, but these clustering algorithms identified clusters that were too large to be comprehensible (e.g. infomap identifies a cluster with greater than 20,000 nodes)( ). Following discussion with clinicians, we determined that the clusters should not have more than 100 nodes, which agrees with the Disease Module Identification DREAM Challenge [ ]. To bound the size, we re-clustered all previously identified clusters using Paris hierarchical clustering [ ], specifying an upper limit to cluster size. The result was many more small clusters ( ).

## Edge-rediscovery
Every unconnected co-clustered gene/phenotype pair represents a potentially latent g2p connection. To validate the biological relevance of these connections, we used our hybrid network time series to count the potential connections in one year’s network that were confirmed by the subsequent year’s network. For example, after creating two distinct networks and clusters from the 2019 and 2020 versions for STRING, HPO, OMIM, and Orphanet and performing clustering on the 2019 network, there were 128,798 new edges in the 2020 network that did not exist in 2019 (but both nodes were present). These edges represent the g2p discoveries made in 2020. After performing clustering on the 2019 network, we found of the 2020 g2p edges, 696 had co-occurring vertices in our 2019 clusters, or “rediscoveries” as we like to call them.
It is worth noting that our rediscovery method had limitations. First, our definition of rediscovery was conservative and only considered findings made in the following year. Just because a cluster had no rediscoveries in year t + 1, does not mean it would not have any in t+ 2 or t+ 3; year after year, it becomes more probable that a cluster has a rediscovery ( ). For example, there were 696 rediscoveries from 2019 to 2020 and 1011 from 2019 to 2021. Using a short 1-year peek into the future, as few as 15% of clusters had one or more rediscoveries. If we look 3 years into the future, as many as 37% of clusters had a rediscovery. Second, the number of rediscoveries is bounded by the priorities and the productivity of the biomedical research community. For example, the number of g2p edges grew by a factor of 3 from 2019 to 2020, which is likely explained by a burst in curation efforts in the Monarch Initiative. Regardless of the clusters BOCC creates, due to the incomplete and ever-advancing nature of biomedical knowledge, many of its unconnected co-clustered vertices would remain undiscovered for years, and given the technical and ethical limitations of research, we would expect that many of the connections would never be found.
 Each clustering algorithm rediscovered different information. Consider the specific edges rediscovered from 2021 in the 2020 clusters. In total, there were 31,858 edges that could possibly be rediscovered. Across the four algorithms, 1,299 total edges were rediscovered. 599 were rediscovered by two or more algorithms, and the rediscovery of 700 was unique to a single algorithm. While one algorithm may outperform another in the total number of edges rediscovered, the high amount of edges rediscovered by only a single algorithm suggested we should not choose a “best” algorithm, but instead consider them all in-concert for the best results ( ). This coincides with the findings of Peel et al. 2017 [ ] that clustering algorithms abide by the idea of No Free Lunch—none are universally optimal.
Given the size and complexity of our hybrid network, rediscovered edges could occur by chance. To evaluate how likely this is for a given cluster, we compared the number of rediscoveries per cluster to the expected number using a snowball-sampling-inspired [ ] null model ( ). Our null model generated a set of 10,000 synthetic clusters by selecting one node at random from the network, then iteratively adding that node’s neighbors, those neighbor’s neighbors, and so on until the size of the original cluster was reached, and then repeated this process 10,000 times. We then performed edge-rediscovery on the synthetic clusters as described earlier. This results in an empirical rediscovery distribution from which we could extract the expected number of rediscovers and determine the significance of the observed rediscovery count. We chose this method over a random-graph or edge-shuffle null model because the random-graph model tended to overestimate significance in our network ( ) and biological networks in general [ , ]. Among the 41,968 2019 clusters, 1,323 are non-trivial (heterogeneous and have > 3 members). Of these non-trivial clusters, 255 have at least one rediscovery (19.3% of non-trivial clusters). The distribution of the empirical p-values of these non-trivial clusters with at least 1 rediscovery can be seen in .
 

## Predicting cluster usefulness
Using historical data, we identified many clusters, only a portion of which contained rediscoveries in the subsequent year and a smaller portion of which had more rediscoveries than expected under the null model. We anticipated this observation would continue to be true in the future, which necessitated a means of predicting which clusters were most likely to contain a substantial number of rediscoveries in the near future. To do this we trained an XGBoost classifier [ ] with a DART model (Dropouts meet Multiple Additive Regression) [ ] as the booster to predict if a cluster satisfies several significance thresholds ( ). Due to the high amount of variation in the predictive performance across significance thresholds, rather than selecting a single threshold, we selected several to allow users to choose the balance between predictive performance and the likelihood of clusters containing a non-random abundance of new edges in the near future. Specifically, we train four models to predict if clusters’ p-values are p < 1.00, p < 0.35, p < 0.10, or p < 0.05. Analysis of ROC AUC of all thresholds up to 1.00, in .05 steps, revealed these four thresholds led to the best model performances ( ). To address the imbalance of classes (if a cluster’s p-value is above or below the threshold) when thresholding the p-values for training, we randomly down-sampled the majority class without replacement to equal the size of the minority class. This resulted in 779, 700, 496, and 343 samples of each class for the models trained with thresholds p < 1.00, 0.35, 0.10, 0.05 respectively.
 For each subcluster, we calculated a series of 20 biological and network topology-based features. Feature selection was performed using the greedy Sequential Feature Selection method [ ] which resulted in a set of 9 features ( ). Feature importance was determined using SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations) [ ], and the model for predicting clusters with p < 0.35.
 We tuned the hyper-parameter for each model using a genetic algorithm optimizer [ ]. We used a population of 40, 100 generations, and F1 score as the fitness metric. A full list of the hyperparameters search space and the final values for each threshold model can be seen in . The fitness improvement over time can be seen in .
 Our final models were trained using the selected features ( ), their corresponding hyperparameters ( ), and class-balanced sets of clusters from 2019 and 2020. As our test set, we use the 2021 clusters. The models achieved ROC AUC of 0.82, 0.80, 0.75, and 0.71 for the models trained to predict p < 1.00, 0.35, 0.10, or 0.05 ( ).

## Processing clinical samples
We performed a retrospective study of medical records and used BOCC to generate hypotheses for 721 fully anonymized rare and undiagnosed disease patient profiles at Children’s Hospital Colorado (CHCO). CHCO granted permission to use the data, and the Colorado Multiple Institutional Review Board (COMIRB) approved the protocol used here. Records were accessed on November 8th 2023, and authors did not have access to any identifiable information. These patients had all previously undergone whole exome sequencing (WES) and had their conditions described with HPO terms by clinicians. Patients had between 1 and 17 associated HPO terms (median 3). For our analysis, we used the variant call format (VCF) files generated by CHCO’s standard variant calling pipeline, which identified, on average 42,449 SNPs and indels in each patient. These variants were filtered down to an average of 401 variants per patient by selecting variants that met the following criteria:
f = population frequency (0.00–1.00)
i = is insufficient population frequency (true/false)
e = is located on an exon (true/false)
s = is located on a splice site (true/false)
c = is a coding effect other than synonymous (true/false)
l = is labeled pathogenic/likely-pathogenic (P/LP) based on ClinVar scoring (true/false)
select variant if (f < 0.01 ‖ i) & (e ‖ s) & (c ‖ l)
Given the number of patients, affected genes, and HPO terms we searched for, there was a real possibility of false positive co-occurring pairs. To control for this, we generated empirical p-values for each patient by comparing the number of co-occurring gene and phenotype pairs each patient had to the number of co-occurring pairs expected based on a null model. Our null model operated by doing the following for each patient:
Choose a set of HPO terms belonging to another patient at random from the set of all patients.
Count co-occurring pairs found between the patient’s affected genes and the random set of HPO terms.
Repeat steps 1 and 2 100 times.
Calculate the empirical probability the number of co-occurring pairs under the null model is greater than or equal to the observed.

## BOCC based tools
To use BOCC to generate hypotheses for a specific patient, one can search the clusters for co-occurring pairs of an affected gene and presenting phenotype in the clusters predicted to be significant. We provide two tools for accessing and interacting with BOCC: a web-based network visualization tool and a command-line interface (CLI). Access the visualization tool at https://ryanlayerlab.github.io/BOCC/.
The BOCC CLI is better suited for searching for many g2p connections in the clusters. The requirements for the CLI and full documentation can be found at https://github.com/MSBradshaw/BOCC.
The BOCC web app allows users to search for HPO terms and genes within the BOCC clusters in a browser-based interactive manner. Once a cluster has been selected, it is easy to see how genes and HPO that are not directly connected could be. A screenshot of the web app exploring one of the MyGene2 patients can be seen in . To use the BOCC web app for hypothesis generation, a researcher can search for a series of HPO terms and genes, and then view clusters where the search terms co-occur in the context of other relevant genes and HPO terms. All clusters predicted to exceed any threshold of significance will be reported and ordered according to the number of matching terms, followed by the predicted significance threshold, ties in the order are arbitrarily broken alphabetic order of the cluster-ID.
 

## Results

## CHCO patients
We applied BOCC to 721 patients from Children’s Hospital Colorado (CHCO) with suspected genetic drivers of their diseases. These patients had all previously undergone whole exome sequencing (WES) and had their conditions described with HPO terms by clinicians. Patients had between 1 and 17 associated HPO terms (median 3) ( ). For our analysis, we used the variant call format (VCF) files generated by CHCO’s standard rare disease variant calling pipeline, which identified, on average, 42,449 SNPs and indels in each patient ( ). After performing quality control (Section), there were, on average, 401 variants per patient ( ). We then used the BOCC CLI to search for co-occurrences of each patient’s potentially affected genes and HPO terms.
 BOCC found potential co-occurring pairs for 619 patients in clusters predicted to be significant by the p ≤ 0.05 model, ( ). From this experiment, we found that 38 of the 619 patients with a co-occurring pair had significantly (p ≤ 0.05) more co-occurring pairs than expected by the null model as described in Section ( ). Similar results were found when using clusters predicted by models trained on the thresholds p ≤ 1.00, 0.35, 0.10 ( ). One may expect the p-value to directly result from the number of HPO terms assigned to each patient. We did not find this to be the case. While there is evidence of some correlation between the two values ( ), there were still a substantial number (21) of samples with significant p-values with fewer than 8 HPO terms, with a great degree of variability within the lower numbers of HPO term samples. Similarly, having a high number of HPO terms does not guarantee a low p-value; for example, the patient with the second largest number of HPO terms, 14, only had a p-value of 0.10.
 

## MyGene2
Having validated BOCC’s ability to rediscover information on a rigorous null model and validation and test sets based on real times series (see Figs and ), we then applied it to undiagnosed disease patient data found on MyGene2 (https://www.mygene2.org/MyGene2/) [ ]. MyGene2 is a website dedicated to helping families, clinicians, and researchers connected to individuals living with a rare or undiagnosed disease with similar genotypic and phenotypic information, which can go a long way to help the n-of-1 problem. MyGene2 provides a location on the internet for users to upload and publicize genetic information, lists of phenotype HPO terms, and patient background information. The amount of information and degree of privacy is determined by the users. Some users upload many paragraphs of background information and photos of the patient accompanied by a VCF and a long list of HPO terms, which are all publicly available. Other users opt to upload only a single candidate gene/variant and a few HPO terms that are only accessible to those who have also contributed to MyGene2 (other families, clinicians, or researchers). We scraped all publicly accessible profiles on MyGene2 (912 in total), ( ). We found that presently 111 of these profiles contained no direct connection between any of their genes and any of their HPO terms; we assumed these cases to still be undiagnosed. We then searched for co-occurrences of g2p pairs related to their undiagnosed profiles in our clusters from the 2022 network. We found 19 pairs from 14 MyGene2 patients where the currently unconnected gene and phenotype co-occurred in the same cluster ( ).
 Of these MyGene2 patients’ gene-phenotype pairs found in BOCC clusters, all shortest paths between the two nodes have only a single intermediary gene node connecting them.

## Mammalian phenotype ontology
We further evaluated the utility of the clusters using g2p connections present in mice but not present in our 2022 network. We identified 90 g2p connections known from knock-out studies in mice but not yet observed in humans. The clusters suggest that 5 of these pairs may yet exist in humans ( ). One of these pairs (SLC4A1 and HP:0001927) had supporting evidence coming from multiple clusters. These 90 theorized connections we searched for were made by connecting Mammalian Phenotype Ontology (MPO) and their mouse gene knock-out studies to human resources going from MPO → OMIM → HPO. The MPO → OMIM connections were made by Sardana et al 2010 [ ] and were gathered from their .
 

## Rediscovery of drug inferred edges
We created a list of g2p edges that do not exist in humans but are inferred based on drug-to-gene and drug-to-disease edges from the Comparative Toxicogenomics Database (CTD) [ ]. CTD identifies 101,300,249 potentially latent gene-to-disease connections using drugs as intermediaries between genes and disease. Many of the substances in CTD are listed as both therapeutic for a disease and causative of the same disease, we remove all such edges (97,795,120). We further removed an additional 2,233,706 edges that did not have a mapping from their disease MESH ID to an HPO term. This left us with 1,147,313 inferred g2p edges. We searched for these edges in clusters and found substantially more edges occurring within clusters predicted significant than not ( ). There were between 2.35 and 8.72 times as many discovered edges in clusters predicted significant versus not—further evidence that our models can identify which clusters are enriched for latent g2p connections.
 

## Discussion
Rare diseases affect 25 to 30-million people in the United States [ ]. Despite this, it is not uncommon for diagnostic odysseys to last 4–8 years, with many patients never receiving any final diagnosis [ – ]. We have presented BOCC, an analytical pipeline comprised of methodologies and tools for hypothesis generation and exploration. We demonstrated its utility for proposing novel gene-to-phenotypes connections in 38 patient profiles provided to us by Children’s Hospital Colorado and on a total of 14 patients publicly listed on MyGene2.
Ultimately BOCC is an aid to clinicians still searching for answers after standard diagnostic and variant prioritization methods have failed to yield conclusive results. BOCC is not a variant prioritizer; it is a tool intended to cast a wide net by expanding the search space and considering known relationships and interactions of genes and phenotypes. To reduce the chance of false positives, we recommend limiting the searches with BOCC to genes harboring variants that have already been prioritized by another tool or have other preliminary evidence suggesting their culpability but lacked sufficient evidence on their own—such as the quality control process used with the CHCO patients.
In addition to these more specific contributions, we have learned many things along the way that are more broadly applicable to users of biological networks. The use of historical data to create a network time series is a relatively new development in network science, even more so in applications to human health, and presents advantages when training predictive models on networks. Frequently, when building predictive models that operate on biological networks “a fraction of links from the current graph structure is deleted, and taken as the test set” because “one cannot know the future links of a graph at time” [ ]. While it is true we do not know the future, we do however know the past and the past’s future, which we used here for testing and training. Here, we created and used time-stamped versions of our network in the training and evaluation of our models. This is in essence a dynamic network—a network whose structure changes over time. The study of dynamic networks is fairly recent [ ] and its application in biological is yet to be seen, though ripe with applications [ ]. One advantage of using a dynamic network is that it creates a more realistic evaluation by capturing the temporal dynamics and dependencies present in biological systems. By incorporating the time series of the network for training and evaluation, the models can leverage the knowledge of the recent past and its future to make predictions, mimicking the real-world scenarios where network structure evolves over time. This realistic evaluation allows for a more accurate assessment of the predictive models’ performance in biological networks.
We found the structure of the network itself must be carefully considered. When constructing our relatively small knowledge graph from STRING and HPO, we found that certain terms in HPO were extremely highly connected (e.i. hub nodes) and not necessarily informative in predicting novel g2p connections. This includes nodes related to the sub-trees of HPO related to “Clinical modifier”, “Mode of inheritance”, “Past medical history”, “Blood group”, and “Frequency”—all very useful for describing phenotypes from an ontological perspective, but harboring the potential to create uninformative connections that may affect topology reliant clustering methods. For example, the HPO term “Autosomal recessive inheritance” has 2,762 direct neighbors, only two of which are HPO terms. By including this hub, the genes MPIG6B and RIPOR2 are connected by the path MPIG6B—“Autosomal recessive inheritance”—RIPOR2, whereas without the nodes encoding modes of inheritance, the shortest paths connecting MPIG6B to RIPOR2 are of length 6. Pruning and curating just a single ontology did not present much of a challenge to our study, but with the vast number of large and complex ontologies available, if someone were to try and include a large quantity of them in their own graph could present serious undertaking in selecting which parts of an ontology to include to avoid potential spurious connections.
In this study, we devised a snowball-sampling-based null model and showed it to be more conservative than null models used in other works based on the generation of random clusters and edge-shuffling that have been used previously to quantify cluster and model significance [ ]. By combining this null model with the time series aspect of our network (Section), we have created a robust null model and evaluation method. This snowballing null model and edge-rediscovery is another contribution that could easily be taken and applied broadly in the evaluation of future methods and analyses.
The entire application of clustering of biological networks to study disease rests on the idea of guilt-by-association—which means genes that are functionally related or co-expressed with a disease-associated gene or protein are also likely to be involved in the same disease or biological process. Guilt-by-association is an assumption and is known to be imperfect [ ]. BOCC uses and compares a variety of widely used clustering algorithms. In our comparisons, we concluded that the best results are achieved as an ensemble method rather than any single one. Additionally, through our analyses, we found that the vast majority of identified clusters do not exceed the expectations set by our null model; in fact only 16.8% of non-trivial clusters do. These clusters are predicted to be biologically relevant and useful for hypothesis generation but may or may not identify genetic pathways [ – ] or disease modules [ – ]—previous research has shown similar clustering algorithms identify these types of information but we do not explicitly measure it. Using a variety of network topology and biological clustering measurements we were able to train a classification model to predict the significance of a cluster with a reasonable degree of certainty by identifying those clusters where guilt-by-association is valid.
BOCC relies heavily on the structure of the PPI networks and phenotype ontology that make up its knowledge graph. While these sources provide much of the power behind BOCC, they also bring with them inherent biases. The growth of this source is not consistent or unbiased. STRING is an aggregation of numerous databases, PPI networks, and studies. It has been shown that the growth and structure of PPI networks is not necessarily representative of biology, but of the interest and focus of the biomedical research field as a whole [ ]. Similarly, the depth and breadth of phenotype terms vary widely throughout HPO. For instance the term “Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita”, HP:0002804 is a leaf node in HPO, the most specific available term, but is associated with numerous very specific and distinct types of arthrogryposis in OMIM such as “Arthrogryposis, distal, type 1A” and “Arthrogryposis, distal, type 2B2”. This is an area within HPO that could potentially benefit from deeper phenotyping. But it also highlights the power of the hierarchical nature of the ontology as patients with any type of arthrogryposis can still be described with a more general but still fairly specific HPO term. Regardless of the limitations of STRING and HPO, they remain best in class for what they are.
In our experiment using the patient profiles, we consider patients “undiagnosed” if there is no direct connection between the variant harboring genes and HPO terms. This is a simplification as a patient’s diagnostic state is not determined by any computation tool, ontology, or database. These resources aid decisions but diagnoses are ultimately made by health care professionals and their careful consideration of the evidence. Our assumption is however necessary and useful if useful for trialing our tool.
In this study we operated on a relatively small knowledge graph, using only two source ontologies. In Open Biological and Biomedical Ontology Foundry (OBO Foundry) [ ] there are well over 100 ontologies currently maintained and active. There are many ongoing efforts to combine all knowledge relating to human health into a single large knowledge graph such as PheKnowlater [ ] and the Integrated Monarch Ontology [ ]. A clear future direction of this work is to include, learn from, and use a more full representation of human biology. One hurdle to overcome here is the semantic information also accompanying biological ontologies. Just as we had to prune HPO prior to using it in this study, we anticipate the same would be required for other sources, which may become a burden as the number of ontologies grows. A method like BOCC could also be expanded by integrating quantifiable data like gene expression. Work already exists using this data for phenotype classification in depended of biological networks or ontologies [ ].
In scaling up the quantity of information used, we anticipate other algorithmic approaches may become necessary. One of the great advantages of using a full knowledge graph is the vast heterogeneity of the data types. Instead of operating on just genes and phenotypes, we could include diseases, drug interactions, pathways, regulator elements, tissue expression/specificity, and much more. However, most clustering algorithms are blind to node and edge type, a huge loss of information. Of the clustering algorithms we used here, only CESNA took into account node type. This problem inspired the recent ECoHeN algorithm [ ] and is also addressed in proposed alterations to modularity to account for heterogeneous networks [ ]; though this latter approach may still be hindered by the resolution limit inherent to modularity-based approaches [ ]. Alternatively, it has been shown how node embeddings can be created and used to represent higher-order patterns in biological knowledge graphs more heterogeneous than those used here [ ].
Through this study, we have demonstrated how a variety of network science clustering methods applied to a heterogeneous biological time-varying network can be instrumental in finding novel connections between mutation-harboring genes and phenotypes, potentially causal links for rare and undiagnosed diseases. From a conceptual standpoint, this study contributes to the methodological understanding of clustering and classifying in network biology for understanding rare and undiagnosed diseases. It also provides concrete and ready-to-use tools for exploring the gene-to-phenotype connections in our clusters in a web application and command line interface.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## A contrived example illustrating various types of community structure including a) disjoint, B) overlapping, and C) hierarchical communities.
Adapted from [ ].
(TIFF)
S2 FigShown are distributions of cluster size using A. greedy B. walktrap C. infomap and D. censa. The second column contains the subcluster size distributions, where every cluster from panels A-D were clustered again with the paris-hierarchical method E. greedy-paris F. walktrap-paris G. infomap-paris and H. censa-paris. In all of these plots the x-axis is cluster-size and the y-axis is the number of clusters. The first three of the clustering algorithms on their own, have a tendency to produce very few clusters that are all very large, some with a membership larger than 20,000 nodes, in the case of infomap. Our end goal is to use these clusters to provide sets of genes and phenotypes that are likely to have yet-to-be-discovered clinically meaningful relationships. These clusters in A-D are far too large to be useful for hypothesis generation in clinical or experimental settings. A second layer of cluster with the paris method is applied and shown in F-H, setting an upper limit of 100 on cluster size results in many more clusters of a size manageable for human curation.
(TIFF)
S3 Fig

## Distribution of empirical p-values of the 2019 greedy-paris clusters using three different null models: Snowballing sampling, edge shuffle, and random clusters.
All figures share the same y-axis which is also on a log scale. The proportion of clusters with p < 0.05 in each model is 6%, 48%, and 39%, for snowballing, edge-shuffle, and random clusters respectively. Snowballing has 70% of its clusters with p = 1.00, whereas the other two models have zero clusters falling into this category.
(PDF)
S1 Methods

## Additional details about clustering methods and alternative null models.
(PDF)
S1 Dataset

## Data from MyGene2.
(CSV)

The authors thank Dr. Jessica Chong for her help in understanding MyGene2, and Dr. Tiffany Callahan for her helpful feedback and advice along the way.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0309205.r001Decision Letter 0
OgundokunRoseline OluwaseunAcademic Editor© 2024 Roseline Oluwaseun Ogundokun2024Roseline Oluwaseun Ogundokunhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
8 Jan 2024

PONE-D-23-41162HYPOTHESIS GENERATION FOR RARE AND UNDIAGNOSED DISEASES THROUGH CLUSTERING AND CLASSIFYING TIME-VERSIONED BIOLOGICAL ONTOLOGIESPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Layer,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.

ACADEMIC EDITOR: 

The main comments made by the reviewers on the manuscript about the Biological Ontology Cluster Classification (BOCC) tool can be summarized as follows:
1. Figures in the manuscript are not properly labeled.
2. Inconsistency in font face and clarity between text and images.
3. Lack of clarity on the novelty of the study needs highlighting in the introduction.
4. Absence of a literature review section to establish context and credibility.
5. The manuscript seems outdated due to the limited citation of recent works; it needs updating with suggested references made by the reviewers, which I suggest you incorporate in your article, such as the introduction section or literature review section.
6. Recommendations for proofreading to correct grammatical mistakes.
7. Suggestion to compare results with state-of-the-art studies for validation.
8. Absence of a discussion on the limitations of the study; recommended for inclusion in the conclusion.
9. Overall, the paper is well-written and suitable for the journal but lacks a conclusion section to summarize findings and implications.
This summary addresses the key areas the reviewers have identified for improvement, including technical presentation, content depth, literature context, and overall structure.
Please ensure that your decision is justified on PLOS ONE’s publication criteria and not, for example, on novelty or perceived impact.
For Lab, Study and Registered Report Protocols: These article types are not expected to include results but may include pilot data. 
==============================
Please submit your revised manuscript by Feb 22 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Roseline Oluwaseun Ogundokun, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. Please note that PLOS ONE has specific guidelines on code sharing for submissions in which author-generated code underpins the findings in the manuscript. In these cases, all author-generated code must be made available without restrictions upon publication of the work. Please review our guidelines at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/materials-and-software-sharing#loc-sharing-code and ensure that your code is shared in a way that follows best practice and facilitates reproducibility and reuse
3. Please note that PLOS ONE has specific guidelines on code sharing for submissions in which author-generated code underpins the findings in the manuscript. In these cases, all author-generated code must be made available without restrictions upon publication of the work. Please review our guidelines at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/materials-and-software-sharing#loc-sharing-code and ensure that your code is shared in a way that follows best practice and facilitates reproducibility and reuse
4. We suggest you thoroughly copyedit your manuscript for language usage, spelling, and grammar. If you do not know anyone who can help you do this, you may wish to consider employing a professional scientific editing service.  
Whilst you may use any professional scientific editing service of your choice, PLOS has partnered with both American Journal Experts (AJE) and Editage to provide discounted services to PLOS authors. Both organizations have experience helping authors meet PLOS guidelines and can provide language editing, translation, manuscript formatting, and figure formatting to ensure your manuscript meets our submission guidelines. To take advantage of our partnership with AJE, visit the AJE website (http://learn.aje.com/plos/) for a 15% discount off AJE services. To take advantage of our partnership with Editage, visit the Editage website (www.editage.com) and enter referral code PLOSEDIT for a 15% discount off Editage services.  If the PLOS editorial team finds any language issues in text that either AJE or Editage has edited, the service provider will re-edit the text for free.
Upon resubmission, please provide the following: 
● The name of the colleague or the details of the professional service that edited your manuscript
● A copy of your manuscript showing your changes by either highlighting them or using track changes (uploaded as a *supporting information* file)
● A clean copy of the edited manuscript (uploaded as the new *manuscript* file)
5. Thank you for stating the following financial disclosure: "This work was supported by a grant from Children's Hospital Colorado."  
Please state what role the funders took in the study.  If the funders had no role, please state: ""The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript."" 
If this statement is not correct you must amend it as needed. 
Please include this amended Role of Funder statement in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
6. Thank you for stating the following in the Acknowledgments Section of your manuscript: "This work was supported by a grant from Children's Hospital Colorado."  
We note that you have provided funding information that is not currently declared in your Funding Statement. However, funding information should not appear in the Acknowledgments section or other areas of your manuscript. We will only publish funding information present in the Funding Statement section of the online submission form. 
Please remove any funding-related text from the manuscript and let us know how you would like to update your Funding Statement. Currently, your Funding Statement reads as follows: "This work was supported by a grant from Children's Hospital Colorado."  
Please include your amended statements within your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
7. We note that you have indicated that there are restrictions to data sharing for this study. For studies involving human research participant data or other sensitive data, we encourage authors to share de-identified or anonymized data. However, when data cannot be publicly shared for ethical reasons, we allow authors to make their data sets available upon request. For information on unacceptable data access restrictions, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions. 
Before we proceed with your manuscript, please address the following prompts:
a) If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially identifying or sensitive patient information, data are owned by a third-party organization, etc.) and who has imposed them (e.g., a Research Ethics Committee or Institutional Review Board, etc.). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent.
b) If there are no restrictions, please upload the minimal anonymized data set necessary to replicate your study findings to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. Please see http://www.bmj.com/content/340/bmj.c181.long for guidelines on how to de-identify and prepare clinical data for publication. For a list of recommended repositories, please see https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/recommended-repositories. You also have the option of uploading the data as Supporting Information files, but we would recommend depositing data directly to a data repository if possible.
Please update your Data Availability statement in the submission form accordingly.
8. Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information. 
9. We notice that your supplementary figures are uploaded with the file type 'Figure'. Please amend the file type to 'Supporting Information'. Please ensure that each Supporting Information file has a legend listed in the manuscript after the references list.
10. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Additional Editor Comments:
The main comments made by the reviewers on the manuscript about the Biological Ontology Cluster Classification (BOCC) tool can be summarized as follows:
1. Figures in the manuscript are not properly labeled.
2. Inconsistency in font face and clarity between text and images.
3. Lack of clarity on the novelty of the study needs highlighting in the introduction.
4. Absence of a literature review section to establish context and credibility.
5. The manuscript seems outdated due to the limited citation of recent works; it needs updating with suggested references made by the reviewers, which I suggest you incorporate in your article, such as the introduction section or literature review section.
6. Recommendations for proofreading to correct grammatical mistakes.
7. Suggestion to compare results with state-of-the-art studies for validation.
8. Absence of a discussion on the limitations of the study; recommended for inclusion in the conclusion.
9. Overall, the paper is well-written and suitable for the journal but lacks a conclusion section to summarize findings and implications.
This summary addresses the key areas the reviewers have identified for improvement, including technical presentation, content depth, literature context, and overall structure.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: the study presents an innovative tool named Biological Ontology Cluster Classification (BOCC). This tool is aimed at assisting in the diagnosis of rare and undiagnosed diseases by identifying potential gene-to-phenotype (g2p) associations that are not explicitly documented in the current literature. Here are my comments on the manuscript:
1. All the figures are not properly labeled.
2. the manuscript has different font face. for instance, I dont know how I will classify the text/image between line 50 and 51. Is it text or image, if it is text, while did it have different front face and if it is image while is it not label?
3. I understand that BOCC is available as both a web application and a command-line tool, making it accessible for different types of users ranging from researchers to clinicians. However, what is the novelty of this study? the author is expected to highlights the contributions of this study towards the last paragraph of the introduction section.
4. I suggest that the author should create a section to discuss the literature review of some related work done in this area so as to enhance the credibility of this study.
6. Havn't checked this manuscript thoroughly, I observed that the author makes little efforts to cite and reference 2023 work. This act makes the manuscript looks outdated. Therefore, I will suggest that the author should make use of this following searched references to updated their manuscript:
1. Zhuang, Y., Jiang, N., Xu, Y., Xiangjie, K., & Kong, X. (2022). Progressive Distributed and Parallel
Similarity Retrieval of Large CT Image Sequences in Mobile Telemedicine Networks. Wireless
communications and mobile computing, 2022. doi: 10.1155/2022/6458350
2. Lu, G., Duan, L., Meng, S., Cai, P., Ding, S.,... Wang, X. (2023). Development of a colorimetric and
turn-on fluorescent probe with large Stokes shift for H2S detection and its multiple applications
in environmental, food analysis and biological imaging. Dyes and Pigments, 220, 111687. doi:

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dyepig.2023.111687

3. Siyu Lu, J. Y. B. Y. (2023). Analysis and Design of Surgical Instrument Localization Algorithm.
Computer Modeling in Engineering & Sciences, 137(1), 669-685. doi:
10.32604/cmes.2023.027417
4. Zhu, Y., Huang, R., Wu, Z., Song, S., Cheng, L.,... Zhu, R. (2021). Deep learning-based predictive
identification of neural stem cell differentiation. Nature Communications, 12(1), 2614. doi:
10.1038/s41467-021-22758-0
5. Chen, L., He, Y., Zhu, J., Zhao, S., Qi, S., Chen, X.,... Xie, T. (2023). The roles and mechanism of
m6A RNA methylation regulators in cancer immunity. Biomedicine & Pharmacotherapy, 163,
114839. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2023.114839
6. Huang, H., Liu, L., Wang, J., Zhou, Y., Hu, H., Ye, X.,... Tang, B. Z. (2022). Aggregation caused
quenching to aggregation induced emission transformation: a precise tuning based on BN-doped
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons toward subcellular organelle specific imaging. Chemical
Science, 13(11), 3129-3139. doi: 10.1039/D2SC00380E
7. Huang, H., Wu, N., Liang, Y., Peng, X., & Shu, J. (2022). SLNL: A novel method for gene selection
and phenotype classification. International Journal of Intelligent Systems, 37(9), 6283-6304. doi:

https://doi.org/10.1002/int.22844

5. I suggest that the manuscript should be thoroughly proof-read to avoid some grammar mistake.
6. I recommend that the author should compare their result with the state-of-the-art studies so as to validate the strength of the obtained result.
7. What is the limitation of this study. This can be included in the conclusion section to give room for future research.
Reviewer #2: This manuscript is well written, introducing their BOCC tool. As they write, BOCC is a series of network-science-based methodologies that identify relevant clusters from a heterogeneous network comprised of HPO, STRING, OMIM, and Orphanet. I do not have any major suggestions for how to improve this paper, and it seems suitable for this journal venue.
Reviewer #3: The research addressed the topic of discuss but there are areas to be improved. The importance of literature review cannot be overemphasized. it is of great importance as it serves the purpose of establishing the context of a research study by elucidating the existing knowledge on the subject matter. This aids researchers in situating their work within the already established body of knowledge. Secondly, it allows researchers to identify gaps within the current knowledge base, which can subsequently form the foundation for research questions or hypotheses. Thirdly, a literature review supports the justification of research methodologies or methods by showcasing the manner in which prior studies were conducted and their contributions to the field. Therefore as observed that this important section is missing in the work, I suggest that it be included and relevant work be added to improve this research. I suggest the following work:
1. Luo, Y., Chen, D., & Xing, X. (2023). Comprehensive Analyses Revealed Eight Immune Related Signatures Correlated With Aberrant Methylations as Prognosis and Diagnosis Biomarkers for Kidney Renal Papillary Cell Carcinoma. Clinical Genitourinary Cancer, 21(5), 537-545. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clgc.2023.06.011
2. Gan, Y., Xu, Y., Zhang, X., Hu, H., Xiao, W., Yu, Z.,... Zheng, S. (2023). Revisiting Supersaturation of a Biopharmaceutical Classification System IIB Drug: Evaluation via a Multi-Cup Dissolution Approach and Molecular Dynamic Simulation. Molecules , 28(19), 6962. doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules28196962
3. Fan, Z., He, Y., Sun, W., Li, Z., Ye, C.,... Wang, C. (2023). Clinical characteristics, diagnosis and management of Sweet syndrome induced by azathioprine. Clinical and Experimental Medicine, 23, 3581-3587. doi: 10.1007/s10238-023-01135-9
4. Wu, J., Fang, Z., Wang, X., Zeng, W., Zhao, Y., Jiang, F.,... Li, J. (2022). SLIT2 Rare Sequencing Variants Identified in Idiopathic Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism. Hormone Research in Paediatrics, 95(4), 384-392. doi: 10.1159/000525769
5. Gong, T., Zhang, F., Feng, L., Zhu, X., Deng, D., Ran, T.,... Ji, X. (2023). Diagnosis and surgical outcomes of coarctation of the aorta in pediatric patients: a retrospective study. Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine, 10. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2023.1078038
6. Fan, Z., He, Y., Sun, W., Li, Z., Ye, C., & Wang, C. (2023). Amoxicillin-induced aseptic meningitis: clinical features, diagnosis and management. European journal of medical research, 28(1), 301. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40001-023-01251-y
7. Jin, K., Gao, Z., Jiang, X., Wang, Y., Ma, X., Li, Y.,... Ye, J. (2023). MSHF: A Multi-Source Heterogeneous Fundus (MSHF) Dataset for Image Quality Assessment. Scientific Data, 10(1), 286. doi: 10.1038/s41597-023-02188-x
The introduction should include wht the work is contribution to the body of knowledge and conclude with section of the work.
The conclusion furnishes a brief overview of the primary discoveries and outcomes of the investigation, highlighting the significant implications of the study. It permits the researcher to contemplate on the degree to which the study has accomplished its objectives and whether the research inquiries have been addressed. Implications: The conclusion provides an occasion to deliberate upon the ramifications of the research findings, encompassing their pertinence to the research domain, practical implementations, and prospective influence.
I observed that there is no conclusion. I suggest this section be included.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0309205.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
20 Feb 2024

Rebuttal Letter
The text in black is copied and pasted from the email from the editor. Our comments and
response to each item is in red.
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affili ations.pdf
Updated formatting
2. Please note that PLOS ONE has specific guidelines on code sharing for submissions in which author-generated code underpins the findings in the manuscript. In these cases, all author-generated code must be made available without restrictions upon publication of the work. Please review our guidelines at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/materials-and-software-sharing#loc-sharing-code and ensure that your code is shared in a way that follows best practice and facilitates reproducibility and reuse
License added to github, Data Availability Statement updated
3. Please note that PLOS ONE has specific guidelines on code sharing for submissions in which author-generated code underpins the findings in the manuscript. In these cases, all author-generated code must be made available without restrictions upon publication of the work. Please review our guidelines at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/materials-and-software-sharing#loc-sharing-code and ensure that your code is shared in a way that follows best practice and facilitates reproducibility and reuse
Data Availability Statement section has been added with details about code and data access.
4. We suggest you thoroughly copyedit your manuscript for language usage, spelling, and grammar. If you do not know anyone who can help you do this, you may wish to consider employing a professional scientific editing service.
 Whilst you may use any professional scientific editing service of your choice, PLOS has partnered with both American Journal Experts (AJE) and Editage to provide discounted services to PLOS authors. Both organizations have experience helping authors meet PLOS guidelines and can provide language editing, translation, manuscript formatting, and figure formatting to ensure your manuscript meets our submission guidelines. To take advantage of our partnership with AJE, visit the AJE website (http://learn.aje.com/plos/) for a 15% discount off AJE services. To take advantage of our partnership with Editage, visit the Editage website (http://www.editage.com ) and enter referral code PLOSEDIT for a 15% discount off Editage services. If the PLOS editorial team finds any language issues in text that either AJE or Editage has edited, the service provider will re-edit the text for free.
Upon resubmission, please provide the following:
● The name of the colleague or the details of the professional service that edited your manuscript
● A copy of your manuscript showing your changes by either highlighting them or using track changes (uploaded as a *supporting information* file)
● A clean copy of the edited manuscript (uploaded as the new *manuscript* file)
Edits were made by Michael Bradshaw and Ryan Layer. Changes were tracked with Overleaf and will be provided.
5. Thank you for stating the following financial disclosure: "This work was supported by a grant from Children's Hospital Colorado."
Please state what role the funders took in the study. If the funders had no role, please state: ""The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.""
If this statement is not correct you must amend it as needed.
Please include this amended Role of Funder statement in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
Elaborated members of Children’s Hospital were involved in this study saying:
This work was supported by a grant from Children's Hospital Colorado. Members of the funding body collected the patient data, aided in the direction of analysis, and are authors of the paper.
6. Thank you for stating the following in the Acknowledgments Section of your manuscript: "This work was supported by a grant from Children's Hospital Colorado."
We note that you have provided funding information that is not currently declared in your Funding Statement. However, funding information should not appear in the Acknowledgments section or other areas of your manuscript. We will only publish funding information present in the Funding Statement section of the online submission form.
Please remove any funding-related text from the manuscript and let us know how you would like to update your Funding Statement. Currently, your Funding Statement reads as follows: "This work was supported by a grant from Children's Hospital Colorado."
 Please include your amended statements within your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
Amended text has been added to the cover letter.
7. We note that you have indicated that there are restrictions to data sharing for this study. For studies involving human research participant data or other sensitive data, we encourage authors to share de-identified or anonymized data. However, when data cannot be publicly shared for ethical reasons, we allow authors to make their data sets available upon request. For information on unacceptable data access restrictions, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions.
Before we proceed with your manuscript, please address the following prompts:
a) If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially identifying or sensitive patient information, data are owned by a third-party organization, etc.) and who has imposed them (e.g., a Research Ethics Committee or Institutional Review Board, etc.). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent.
b) If there are no restrictions, please upload the minimal anonymized data set necessary to replicate your study findings to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. Please see http://www.bmj.com/content/340/bmj.c181.long for guidelines on how to de-identify and prepare clinical data for publication. For a list of recommended repositories, please see https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/recommended-repositories. You also have the option of uploading the data as Supporting Information files, but we would recommend depositing data directly to a data repository if possible.
Please update your Data Availability statement in the submission form accordingly.
Data Availability statement has been updated to include details about requesting access to CHCO patient records. The patient data from MyGene2, all of which is publicly available is included in S1_dataset.csv
8. Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information.
Supporting info section added
 9. We notice that your supplementary figures are uploaded with the file type 'Figure'. Please amend the file type to 'Supporting Information'. Please ensure that each Supporting Information file has a legend listed in the manuscript after the references list.
Supplementary figures have been properly labeled
10. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Duplicate citations removed
Additional Editor Comments:
The main comments made by the reviewers on the manuscript about the Biological Ontology Cluster Classification (BOCC) tool can be summarized as follows:
1. Figures in the manuscript are not properly labeled.
Figures labels have been updated to match PLOS guidelines.
2. Inconsistency in font face and clarity between text and images.
3. Lack of clarity on the novelty of the study needs highlighting in the introduction. 4. Absence of a literature review section to establish context and credibility.
A literature review has been added to the introduction.
5. The manuscript seems outdated due to the limited citation of recent works; it needs updating with suggested references made by the reviewers, which I suggest you incorporate in your article, such as the introduction section or literature review section.
Additional references have been added in the literature review section.
6. Recommendations for proofreading to correct grammatical mistakes.
Proof reading has been done and edits made
7. Suggestion to compare results with state-of-the-art studies for validation.
We agree with you about the importance of comparing tools. Our manuscript includes comparisons with widely used clustering algorithms and null models. More specifically, we
 compared four pre-existing and widely used clustering algorithms and a comparison of the traditional random-graph based null models vs the more conservative snow-ball sampling-based approach. To make this easier to find, we have added clearer language about our comparisons and findings. As for comparing high level results of BOCC to other tools, we do not know of any other method that unbiasedly discovers co-occurring genotype/phenotype pairs. While it is module identification tools and variant prioritization tools do yield pairs, their search is biases toward pathways or patients. If the reviewers are aware of tool directly comparable to BOCC that we are not, we will be happy to perform a comparison and cite them.
8. Absence of a discussion on the limitations of the study; recommended for inclusion in the conclusion.
We agree on the importance of a discussion of the limitations, discussion has been added.
9. Overall, the paper is well-written and suitable for the journal but lacks a conclusion section to summarize findings and implications.
Per PLOS ONE submission and formatting guidelines a conclusion section is not required and can be combined with the discussion and or results section. See https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-results-discussion-conclusions
“Results, Discussion, Conclusions
These sections may all be separate, or may be combined to create a mixed Results/Discussion section (commonly labeled “Results and Discussion”) or a mixed Discussion/Conclusions section (commonly labeled “Discussion”).”
We found for the sake of narrative integrating the discussion and conclusion seemed best. But we acknowledge that if the reviewers miss that information it should be clearer, so we have added emphasising language in the discussion section about we conclude.
This summary addresses the key areas the reviewers have identified for improvement, including technical presentation, content depth, literature context, and overall structure.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.] Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
 The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: No Reviewer #2: Yes
 Reviewer #3: Yes
We and collegaes have done a general full proofreading of the manuscript to catch any errors.
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: the study presents an innovative tool named Biological Ontology Cluster Classification (BOCC). This tool is aimed at assisting in the diagnosis of rare and undiagnosed diseases by identifying potential gene-to-phenotype (g2p) associations that are not explicitly documented in the current literature. Here are my comments on the manuscript:
1. All the figures are not properly labeled.
Thank you for noting this, figure labels have been fixed.
2. the manuscript has different font face. for instance, I dont know how I will classify the text/image between line 50 and 51. Is it text or image, if it is text, while did it have different front face and if it is image while is it not label?
Formatting of this section has been edited to match PLOS’s guidelines.
3. I understand that BOCC is available as both a web application and a command-line tool, making it accessible for different types of users ranging from researchers to clinicians. However, what is the novelty of this study? the author is expected to highlights the contributions of this study towards the last paragraph of the introduction section.
The novelty of BOCC has now been highlighted in the introduction, it was previously only discussed at length in the Discussion section.
4. I suggest that the author should create a section to discuss the literature review of some related work done in this area so as to enhance the credibility of this study.
A literature review has been added to the introduction, complete with a table!
6. Havn't checked this manuscript thoroughly, I observed that the author makes little efforts to cite and reference 2023 work. This act makes the manuscript looks outdated. Therefore, I will suggest that the author should make use of this following searched references to updated their manuscript:
 Thank you for this suggestion to include more recent citations. We have included additional references in the literature review and discussion sections. We have carefully reviewed each paper listed below and comment on why we chose to cite it or not.
1. Zhuang, Y., Jiang, N., Xu, Y., Xiangjie, K., & Kong, X. (2022). Progressive Distributed and Parallel
Similarity Retrieval of Large CT Image Sequences in Mobile Telemedicine Networks. Wireless communications and mobile computing, 2022. doi: 10.1155/2022/6458350
We appreciate this article deals with human health and 
AttachmentSubmitted filename: BOCC_rebuttal (1).pdf
10.1371/journal.pone.0309205.r003Decision Letter 1
Vall-llosera CampsMiquelStaff Editor© 2024 Miquel Vall-llosera Camps2024Miquel Vall-llosera Campshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
15 May 2024

PONE-D-23-41162R1HYPOTHESIS GENERATION FOR RARE AND UNDIAGNOSED DISEASES THROUGH CLUSTERING AND CLASSIFYING TIME-VERSIONED BIOLOGICAL ONTOLOGIESPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Layer,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.

I would like to sincerely apologise for the delay you have incurred with your submission. Due to the concerns raised about the process of evaluation of this manuscript, it was considered necessary to invite additional reviewers to provide comments on your study. Although some reviewers are happy with the revised version, other reviewers have raised remaining scientific concerns about the study that need to be addressed. Please revise the manuscript to address all the reviewer's comments in a point-by-point response in order to ensure it is meeting the journal's publication criteria. Please note that the revised manuscript will need to undergo further review, we thus cannot at this point anticipate the outcome of the evaluation process.

Please submit your revised manuscript by Jun 24 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Miquel Vall-llosera Camps
Staff Editor
PLOS ONE
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #3: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #4: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #5: (No Response)
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
Reviewer #5: Partly
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
Reviewer #5: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
Reviewer #5: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
Reviewer #5: No
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: The Author have attended to all the comments raised by the reviewer. Therefore, I recommend the manuscript for publication.
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
Reviewer #4: The study is novel and Article may be accepted. This research is fascinating and incredibly promising for advancing our understanding of rare diseases and providing potential diagnoses for patients who have struggled to find answers. The approach of integrating protein-protein interactions and phenotype relationships through networks and clustering is innovative and holds great potential for uncovering latent gene-to-phenotype connections. The use of databases like STRING and HPO, combined with the development of a tool like BOCC, marks a significant step forward in addressing the diagnostic challenges posed by rare diseases. The ability to identify significant clusters that correlate with known drug interactions is particularly exciting, as it opens new avenues for targeted therapeutic interventions.
Reviewer #5: The authors introduced a clustering method that can be used to discover the potential and novel gene-phenotype relationship. It is especially important for undiagnosed patients and unknown gene-phenotype relationships. The clusters reported by the method can be a guide to shortening the search space. Although the author addressed many questions raised by the reviewers in the first review process, the experimental setup and the clinical usage and validation are still unclear to me. Moreover, the author needs to do more proofreading as numerous mistakes are observed easily.
Major comments:
1. The formatting and language are usually relatively minor during review. However, multiple reviewers have already pointed it out in the first review. Several grammatical errors and formatting errors persist in the manuscript. I think the author should take it very seriously. I still observed many formatting issues, such as a missing space before the citation. For example, in page 2, “Matchmaker Exchange[2] and MyGene2[1]”. Many issues might be easily detected by Grammarly or other tools. I will recommend really finding an English editing service for the proofreading.
2. In page 2, these two sentences: “Using the Human Phenotype Ontology, we can expand the patient’s assigned phenotypes to include all closely related phenotypes and diseases. By connecting STRING and HPO [4] with the gene-to-phenotype (g2p) connections from Orphanet[5] and OMIM[6], we can then look for indirect associations between the patient’s assigned data points.”
HPO was not introduce as abbriveation after the first appearance. And the citation for HPO should be after the first appearance.
3. Page 3: “There is a trend toward using an ensemble of methods or methods capable of using higher-order patterns and integrating multiple types of networks (Table 1 ).” Redundant space before “)”.
4. Page 10: “Fig 4. A. Procedure for training and evaluating the XGboost model. Features were generated about each cluster (identified as described in Section )”, which Section? Is the Section number missing here? In page 11: the same issue, “After performing quality control (Section ), there were on average 401 variants per patient (Fig 6.C).”
5. The author refers g2p to gene to phenotype. Does the author use Phenotype in this paper as a feature (HPO term)? We often use phenotype to refer to disorders and describe HPO terms by features.
6. The author's definition of the undiagnosed patient in CHCO and MyGene2 is unclear. The first sentence of the result section states, “We applied BOCC to 721 patients from Children’s Hospital Colorado (CHCO) with suspected genetic drivers of their diseases.” Does that mean these patients are undiagnosed?
7. Moreover, in MyGene2 section, “We found that presently 111 of these profiles contained no direct connection between any of their genes and any of their HPO terms; we assumed these cases to still be undiagnosed.”, I think it is problematic. It is dangerous to assume the patient is undiagnosed because there is no connection between HPO and the gene. I randomly checked some patients in Table S1 and Table 5. I found some of the patients are already published in the literature, and I believe they are diagnosed. The first question is the patient with ID 3071 (https://mygene2.org/MyGene2/familyprofile/3071/profile). It is the first patient in Table S1. This patient was already published in a paper with PMID (25142838) and annotated with Kabuki and KMT2D. Does the author consider this patient as diagnosed or undiagnosed? For example, patient ID 877 (https://mygene2.org/MyGene2/familyprofile/877/genetic/gene) is already published in https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5082428/. This patient was also annotated with Joubert syndrome and a likely pathogenic mutation in B9D2. Besides, patient ID 1292 has likely pathogenic mutation in TNNT3 and was diagnosed as “Arthrogryposis, Distal, Type 1A”. And the author reported “Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita” as a new relationship to TNNT3. However, we can see from the disease name linked to TNNT3, which is “Arthrogryposis, distal, type 2B2,” and the entry in omim was updated in 2019. I would say this new relationship between this HPO and TNNT3 is not surprised at all because you can see it from the disease name. Therefore, I wonder what the meaning of this prediction is.
8. My main concern is that I don’t know how I validate wheter the connection found by the cluster is correct or not. The experiement should start from validate on the existing relationship from diagnosed patients. Then we know that the relationship found in the cluster do have some meanings. Then, we might select some patients with a disease gene found after the model is built. For example, the model trained on the data from 2019, then we can check whether the model can predict the relationship between the HPO and a Gene X, which was found as a disease-causing gene in 2020. As pointed out previously, when the definition of diagnosed and undiagnosed is unclear, it is very difficult to validate whether the cluster is meaningful or not, even though the experiments reported many significant p-values from different methods.
9. In the end, how the clinicians use this tool is unclear. There are many nodes in the graph, and many clusters were reported after the HPO and genes are given as input. It will be great to show more examples and the steps how the user should use. For example, I tried several HPOs linked to Cornelia de Lange syndrome (NIPBL gene), Long eyelashes (HP:0000527). Synophrys (HP:0000664) and Highly arched eyebrow (HP:0002553). However, I only found NIPBL is the third claster. I believe it is the key features for CdLS (NIPBL). Therefore, how do I interpret the first two clusters without NIPBL? The experiment and results showed that this method is working, statistically. However, how to interpret the results and validate the clinical meaning is unclear.
10. Will the gene in the same pathway or same phenotypic series shown in the same cluster?
11. In author’s first example, Patient 1930 with VUS in NBEA and SSPO. The author stated in the introduction that with more experiment to the associated phenotype in the clusters could help us to diagnose this patient. I believe the phenotype here is the HPO term. I wonder why we can use the new gene-to-hpo to solve the case with VUS? Does it contribute to the ACMG variant classification?
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #3: No
Reviewer #4: Yes: Amit Joshi
Reviewer #5: Yes: Tzung-Chien Hsieh
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0309205.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
25 Jun 2024

Response to Reviewers
Major comments:
1. The formatting and language are usually relatively minor during review. However, multiple reviewers have already pointed it out in the first review. Several grammatical errors and formatting errors persist in the manuscript. I think the author should take it very seriously. I still observed many formatting issues, such as a missing space before the citation. For example, in page 2, “Matchmaker Exchange[2] and MyGene2[1]”. Many issues might be easily detected by Grammarly or other tools. I will recommend really finding an English editing service for the proofreading.
We apologize for the mistakes, thank you for bringing them to our attention. We have used grammarly and have had multiple native English speakers proofread and edit the manuscript for this revision. We hope you find it satisfactory.
2. In page 2, these two sentences: “Using the Human Phenotype Ontology, we can expand the patient’s assigned phenotypes to include all closely related phenotypes and diseases. By connecting STRING and HPO [4] with the gene-to-phenotype (g2p) connections from Orphanet[5] and OMIM[6], we can then look for indirect associations between the patient’s assigned data points.”
HPO was not introduce as abbriveation after the first appearance. And the citation for HPO should be after the first appearance.
Thank you for your attention to detail; we have fixed this oversight.
3. Page 3: “There is a trend toward using an ensemble of methods or methods capable of using higher-order patterns and integrating multiple types of networks (Table 1 ).” Redundant space before “)”.
This has been addressed, thank you.
4. Page 10: “Fig 4. A. Procedure for training and evaluating the XGboost model. Features were generated about each cluster (identified as described in Section )”, which Section? Is the Section number missing here? In page 11: the same issue, “After performing quality control (Section ), there were on average 401 variants per patient (Fig 6.C).”
Missing section numbers have been added, thank you.
5. The author refers g2p to gene to phenotype. Does the author use Phenotype in this paper as a feature (HPO term)? We often use phenotype to refer to disorders and describe HPO terms by features.
No, we do not use HPO terms directly as features. HPO terms can be used as features - that is a valid methodological approach; but that is not the approach used here.
 6. The author's definition of the undiagnosed patient in CHCO and MyGene2 is unclear. The first sentence of the result section states, “We applied BOCC to 721 patients from Children’s Hospital Colorado (CHCO) with suspected genetic drivers of their diseases.” Does that mean these patients are undiagnosed?
Thank you for raising this point of confusion. We do not claim that all 721 CHCO patients are still undiagnosed, as we are not privy to that aspect of the clinical records nor do we have IRB approval to access that information. But we do know
1. They were suspected of having a disease of genetic origin - which is why they underwent WES sequencing
2. There are no known connections between their VUS and the HPO terms assigned by their doctor - a hallmark of an undiagnosed disease case as set forth by the Clinical validity requirement of the CDC’s ACCE model.
We have added clarifying language around this point in a paragraph starting at line 414.
7. Moreover, in MyGene2 section, “We found that presently 111 of these profiles contained no direct connection between any of their genes and any of their HPO terms; we assumed these cases to still be undiagnosed.”, I think it is problematic. It is dangerous to assume the patient is undiagnosed because there is no connection between HPO and the gene. I randomly checked some patients in Table S1 and Table 5. I found some of the patients are already published in the literature, and I believe they are diagnosed. The first question is the patient with ID 3071 (https://mygene2.org/MyGene2/familyprofile/3071/profile). It is the first patient in Table S1. This patient was already published in a paper with PMID (25142838) and annotated with Kabuki and KMT2D. Does the author consider this patient as diagnosed or undiagnosed? For example, patient ID 877 (https://mygene2.org/MyGene2/familyprofile/877/genetic/gene) is already published in https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5082428/. This patient was also annotated with Joubert syndrome and a likely pathogenic mutation in B9D2. Besides, patient ID 1292 has likely pathogenic mutation in TNNT3 and was diagnosed as “Arthrogryposis, Distal, Type 1A”. And the author reported “Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita” as a new relationship to TNNT3. However, we can see from the disease name linked to TNNT3, which is “Arthrogryposis, distal, type 2B2,” and the entry in omim was updated in 2019. I would say this new relationship between this HPO and TNNT3 is not surprised at all because you can see it from the disease name. Therefore, I wonder what the meaning of this prediction is.
The fact that some of these MyGene2 cases have been solved and published is a vote of confidence for our tool; it shows that our predictions were correct! The bigger question is, if these cases are solved, is there no recorded association between them and the rare disease databases on which the edges in HPO are based? That is a question for the database and ontology curators.
 We conceded that our assumption of undiagnosed in MyGene2 cases has limitations and have added a discussion of the points raised by reviewer 5 to the manuscript, see the new paragraph starting at line 414.
The reviewer has struck upon several outstanding issues, limitations but also intentional features of phenotype-based methods and biological ontologies more broadly:
Distinct meaning - “Arthrogryposis, Distal, Type 1A” is a different disease than “Arthrogryposis, distal, type 2B2”. So while it may not be surprising that mutations to the same gene cause them, it would still be a new connection.
Specificity of terms/incompleteness of data - “Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita” is a leaf node in HPO - it is the most specific identifier currently available. Having more general terms like this one is beneficial in that it allows inferences to be made about a class phenotypes more broadly (like what is happening to patient 1292) or to catch cases where more precise terms do not exist and where terms of greater detail need to be added.
We have added some discussion about this topic at line 406, which highlights the need to continue expanding and improving these ontologies.
8. My main concern is that I don’t know how I validate wheter the connection found by the cluster is correct or not. The experiement should start from validate on the existing relationship from diagnosed patients. Then we know that the relationship found in the cluster do have some meanings. Then, we might select some patients with a disease gene found after the model is built. For example, the model trained on the data from 2019, then we can check whether the model can predict the relationship between the HPO and a Gene X, which was found as a disease-causing gene in 2020. As pointed out previously, when the definition of diagnosed and undiagnosed is unclear, it is very difficult to validate whether the cluster is meaningful or not, even though the experiments reported many significant p-values from different methods.
Yes, what you described is exactly how our validation experiments work. We identify clusters on the 2019 data, then label those clusters according to if new edges in the 2020 graph are found with in the 2019 clusters. These clusters and labels are then used to train our machine learning classifiers which are then tested and evaluated on the 2021 data - showing that the procedure works. Unfortunately, we are unaware of a set of patient profiles that would enable such an experiment; but we are open to suggestions.
9. In the end, how the clinicians use this tool is unclear. There are many nodes in the graph, and many clusters were reported after the HPO and genes are given as input. It will be great to show more examples and the steps how the user should use. For example, I tried several HPOs linked to Cornelia de Lange syndrome (NIPBL gene), Long eyelashes (HP:0000527). Synophrys
 (HP:0000664) and Highly arched eyebrow (HP:0002553). However, I only found NIPBL is the third claster. I believe it is the key features for CdLS (NIPBL). Therefore, how do I interpret the first two clusters without NIPBL? The experiment and results showed that this method is working, statistically. However, how to interpret the results and validate the clinical meaning is unclear.
Thank you for taking the time to use our tool! Since there are already known connections between these HPO terms and gene, our tool is of limited utility as it is intended to generate hypotheses about latent gene-to-phenotype connections, regardless we hope you enjoyed the visual interface.
It is odd NIPBL does not show up until cluster 3 for you. When we searched for all those HPO terms and NIPBL, it is present in the first cluster (see screenshot below). As for the interpretation of the first two clusters not having the gene in them, this is likely an artifact of the sorting procedure in the web interface. It sorts by the number of search term matches, then by the predicted p-value, and then breaks ties by sorting the cluster IDs alphabetically.
We have added additional instructions of the web app use at line 284; thank you for the recommendation.
 10. Will the gene in the same pathway or same phenotypic series shown in the same cluster?
Excellent question. Sometimes, but not always. Clustering algorithms are often used for identifying/ inferring genetic pathways and “disease modules” - or groups of closely related diseases. This was part of the motivation for using clustering. We this is mentioned in the introduction, but we have added text highlighting this later on at line 396.
11. In author’s first example, Patient 1930 with VUS in NBEA and SSPO. The author stated in the introduction that with more experiment to the associated phenotype in the clusters could help us to diagnose this patient. I believe the phenotype here is the HPO term. I wonder why we can use the new gene-to-hpo to solve the case with VUS? Does it contribute to the ACMG variant classification?
Nice observations. Yes, the phenotype and the HPO term are the same; we consider these terminologies more or less equivalent the difference being that HPO terms are precise and discrete and may not fulling encompass or describe all phenotypes. A predicted potential link between an HPO term and a VUS does not constitute a solved case; it is a promising hypothesis to be tracked down with further experimentation, literature, and or database research inorder to satisfy ACMG criteria. Our language around this was admittedly imprecise and has been updated, lines 69.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: response_to_reviewers (1).pdf
10.1371/journal.pone.0309205.r005Decision Letter 2
SteinGary S. Academic Editor© 2024 Gary S. Stein2024Gary S. Steinhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
8 Aug 2024

HYPOTHESIS GENERATION FOR RARE AND UNDIAGNOSED DISEASES THROUGH CLUSTERING AND CLASSIFYING TIME-VERSIONED BIOLOGICAL ONTOLOGIES
PONE-D-23-41162R2
Dear Dr. Layer,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager® and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Gary S. Stein
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #5: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #5: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #5: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #5: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #5: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #5: (No Response)
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #5: Yes: Tzung-Chien Hsieh
**********
10.1371/journal.pone.0309205.r006Acceptance letter
SteinGary S. Academic Editor© 2024 Gary S. Stein2024Gary S. Steinhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
23 Aug 2024

PONE-D-23-41162R2 
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Layer, 
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
If revisions are needed, the production department will contact you directly to resolve them. If no revisions are needed, you will receive an email when the publication date has been set. At this time, we do not offer pre-publication proofs to authors during production of the accepted work. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few weeks to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps. 
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Gary S. Stein 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE