379blackwellopenThe British Journal of SociologyBr J SociolPMC1161780211617802116178023902048010.1111/1468-4446.13134Renewal without replication: Expanding Durkheim's theory of disruptions via queer nightlife
GhazianiAmin AbrutynSeth 
1
UBC Sociology, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada*

Correspondence
, 
Amin Ghaziani. 
Email: amin.ghaziani@ubc.ca

✉Corresponding author.
1772024755854854–8726122024© 2024 The Author(s). The British Journal of Sociology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of London School of Economics and Political Science.This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.

## Abstract
Gay bars are closing in large numbers around the world, but institutional loss provides only a partial narrative for evaluating the larger field of nightlife. Drawing on 112 interviews, we argue that bar closures disrupted the field and consequently encouraged the visibility of alternate nightlife forms, called club nights. Unlike the fixed and emplaced model of bars, club nights are episodic and event‐based occasions that are renewing nightlife without replicating the format of the gay bar. By detailing the phenomenology of club nights, we develop a new Durkheimian theory of disruptions that explains how and why some members of a community are motivated to renew rather than replicate existing institutional structures. We bring our framework to organization, sexuality, and nightlife studies—subfields that seldom engage with Durkheim—while subjecting a foundational social theory to an empirical case that can push it forward in important ways.
Keywords: disruptive events, Durkheim, gay bars, idiopolitics, nightlife, organizational change

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2024 Jun 6; Received 2024 May 3; Accepted 2024 Jul 4; Issue date 2024 Dec.

1.

## INTRODUCTION
Professional sociology was forged in a sea of economic, political, and cultural disruptions that raised discipline‐defining questions about community, social difference, and belonging. No sociologist was more concerned with these disruptions than Durkheim, who worried about how increasingly diverse societies could generate feelings of solidarity in the face of constant change (Durkheim,  ). What emerged from a set of historically specific experiences was a general theory of disruptions that conceptualized individuals as motivated to avoid the breakdown of communities, lest they feel anomie (Abrutyn,  ). This has been interpreted by Durkheimians as an explanation for why the renewal of the group, whatever its size or composition, is often predicated on the replication of well‐worn ritualized encounters, at the interactional level (Abrutyn,  ; Collins,  ), and at the organizational level, in the use of conventional forms that facilitate those rituals (Alexander,  ). In short, reproducing existing structures, cultures, and experiences is a means of survival during moments of threat. We test Durkheim's theory of disruptions by bringing it into conversation with organization, sexuality, and nightlife studies, subfields that seldom engage with Durkheim, in an effort to push the framework forward in ways that can speak to concerns shared by a broader range of scholars. Under what conditions does this theoretical model of disruptions hold, and what pathways lead to alternate outcomes?
Labeled a “closure epidemic” by some (Douek,  , p. 184), LGBTQ nightlife venues are closing in large numbers. Between 2006 and 2016, 58% of gay bars, pubs, and nightclubs shuttered in London, falling from in number from 125 to 53 remaining venues. An audit by the mayor's office found that 44% of all nightclubs and 25% of all pubs in the city had also closed during this same period. Thus, while all nighttime venues are struggling, the impact on LGBTQ spaces is more dire. The two most common explanations for closures are both economic. Redevelopment is the first: because the land is often more valuable than the business, a developer purchases the bar, razes it, and puts up something else in its place, such as luxury housing, offices, or chain retail. A second explanation highlights failed lease negotiations due to steep rent hikes (Campkin & Marshall,  ). 

The decline of conventional nightlife forms in this global capital of finance and culture is part of an international pattern. Residents of Berlin call it “clubsterben,” translated as “the club that dies” or “club death” (Garcia,  ), “caused mainly from gentrification” (Andersson,  , p. 113). Similar institutional losses of bars, pubs, and clubs have been documented around the world (Eeckhout et al.,  ; Rosser et al.,  ). In the United States, 41% of gay bars closed between 2002 and 2019 (Mattson,  ). Writing for Bloomberg, Morgan ( ) provides perspective on these global declines: “In 1976, there were 2500 gay bars in the United States; today, there are fewer than 1400 worldwide.”
Importing a concept from the study of organizations (Zhang,  ), social movements (Fligstein & McAdam,  ), and culture (Swidler,  ) into nightlife scholarship, we argue that bar closures operated as a disruptive event, or a sizable disturbance to an existing state of affairs that has the potential to create structural and social changes. This frame enables us to evaluate Durkheim's thesis by examining how responses to the disruption of the “primary social institutions” of LGBTQ life after the Second World War (Bérubé,  , p. 271) are met with renewal efforts by replication—open more bars as existing establishments close—or, perhaps, an alternative project. Indeed, as we will show, a second response appears to have emerged in the opportunity window pried open by the disruption, particularly in the interplay between the unique cultural histories of certain minority segments of LGBTQ groups, their political relations with dominant groups, and place‐based characteristics. On the one hand, we observe efforts by municipal authorities in cities like London to replicate older institutional patterns. However, given the modal groups to which gay bars cater, using them as a generalized metric of community life risks racializing nightlife as white and gendering it as cis and male (Hunter,  ; Rosenberg,  ). It is the consequences of this latter path that does not supplant Durkheim's theory but, rather, supplements it by explaining how and why new organizational forms become more visible, prompting renewal efforts without replication.
At the level of everyday life, people make great efforts to respond to the fragility of the social order. We draw from more than 100 interviews to show that itinerant forms of fellowship curated by individuals who operate in the cultural economy (Currid,  ), as well as those who identify as queer, trans, Black, Indigenous, or as people of color (QTBIPOC), have become more articulated in the field of nightlife, thus encouraging renewal efforts while resisting pressures to replicate gay bars as the exclusive form for nightlife (Bailey,  ). In the context of global conversations and political movements about Black lives (Francis & Wright‐Rigueur,  ), these alternative forms of fellowship, called “club nights,” have emerged in greater number and variety during the disruption, thus affirming the associations between nightlife, urban life, and social inequalities. Existing work about event‐based nightlife scenes is generally published by humanists, who theorize diasporas (Manalansan,  ), music (Salkind,  ), fashion (Moore,  ), and performance (Khubchandani,  ). By adopting a distinctively sociological perspective, we use club nights to retheorize organizational changes in the midst of structural upheavals.
This argument makes several contributions. First, we redirect the conceptual basis of nightlife studies away from deficit to an asset‐based model of empowerment (Hunter & Robinson,  ; Morris,  ). To make this move, we shift our analysis from an isomorphic focus (DiMaggio & Powell,  ) on bar forms to organizational expressions that are sometimes presented as “sociological epiphenomena” (Wynn,  , p. 276), or secondary forms that orbit the bars rather than sovereign centers of nightlife. Second, the events we examine represent a joint response to a disruption and the “intersectional failures” (Crenshaw,  , p. 1450; Moore,  ) of gay bars, where one form of difference overrides the others. Finally, we offer a robust theory of disruptions that explains when renewal with or without replication is likely to take hold under conditions of community threat.

2.

## NIGHTLIFE FORMS
Emerging in greater numbers after the Second World War, gay bars were often “the only public” place (Kahn & Gozemba,  , p. 92) if not “the only place in town” (Armstrong,  , p. 34) for LGBTQ people to socialize while acknowledging their sexuality. Bars provided reprieve from feelings of “crushing isolation” (Kennedy & Davis,  , p. 29), even if it was illegal to sell or serve alcohol at establishments that openly hosted non‐heterosexuals. Because liquor licenses functioned as mechanisms of state surveillance (Canaday,  ), gay bars became symbols of resistance and freedom. A California Supreme Court decision in 1951, Stoumen v. Reilly, ruled that it was illegal to close a venue simply because “persons of known homosexual tendencies patronized said premises and used said premises as a meeting place.” In the decades that followed, gay bars became “central institutions” (Harry,  , p. 238) and “the single most important public manifestation of the subculture” (Kennedy & Davis,  , p. 80).
Although they are “anchored” in particular places (Ghaziani,  , p. 383), gay bars are institutionally impermanent; they “come and go, like a chain of lights blinking on and off over a map of the city” (Achilles,  , p. 182). Based in San Francisco in the 1960s, this early observation resembles the current closure epidemic. When Achilles argued that “familiar bars close and new ones replace them” (p. 179), she restricted the format of nightlife while generalizing its audience. The “gay world” comprises an entire “galaxy of social types” (p. 180), yet that world and galaxy are reduced to bars. This move established a tradition of accounting for cultural variation as a function of bar types while remarking less frequently about the exclusionary practices of those same places (Riggs,  ; Rosenberg,  ), let alone alternative nightlife forms.
Although pioneering (Harry,  ; Israelstam & Lambert,  ) and contemporary researchers (Hilderbrand,  ; Mattson,  ) acknowledge the diversity of bar types around the world (Martel,  ), they seldom analyze organizational variations in the larger field (Scott,  ) of nightlife. Studies feature bear bars for hirsute gay men (Hennen,  ), leather bars for fetishists (Rubin,  ), lesbian (Podmore,  ) and dyke bars (Brown‐Saracino, ), Black bars (Johnson,  ; Tolliver,  ), drag bars (Rupp & Taylor,  ), suburban gay bars (Podmore & Bain,  ), and even post‐gay bars that enable queer interactions in the context of heterosexual integration (Baldor,  , ; Hartless,  ). To be fair, researchers do emphasize the heterogeneity of queer social life, including private house parties (Thorpe,  ), clubs for stigmatized groups (Whitesel,  ), and events at bookstores (Liddle,  ), record companies (Taylor & Whittier,  ), and music festivals (Gamson,  ). But they generally consider such “infrastructures of the social” (Berlant,  , p. 404) as sites to understand the failures of the capitalist state (Ibid.), racism (Lane,  ), retreats from homophobia (Newton,  ), or as evidence of sexual cultures that form during inhospitable historical moments (Chauncey,  ).
Nightlife has never been solely about bars, although some public commentators (Huneke,  ), city officials (Greater London Authority,  ), and academics emphasize them in disproportionate measure. While recent writings complicate a simplistic assessment of gay bars as places that cater only to limited groups (Greene,  ), these studies prioritize arguments about adaptation over organizational changes, providing evidence for what we call renewal with replication, including efforts to preserve existing venues (Campkin,  ) as new bars open (McCormack & Measham,  ). Yet we still have little systematic evidence, especially in sociology, about nightlife forms beyond the bar.
QTBIPOC groups have often used their subcultural capital (Thornton,  ) to organize alternative scenes. Stillwagon and Ghaziani ( ) call these scenes “popups,” arguing that they provide fellowship for groups who feel excluded from mainstream venues like gay bars. Examples of occasional, popup gatherings are numerous, including queer parties at the Adelphi Rooms, a boarding lodge in London, in the 1920s (Houlbrook,  ); drag parties at speakeasies during American prohibition in the 1920s and 1930s (Bullock,  ); rent parties that Black lesbians organized in postwar Detroit and elsewhere during the 1940s and 1950s (Lane,  ; Thorpe,  ); from the 1970s onward, the ballroom scene emerged in the United States, with revelers voguing to house music on the east coast and waacking to disco on the west coast (Bailey,  ); British raves bloomed in the 1980s and 1990s (Gillett,  ); circuit parties diffused around the world in the late 1990s and 2000s (Ghaziani & Cook,  ); and queer techno parties in Berlin, like Buttons and Cocktail d’Amore, became popular in the 2010s (Andersson,  ). Each scene used the episodic and event‐based format, and in terms of our theoretical intervention, each implicitly challenges that the reproduction of gay bars is the only means of community survival and celebration.
This work, which we see as part of a larger temporary turn in urban studies (Bishop & Williams,  ), economic sociology (Hirschman,  ), and sexuality studies (Muñoz,  ), examines temporal and organizational variations in “queer infrastructure” (Campkin,  , p. 7). Our objective is not normative, to malign or champion any particular component of nightlife infrastructure, but to draw attention to its often‐overlooked complexity beyond the most visible examples of formal licensed venues. Event‐based scenes ought to be a “subject matter in their own right” (Goffman,  , p. 2), as they are a “basic unit of sociological investigation” (Becker,  , p. 270). By centering events, we examine how “shocks to the system” (Adeyemi,  , p. 99) can incite renewal efforts without replication.

3.

## DISRUPTIONS
We thus arrive at the utility of disruptions as a frame. By definition, disruptions are messy, and they have a variety of consequences, not all of which are intended, anticipated, or predictable. Disruptive events “shake up old hierarchies” (Zhang,  , p. 376) and “force substantive changes” (p. 378), often with a “sense of urgency” (p. 381). To understand the relationship between the closure epidemic, as a disruption, and nightlife forms, especially those which challenge assumptions of organizational fixity (DiMaggio & Powell,  ; Mahoney,  ), we look for insights in foundational texts of social theory.
The most significant theoretical strand finds its genesis in (Durkheim,  ), who has been characterized as terrified by the disruptive threats of disintegrating social structures (Lukes,  ). Durkheim argued that stable and supportive social organizations provide meaning and purpose and, when threatened, people are motivated to repair (Goffman,  ) and rebuild them (Erikson,  ). Scholars have taken this assumption largely for granted, evidenced by the assessment of events, as we described earlier, as sociological epiphenomena incapable of generating a comparably robust sense of community. In part, this discrepancy arises due to Durkheim having theorized two distinct mechanisms of solidarity (Abrutyn,  ): meso‐level collectives, like extended kinship groups, associational groups, or even gayborhoods (Ghaziani,  ); and the micro‐level interaction rituals that were facilitated by and within these meso‐level structural and cultural spaces. The first mechanism provides the context in which personal identities become subsumed within a collective sensibility, providing a source of meaning, purpose, and obligation (Fine,  ), while the second provides the tangible, corporeal experience of the collective: co‐presence in sequenced interactions that draw our attention to a state of mutual entrainment of synched bodies (Collins,  ). However, these sequenced interactions are presumed not as meaningful outside the stable organizational forms they inhabit.
Both mechanisms of solidarity are fragile and subject to disruptions that are distressing, or what Durkheim called anomic (Abrutyn,  ). Like boats adrift, anomic communities are awash with people seeking safe harbors from social storms that disrupt collective and moral anchorage. Some have turned to natural or human‐made disasters, along with their consequences, to explore Durkheim's theory (Arcaya et al.,  ; Erikson,  ), while others, like disorganization theorists, look to the less spectacular and find that crime rates, for example, are positively associated with the amount of familial, ethnic, and economic disruption found in a neighborhood (Sampson & Groves,  ). It is not surprising, therefore, that the most common response to bar closures, among academics and the public alike, has been alarm. That reaction perpetuates the assumption that recurring interactions in emplaced and anchored organizations are paramount to sustaining stable feelings of community.
Durkheim's interest in disruptions goes beyond their causes and consequences in ways that have striking parallels with the literature on nightlife while also speaking to a core problem in sociological theory (Collins,  ; Turner,  ): how do groups re‐establish a sense of integration following a disruption? For Durkheim, and those who have developed his line of thinking, disruptions are also inciting events that catalyze people to mourn (Poblete & O'Dea,  ), rebuild social infrastructure (Erikson,  ), repair social occasions (Goffman,  ), and protect cherished social relationships (Abrutyn,  ). For instance, we see communities collectively mobilizing to rebuild razed sections of a town in ways that are identical to what it looked like before a disaster (Wallace,  ). Materially, the goal is to restore familiar objects and routine, mundane interactions around those objects in order to combat a sense that the world has been destroyed. In one case, a tornado tearing through the social infrastructure of a town left its denizens feeling “separated from all sources of support,…left naked and alone, without a sense of [their] own identity, in a terrifying wilderness of ruins” (Ibid., p. 154). Similar impulses are found in the communities Hochschild ( ) visited. Small, conservative towns were hollowed out by a decades‐long shift from a manufacturing to service‐based economy, while intergenerational ties eroded as young people left in search of opportunities elsewhere. Ravaged by these social forces, Hochschild's respondents overwhelmingly saw their mission to piece the community back together by rebuilding their shredded infrastructure, both real and imagined.
When a community is disrupted, renewal through replication makes sense, as it is feels comforting and predictable. After all, people are fundamentally motivated to reaffirm their identities in the specific interactions, groups, and places that have provided feelings of belonging (Baumeister & Leary,  ). This explains why so many studies err on the side of what we earlier referred to as rebuilding, or efforts to entrench the elements of a community that have not yet been disrupted while reconstructing and replacing that which has been lost with a return to familiar organizational forms (Wallace,  ).
However, as organizational scholars point out, isomorphism can limit possibilities for creativity (DiMaggio & Powell,  ), even among those tasked with rebuilding efforts. Replicating existing forms, such as gay bars in the context of nightlife, creates occasions that make people feel connected to a community while ensuring that perceptions about the “newness” of establishments still makes sense, that is, it is cognitively and emotionally familiar. In these rebuilt forms, people are placed back into an interactional context that has the requisite integrative and regulative mechanisms of group life that supply cultural meaning and a familiar sense of duty to something greater than the self. Ironically, even when natural (Erikson,  ) or human‐made barriers, like social inequalities, constrain a community's capacity to rebuild (Picou et al.,  ), groups will still funnel resources to finding the past, rather than reimagining the future. This is partially due to the fact that prolonged disruptions amplify the initial alarm and act as a new source of tragedy for the community.
Missing from the Durkheimian account is an alternative pathway, one that emphasizes reconstituting the very grounds of social order. Of course, it is not a logical leap to suggest that disruptions drive creativity; Merton ( ) suggested early that anomie can motivate creative solutions. But, the sort of change that produces alternative organizational forms, like club nights, is undertheorized in the Durkheimian tradition, as well as in myriad other traditions, like organizational sciences, that take reproduction for granted. Nightlife offers a unique, if unexpected, vantage point to expand Durkheimian ideas of disruption, while also extending them beyond the common narrative of isomorphic rebuilding of familiar bar forms. We have both the structural and phenomenological starting point—stable LGBTQ urban communities—and a disruption: the closure of conventional nightlife forms. To revise Durkheim's framework, the theoretical questions, then, are why and how an alternative pathway, something that pushes beyond mere replication while being subculturally affirming, is emergent?
We are not the first to argue that creative agency is possible, even urgent (Wood et al.,  ), in unsettled times (Swidler,  ), leading to opportunities that are necessary for altering the social landscape. In bringing our case of the closure epidemic to bear on a classic sociological problem, we offer two novel interventions. First, in shifting our focus from the usual Durkheimian outcome to alternative possibilities of refashioning rather than rebuilding nightlife forms, we reveal an asset‐based model that at once challenges assumptions of deficit that have become pervasive in the face of community threat and an emphasis on convergence over divergent options in organizational sociology. In some ways, this joint offering is anticipated by Durkheim, who was an evolutionary scholar that rejected popular survivalist forms and favored human ingenuity in creating new fields capable of re‐integrating people in ways that were not always possible to anticipate a priori.
Second, our expanded Durkheimian framework calls into question assumptions of integration into an undifferentiated community that have been similarly raised by some queer theorists (Johnson & Henderson,  ). We thus refuse to interpret the closure epidemic as signaling the decline of nightlife writ large. Instead, we see it as a moment in which QTBIPOC groups, incited by the disruption, systemic exclusions, and a long history of facilitating alternate forms of fellowship in the midst of social occlusion, are able to reimagine nightlife in ways that are not always possible by dominant segments of LGBTQ communities. By highlighting the intentions of QTBIPOC groups, a major corrective is offered to Durkheim's theory of disruptions: he has been rightfully accused of ignoring power, status, and inequality.

4.

## DATA AND ANALYTIC STRATEGIES
Using bar listings in travel guides to study nightlife has been a methodological feature of the literature in urban sexualities (Knopp & Brown,  ; Mattson,  ) and urban sociology more generally (Silver & Clark,  ) for decades. While imperfect, like all data, tracking changes in listings can establish statistical trends about closures, similar to what we reported earlier. That said, counting bars will offer conclusions only about bars, creating a selection mechanism that will leave unexamined other forms of nightlife that are harder to quantify. The episodic nature of the gatherings of interest to us, along with the use of social media platforms to publicize them, enables at best rough approximations that are vulnerable to a variety of validation challenges. Still, policy reports from the mayor's office suggest that the number of club nights in London was “growing” (Campkin & Marshall,  , p. 32) during the same period that gay bars were closing. Although we cannot establish a causal relationship, we can reasonably argue that closures encouraged club nights not to emerge but to increase in visibility and variety. Expressing the association in this way suggests a relationship between nightlife forms without fixing or reducing its complexity.
Event‐based social scenes are “key sites of theoretical relevance” (Rinallo & Golfetto,  , p. 453) in several sociological subfields. While our inability to count club nights poses a potential constraint, it also presents an opportunity to develop a methodology of messy moments (Ghaziani & Brim,  ). Knowledge creation in creative industries and cultural markets like nightlife does not always fit the standard account of knowing as rational, cognitive, and countable (Allen,  ; Entwistle,  ). Shifting the focus from fixed and emplaced bars to episodic and event‐based parties requires researchers to “expand definitions” (Ibid., p. 4) of knowledge to include the embodied and embedded, the spatial and situated (Bathelt et al.,  ; Weller,  ). Feminist scholar Haraway ( ) offers useful counsel: “The only way to find a larger vision is to be somewhere in particular.” This requires “the joining of partial views” (p. 590). Knowing, therefore, involves comparing count data with a practice of participating, of “knowledge‐in‐use” (Entwistle,  , p. 108), whether firsthand or through others' accounts.
Because club nights are connected to gay bars in manifold ways, we combine conventional forms of knowledge with a situated phenomenology of club nights in London. The entertainment opportunities of this city contribute to its status as a global hub of culture and creativity. The workforce at night consists of 1.6 million workers, or 33% of all jobs. The value of London's nighttime economy is estimated at £26.3 billion (US$33.2 billion). Forty percent of the £66 billion (US$83.4 billion) for the entire country's nighttime economy is represented by London alone, and the mayor projects an additional £2 billion (US$2.5 billion) in growth per year through 2030. The United Nations estimates that the creative economy, which includes nightlife, had a global valuation of £780 billion (US$985 billion) in 2023, and it will represent 10% of global GDP by 2030. These figures have prompted city officials around the world to reframe nightlife from matters of crime, anti‐social behavior, and conflict to expressions of culture and creativity (Eldridge,  ; Ghaziani,  ). For scholars, they gesture to nightlife as an object of urgent sociological inquiry (Grazian,  ; Hidalgo,  ; Lloyd,  ; Mears,  ).
The first author used a combination of snowball and sampling for range (Weiss,  ) to collect 112 interviews with city officials, bar owners, party producers, activists, artists, and revelers. This sample size goes beyond established standards of saturation (Small,  ) in qualitative research in an effort to address the lack of numerical data about club nights. We thus use our large‐N sample not in pursuit of statistical inferences but to validate the recurring themes we identified about being there (Gertler,  ) in fleeting moments of local buzz (Bathelt et al.,  ) at club nights.
Most respondents were in their 20 and 30s, ranging in age from 22 to 70 years. The sample contains a range of sexual orientations, gender identities, races, and educational backgrounds. Interviews averaged an hour, ranging from 16 to 100 minutes. Our questions were designed to understand the motivations and “emotional landscape” (Pugh,  , p. 42) of people involved in the social world of club nights. All interviews were recorded and transcribed, producing 1558 pages of data. The first author analyzed this corpus line by line in NVivo, comparing theoretical arguments against empirical evidence. We used an abductive approach (Timmermans & Tavory,  ) to identify unanticipated observations (e.g., renewal without replication) relative to expectations (e.g., isomorphic renewals). As a qualitative framework for empirically‐based theory construction, abduction directs researchers to focus on anomalies and surprises, since they sensitize the analysis to occurrences that violate “expectations, implicit theories, [and] taken‐for‐granted assumptions” (Miles & Michael Huberman,  , p. 270).
Although QTBIPOC groups have a long history of using episodic gatherings (Adeyemi, Khubchandani, & Rivera‐Servera,  ; Bailey,  ), club nights are not organized exclusively by them. In London, one example comes from Knickerbocker, an “alt‐pop, indie‐dance and happy house” party, as they describe themselves. Knickerbocker is a roving event, moving from place to place throughout the year. The organizers have expectations of their attendees that are broadly shared as part of the culture of club nights: “no racism, misogyny, transphobia, homophobia, body, slut, or kink shaming will be tolerated.” Alex, one of the organizers, is aware of his demographic background. “We've been very conscious of being two White gay guys, cis White gay guys who put on another gay night that is for gay men.” Alex also recognizes that the crowd is “mostly White, mostly male.” The organizers manage this in their programming efforts (e.g., the DJs they hire and the performances they schedule). “I'd say at least 40% of the work we program, probably 50%, is people of color.” This is how they “make space,” Alex adds. “We vigorously program radical alternative work, which is inevitably going to be coming from queer people of color.”
As this example suggests, efforts to renew nightlife without replicating established forms is not restricted to events organized by QTBIPOC groups. However, even if a club night is organized by White gay men, the producers are still intentional about redressing intersectional exclusions. This defining characteristic of the parties motivates us to amplify QTBIPOC voices to explain with greater precision how variation in nightlife forms is motivated both by disruptions to gay bars (that White organizers are also responding to, thus contributing to an overall increase in club nights) and a long history of placemaking among QTBIPOC communities who, for various structural reasons (e.g., spatial segregation, racial discrimination, sexual harassment), have relied on refashioning public and private spaces to facilitate nightlife.
We now turn to our results, which we present in two sections. In the first, we detail the theoretically expected response to a disruption: re‐establish integration in existing institutional formats. Because this pathway is well‐established, our discussion here is illustrative and brief. We use this baseline in a second, more sustained discussion in which we examine how cultural divergences can lead to explorations of alternative responses beyond replication. We conclude by outlining a queer Durkheimian theory of disruptions.

5.

## RESULTS
5.1.

## Evidence for replication
In support of rebuilding established forms, as predicted by Durkheim, we highlight the appointment in 2016 by Mayor Sadiq Khan of Amy Lamé as the U.K.’s first “night czar.” The role represents a form of urban governance which prioritizes the nighttime economy (Roberts,  ; Seijas & Gelders,  ). “I think the nighttime economy is important, and the particular kinds of venues that we are trying to save are important because they build resilient communities,” Lamé (47, lesbian, female, White) explains. “They create safe spaces. They are places where people can be themselves without question…[W]e need to make sure that we have spaces that exist in order for communities to thrive and survive.” London's move follows the successful appointment of Mirik Milan, the world's first night mayor, in 2014 in Amsterdam. Many cities have since appointed their own politician‐of‐the‐night, including in Berlin, Budapest, Geneva, Madrid, New York, Paris, San Francisco, Sydney, Tokyo, and Zurich.
The mayor and the night czar are responding to a warning signal that nightlife is under threat, which motivates them to protect existing bars while encouraging new ones to open. “I don't want young and creative Londoners abandoning our city to head to Amsterdam, to Berlin, to Prague where clubs are supported,” Khan said. “We can save London's iconic club scene.” The impulse to “save” gay bars, a word that both the night czar and the mayor used, suggests that they are in danger. The response to the disruption created by bar closures is codified in the Cultural Infrastructure Plan, a planning document that specifies how to protect London's cultural assets. The document details a need to support “culture at risk,” (bar closures); increase investments in cultural assets (direct more funding to support gay bars); and create policies that enable creative industries to become more stable. In our interview, Lamé says that gay bars are an important part of the mayor's vision: “Sadiq and I keep LGBT places close to our hearts and hold them in very high regard.”
Municipal responses that sound alarms about bar closures, mandates to “save” or “protect” them, and calls to “increase investments” in existing infrastructure all make isomorphic assumptions about nightlife (there is no discussion about varying formats) and belonging (Lamé’s remark that gay bars are “safe spaces” where “people can be themselves without question” elides patterned experiences of exclusion). But, while the expected response is focused on entrenching what city officials see as a fragile ecosystem, as well as repopulating it with newer versions of the older form, they are missing an alternative response. In major cities like London, some people are using the disruption created by bar closures to build other nightlife forms and, especially, to re‐center it on people marginalized by multiple vectors of power. These creatives found inspiration in transatlantic and diasporic cultural practices, from Bollywood and bhangra to ballroom, Black Obsidian, and sound system cultures (Bailey,  ; Khubchandani,  ; St. John,  ), which helped to shift their focus from emplaced bars to episodic events.

5.2.

## Evidence for renewal without replication
Londoners are aware of bar closures, but many offer a different interpretation. “I think that journalists often just quote this figure. They say, ‘Oh, 58% of venues closed’, and then they say, ‘Queer nightlife is dying’. It's very easy to write a story based on that,” Laurie (28, gay, male, White British) remarks. He organizes The Chateau, a DIY‐styled party in an abandoned, religiously‐themed cocktail bar located in a 130‐capacity basement venue with low ceilings and stained‐glass windows that make the space look like a church crypt. After a moment of reflection, Laurie adds, “I think queer nightlife is thriving, but things are just changing.” How so? we ask. “You have to look past that [closure statistics] and just look much deeper into the way that queer people are operating now, which is outside of permanent venues.” Laurie is emphasizing renewal efforts that do not replicate the form of a gay bar. “That doesn't have to be the way that queer spaces operate,” Laurie says. How do you operate? “We are a temporary space; we're a pop‐up.” madison (36, queer, male, African American), who uses they/them pronouns and does not capitalize their name, organizes a techno‐fashion club night called Opulence. They see club nights as a response to the closing of gay bars. “I think that the reason that a lot of these parties exist is because clubs are closing.”
We heard repeated references to renewing nightlife scenes without replicating the format of a bar. Angel (35, queer, male, Spanish) organizes a party called Gayzpacho, which fuses queerness with Spanish identity. “[C]ertain places might be closing,” he acknowledges, but “the queer community always finds places to exist regardless of what the world is turning into.” Samuel is 27, identifies as queer and White, and organizes The CAMPerVAN, a party in and around a caravan that he drives to parking lots across the city. He sees a similar change as what Angel described: “There's very few permanent spaces.” All these respondents are remarking on the strategic use of occasional, roving parties.
Originally from Stockholm, Ingo (56, queer, nonbinary, Swedish) organizes several events. Conversations about nightlife raise for them “two different questions.” One is about gay bars closing, but there is another, lesser‐known narrative as well. “At the same time, shitloads has come up,” they quip. Newer events are “not so established, and they are definitely not seven nights a week venues or spaces.” What are they? we ask. “They are takeovers,” Ingo replies, events that appropriate existing spaces for temporary gatherings. This is why club nights do not have “that much recognition yet” and are “happening under the surface,” Ingo adds, drawing on two decades of experience in nightlife production. Resembling the “guerrilla gay bar movement” (Rosenthal,  , p. 49) which began in the 2000s as LGBTQ people flocked to straight bars and converted them into queer spaces for the night, Ingo proposes that nightlife forms today interact in a similar symbiotic format. 

Bar closures did not uniformly signal danger for creatives, as they did for the mayor's office. Rather, the disruption was perceived by many as an opportunity to shift from institutional rebuilding to revision. One reveler remarked, “There's no actual model that exists for spaces like this, and that's why they're a bit more temporal and a bit more experimental.” But who, exactly, is motivated to renew without defaulting to the replication of existing structures? Consider this episode: A racist encounter flared in a gay bar where QTBIPOC patrons “were selling zines called Black Fly,” Nadine (29, queer femme, undecided gender, Scottish Pakistani), recounts. “The zine is about sexual freedom between POC people.” At one point, “this White girl had a problem with it, and she started getting angry about it.” The organizers remained calm, replying that “this is a positive magazine,” but the individual grew angrier. “There were no White people in the zine,” Nadine explains. The conflict escalated. “The White girl got so angry, even though they [the zine sellers] weren't being angry with her.” It was at this point that “she threatened to call the police, even though nothing was going on.” This forced the bar owners to get involved. The venue promoted itself as “inclusive,” Nadine says with an eye roll, “but because it's White‐owned, they sided with the White girl. This is the kind of thing that goes on.”
Respondents like Nadine identify the intersectional failures of gay bars as a motivation to create club nights. “There's not enough Black and Brown‐owned spaces in London that cater to us, that are for us,” they emphasize. In response, Nadine formed a collective with three other friends who together produced a party called Pxssy Palace, a space “centered around women and femmes of color” where they can be “free from discrimination.” Pxssy Palace was “born out of frustration,” Nadine explains. The other “gay places,” their words, “were all controlled by either White men or gay White men. We got really frustrated, we were fed up with it, but we didn't know how fed up with it we were.” Resembling the efforts of queer women of color in the U.S. (Lane,  ; Thorpe,  ), they started with private house parties. Those gatherings grew to hundreds of people, which motivated Nadine to scale up the occasion. On their website, they state that Pxssy Palace is “rooted in intentional nightlife, celebrating Black, Indigenous and people of color who are women, queer, intersex, trans or nonbinary. We provide space to dance, connect, and engage, whilst encouraging consent, sexual freedom, pleasure, expression, and exploration of our authentic selves.”
In response to repeated experiences of exclusion, some QTBIPOC creatives began producing their own events to celebrate lives located at the intersection of multiple vectors of power. Mwice (27, queer lesbian, femme female, Black British and Zambian) created The Cocoa Butter Club for this reason. “The Cocoa Butter Club was born from a frustration of seeing people who blackface,” she remarks. “I was just sick and tired of it, that Black bodies aren't getting booked, but bodies that can do things which have strong connotations to Black culture are getting booked.” Founded in 2016, The Cocoa Butter Club is “a creative clap back to cultural appropriation, lack of representation, and imitation, such as black‐facing.”
While White party producers often emphasize the organizational qualities of club nights, QTBIPOC organizers go a step further and perceive the closure epidemic as a racialized trend. “I think there's a small joke when all of these places are being closed down, which is, how many people of color were their clientele? How many versions of not‐a‐cis‐White‐gay‐man were these venues catering to?” Mwice has worked hard to “unlearn that my Blackness makes me undesirable.” That had to go “out the window,” she says. “I lost my Blackness because these places [gay bars] do not center our Blackness.”
Many QTBIPOC respondents offer counter‐narratives about disruptions. Katayoun (26, queer, genderqueer, Iranian) organizes Femmi‐Erect, a party that celebrates “the whole femme spectrum.” We discuss the shortcomings of existing institutions. “There's a massive lack of queer women who are femme‐identifying and queer femme people.” The closure of gay bars motivated Katayoun to form a club night. “I wanted to give a platform to people that feel like they're excluded by the gay scene,” they explain. “Most of the time, femmes become objects of glamor. People will non‐consensually touch you, and if you give them any attitude, you can expect to get called a bitch or even have drinks thrown at you. People can make you feel like you don't belong in their spaces, and try to get rid of you. These are all things I have experienced personally and know my friends have experienced too.”
Addressing femmephobia in gay bars requires an intersectional ethos. “For Black, Brown, and East Asian femmes, it's even more difficult,” Katayoun adds. “Femmeness is harder to access if you have dark or non‐western features; they're seen as unfeminine due to White beauty standards…It's so much harder to claim a femme identity when you're not White, because we always have to try harder to be seen as beautiful or desirable.” Sexuality brings additional challenges that also require an intersectional imagination. “But also, inherent queerphobia is a big thing; people often automatically assume someone who is Brown can't be queer. So, the intersection of both identities sometimes feels very suffocating.”
While all gay bars are not exclusive or discriminatory, club nights engage with racial and gender inclusion in ways that are more intentional. “When you go to a gay bar, you get drag queens being allowed to perform femininity in a really big space,” Lola (33, bisexual queer, cis woman, African British), a reveler, remarks. “As someone that is visibly gender nonconforming, I'm not allowed to perform my gender in the same way.” Several others corroborated this intuition. Prem (35, gay/queer, nonbinary, South Asian and Polish mixed‐race British) went out to a gay bar one night with a friend who identifies as nonbinary. When they arrived, “the guy at the door [the bouncer] whispered to me, ‘You've got to tell him to take his lipstick off, otherwise he can't come in.’” Femmephobia, transphobia, and misgendering are common at gay bars, whose staff “police their borders,” Prem adds. Gaby (25, queer, genderqueer, French Arabic), the organizer of a club night called Queerdirect, has had similar experiences. “A lot of my friends who I know who are queer don't like to go to gay bars because they feel like their body, or their race, or their sexuality doesn't have a place in those spaces.” Club nights offer a response to, and respite from, repeated experiences of exclusion at gay bars. “I feel like queer nights are often put on in reaction to gay bars, to what gay bars don't offer, which is a safe space for bodies, and genders, and sexualities across a whole spectrum.” Gaby's remark stands in strong contrast to the night czar's earlier statement that gay bars are safe spaces “without question.”
When gay bars limit opportunities to be queer and Black, queer and Brown, queer and femme, or queer and trans, some creatives produce parties defined by an ethos of intentional inclusion and intersectional queerness. These events are for “the most marginalized groups within the queer community,” Lewis (27, queer, nonbinary/queer, White British) explains. They are “platforming them, and really giving them a voice.” Nadine agrees. In gay bars, “we're just being invited.” That is not enough. “We don't want to be invited anymore. We want to be in charge.” These comments suggest that disruptions create opportunities for critical introspection about established institutions.
Rosie (26, lesbian, White British) explores how the field of nightlife is changing. “I think there's something about this newer queer culture of being trans, and nights that are trans‐inclusive,” she reflects. “They're more about people of color, trans people of color.” After reflecting for a moment, Rosie distinguishes an “older model” of nightlife, which includes gay bars, from newer formats like club nights. The latter “have more up‐to‐date gender inclusion policies. They're more trans and nonbinary friendly.” These events are “privileging the bodies of people who don't normally get to go to a public space and be centered.” She summarizes the qualities of club nights as representing “a whole new culture of queer trans people organizing for themselves, putting on their own nights.” Gaby agrees. In club nights, “people will be more inclined to be genderqueer or show a truer side to their self.” In contrast, gay bars “can often feel more oppressive” because “forms of femininity within men are shut down there.”
Tia is part of a collective that organizes a party called BBZ (an acronym for “Bold Brazen Zamis,” pronounced as “babes”), which blends an art exhibition with a club night “focused on eradicating misogyny” and “center[ing] queer women and gender‐neutral women of color.” When we ask Tia about the artistic elements of the party, they emphasize intentional inclusion. “One of the threads running throughout the installations and spaces that we create is ‘home’, and using ‘the home’ as a gallery. So, it's spaces where we already feel like we're able to exist in.” By integrating artistic imagery that evokes a feeling of being at home with a party format, the collective reimagines what it means to belong. “You have to create your own communities in cities like London, otherwise you can't exist.” This is how BBZ and other club nights challenge the power dynamics of nightlife. “We don't care about anybody else's gaze,” like the zine conflict Nadine described earlier. “We're creating a space for us.”
When Soof (26, queer asexual, gender nonconforming, Pakistani British) reflects on the disruption caused by the closure of gay bars, they share a memorable metaphor that captures the tonal differences between nightlife forms. Club nights create “a space that allows you to starfish and stretch out.” That stretched‐out starfish is an apt symbol for what it feels like to renew the field of nightlife without replicating the gay bar. “In most spaces, I don't necessarily feel I can starfish,” Soof adds, but at a club night, “you feel at home, like you can just take up the whole bed.”

6.

## DISCUSSION
Despite a century‐long reputation as sites that promote anonymity and anti‐social behavior (Park,  ; Simmel,  ), the night and its places are vital aspects of social life (Chauncey,  ; Currid,  ; Jacobs,  ; Lloyd,  ; Melbin,  ). For LGBTQ individuals, nightlife is “transformative” (Muñoz,  , p. 108) because it provides an opportunity to imagine new worlds of belonging, especially for QTBIPOC groups (Adeyemi,  ; Hunter,  ). This makes the closure epidemic an urgent matter. Our research contributes to organization, sexuality, and nightlife studies by examining how field‐level disruptions affect nightlife forms. The findings show that the decline of bars does not scale up to the institutional decimation of nightlife. Yet a preoccupation with dwindling numbers of gay bars, among city officials and academics alike, conceals creative responses to those closures.
QTBIPOC groups often feel excluded from mainstream nightlife venues, like gay bars, due to experiences of “intersectional failures” (Crenshaw,  , p. 1450). This is evidenced by the use of dress codes (May  ), requiring multiple pieces of ID (Thorpe,  ), or being denied entrance under false pretenses, like being at capacity (Street,  ). During the closure epidemic, some creatives initiated efforts to shift nightlife away from the “whiteness of urban gay belonging” (Rosenberg,  , p. 137) to an intentionally inclusive and intersectionally queer ethos that inspired the renewal of nightlife forms rather than replication of gay bars.
Because they are defined as “urgent,” disruptions “require quick response” (Zhang,  , p. 381). Those rapid responses target survival more often than revisions (Erikson,  ), thereby decreasing attention to accountability. But disruptions may also produce opportunities to imagine other kinds of places beyond rebuilding that which has been lost. Ballroom culture in Harlem and club nights in London both point to conditions under which disruptions can prompt critical introspection about nightlife forms beyond the bar (Bailey,  ; Khubchandani,  ; Livingston,  ). The closure epidemic, in other words, provided an opportunity to engage in agentic forms of institutional work (Abdelnour et al.,  ; Ray,  ).
Thus, we arrive at long‐standing Durkheimian questions: under the threat of disintegration, are people motivated only to recover and rebuild what has been lost? Or are disruptions also incitements to act in more experimental ways? Traditionally, the pathway following Durkheim's ( ) thoughts on disruption saw replication as the principal goal of renewal efforts aimed at re‐creating solidarity (Wallace,  ), or collapse and breakdown leading to a sustained anomic malaise in which groups adopt an identity saturated in trauma (Erikson,  ). Our findings speak to a second possibility in which the community is reconceptualized, and the places used to renew that community are reconstructed. In Figure  , we visualize these two paths, envisioning a process moving from left to right. Before discussing the specifics, we trace the theoretical argument, beginning with the outcomes and working backwards. The processes or circumstances most causally proximal to either replication or renewal without replication are place‐based characteristics, most importantly the availability of media resources to direct public attention, local communication channels to discuss and debate that attention, and resources to respond to the disruption. In addition, we argue that size, density, and heterogeneity also matter (Wirth,  ): the LGBTQ community in London is large, concentrated in many parts of the city, and internally diverse. Consequently, we recognize that the model cannot generalize to other cases without taking place‐based characteristics into account, though it suggests comparisons with other metropolitan areas that vary across these dimensions.
 How place‐based characteristics translate into distinct outcomes depends on perceptual primes and cultural lenses that social groups use to evaluate the significance of the object of disruption (Patterson,  ). We might expect that a more homogeneous LGBTQ community would invite greater perceptual alignment in defining the problem and its solutions, but where local culture is characterized by greater group asymmetries and systemic exclusions, contradictory perceptions are shaped by what we call idiopolitics, particularly those built from a wider array of organizational frames (Goffman,  ) that different groups in the community use and which are key mechanisms to experiencing and making sense of disruptions.
Following the disruption, our analysis revealed two sets of actors mobilizing different frames that shaped their respective perceptions of the object of disruption as well as its most suitable response. On the top of Figure  , we see the official actors, like the London mayor and night czar, who followed the typical Durkheimian pathway: disruptions directed them to efforts to renew through replicating established organizational forms. In the event of uncertainty, mimetic isomorphism is the most parsimonious frame (DiMaggio & Powell,  ), and it was this frame that made salient the perception of threat situated in a culture of risk (Alexander,  ). Not surprisingly, renewal with replication is often shaped by those with the most to lose, which makes powerful actors, like a mayor, capable of articulating frames that encapsulate a sense that loss of familiar community anchors calls for their reconstitution.
Conversely, on the bottom of the model, we see a more complicated story that Durkheim did not anticipate and which reflects what we earlier called idiopolitics, which we can now define as local group cultures and interactional styles shaped by inequitable relations of power and status with other local groups that are sustained by uneven access to resources necessary to facilitate a response to a disruption. We derive our concept of idiopolitics from Fine ( )'s cognate notion of idioculture, which he defines as “group culture and group history [that] provide participants with the recognition of community” (p. 167). Groups are often characterized by shared places, common identities, collective cultures, and social relations. However, idioculture is designed to capture a single homogeneous small group culture, which takes for granted the constellation of groups that may share, in varying degrees, cultural experiences in the same place but whose relationships are characterized by power asymmetries between groups and their members. Thus, our notion of idiopolitics recognizes that two or more groups may have overlapping cultures and collective identities predicated on shared place, yet they may still have extraordinarily different histories and present experiences that stem from that history, conditioned by contestation, discrimination, and even violence, or at least its threat.
In the model, we argue that idiopolitics steer dominant segments of the impacted minority group closer to the official group's perceptual lens of threat. Consequently, White and cis community members' understanding of gay bars as central institutions framed their solution to the disruption as replication. QTBIPOC members perceive the object of disruption differently, however. Though this may sit outside Durkheim's own framework, it does not contradict his argument that disruptions motivate prosocial responses that facilitate a sense of “we‐ness.” In historical research, revitalization movements are often found in the margins of a community, where actors have greater freedoms to innovate alongside the experiences and grievances that motivate this sort of innovation (Abrutyn,  ). For example, facing real existential threat, a group of Native Americans, the Northern Paiute, renewed their community through innovation and not replication (Wallace,  ). The creation of the Ghost Dance cult was a new way to revitalize the threatened community, which came to spread through an array of plains tribes to engender pride and solidarity. In a similar vein, instead of imagining gay bars as central institutions under threat, QTBIPOC groups in London become acutely aware of systemic exclusions and intersectional failures. In turn, their idiopolitics motivated critical introspection and a heightened perception of alternative forms that their communities have shared in the past. Under these conditions, renewal with replication makes little sense as it is a recipe for reproducing past exclusions; thus, actors are motivated to renew by turning toward alternative nightlife forms that promote intentional inclusion and more robust ritualized encounters.
This model's strength lies in its simultaneous ability to make sense of our empirical observations while also expanding Durkheim's theory of disruptions in provocative ways. In terms of the former, we are able to explain why something that has always existed, like episodic events in nightlife, becomes suddenly more visible and varietal. Furthermore, the model suggests that renewal in the face of disruption does not need to follow the well‐worn path of isomorphic replication. Rather, disruptions may be framed differently, leading some groups to see opportunity and alternatives, while others sense danger.

7.

## CONCLUSIONS
In this article, we developed a novel theory of disruptions through the integration of sociological subfields that are seldom in conversation: Durkheim, organization studies, sexuality studies, and nightlife studies (with important additional connections to urban and cultural sociology as well). Though Durkheim is often seen as conservative and functionalist, his model of disruptions and rebuilding can help us understand why some actors seek to protect what remains and rebuild what is lost: the impulse to maintain or reconstitute a sense of we‐ness is an urgent desire. On the other hand, Durkheim's work is often put to the test through the study of natural or human‐made disasters, like earthquakes, nuclear meltdowns, or economic ruin. By moving the focus to a community‐level analysis and exploring the ways that groups marginalized by multiple vectors of power respond, an alternative Durkheimian pathway to we‐ness can be realized. As a result, nightlife forms help us think about core sociological questions related to community formation and collective action amidst threats to stable, enduring organizational fields. Systematic exclusions, intersectional failures, and the emergence of opportunities for experimentation combine to channel the same feelings of incitement in the face of disruption toward renewal without replication. During unsettled times, some marginalized voices are able to articulate new meanings of community and forms of belonging such that what appears, superficially, to be institutional decline and disintegration is in fact an emerging and arguably more expansive epoch of intentional and intersectional inclusion.
Whether these forms take root and endure, competing with and sometimes complementing the older organizational forms occupying space in the same field, is beyond the scope of this research—although it is an important question with far‐reaching theoretical implications. For future researchers, the general wisdom that emerges from our findings is to strive for complexity, rather than forced or mimetic parsimony, in how we study urban nightlife, particularly the assumptions we make about what outcomes are conditioned by disruptions.

## CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
The authors are not aware of any conflicts of interest with respect to this research.

## ETHICS STATEMENT
This project has been approved by the LSE Research Ethics Committee.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was undertaken thanks to funding from the Canada Research Chairs Program.

Ghaziani, A.
, & 
Abrutyn, S.
 (2024). Renewal without replication: Expanding Durkheim's theory of disruptions via queer nightlife. The British Journal of Sociology, 75(5), 854–872. 10.1111/1468-4446.13134

## ENDNOTES

1
More recently, the Nighttime Industries Association (NTIA) reported that between 2021 and 2022, the rate accelerated to 14 venues of any kind per month, or one closure every two days. “The closure of nightclubs…represents a cultural crisis,” the NTIA said. “Nightclubs serve as vital hubs of social interaction, artistic expression, and community cohesion, making their preservation imperative.” For the report, see https://ntia.co.uk/ntia‐says‐government‐is‐ripping‐the‐heart‐out‐of‐nightlife‐as‐1‐in‐3‐nightclubs‐face‐closure‐by‐the‐end‐of‐2022/. For the quote, see https://www.dazeddigital.com/music/article/62055/1/uk‐clubs‐will‐be‐extinct‐by‐2030‐warns‐nightlife‐expert.

2
Economic forces operate in a multivariate causal landscape with cultural shifts in public opinion about sexuality, cycles of local government agendas, and technological developments in how people meet. This motivates researchers to caution against “singular or simplistic cause‐and‐effect explanations” (Campkin,  , p. 89) for bar closures. However, our objective is not to explain why gay bars are closing but to examine how nightlife is changing.

3
Following queer theoretic arguments about the social deconstruction of categories (Green,  ), we argue that it is a fallacy to see gay bars and club nights as binary expressions of nightlife. Gay bars often host club nights, and some club nights set up residencies at gay bars. In addition, some individuals own gay bars and also organize club nights. This suggests a relational model of interactions and collaborations rather than a false dichotomy of gay bars and club nights as mutually exclusive. The idea of renewal without replication also offers a way of thinking about how queer theory's deconstructive impulse can clarify sociological theories, like Durkheim's understanding of disruptions. For instance, while most queer theorists have focused on the subject of the self—deconstructing sexual and gender identities—our focus is on the deconstruction of organizational forms.

4
These figures were produced by London First, an independent business membership organization that represents finance and business services, property, transportation, education, creative industries, hospitality, and retail sectors. https://www.londonfirst.co.uk/sites/default/files/documents/2018‐05/Londons‐24‐hour‐economy.pdf. For UN figures, see https://unctad.org/news/creative‐economy‐takes‐center‐stage.

5
We use a mix of pseudonyms and actual names in the results, depending on what each person instructed us to do.

6

https://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home‐news/london‐night‐czar‐sadiq‐khan‐night‐life‐job‐24‐hour‐city‐tube‐a7206796.html.

7
Ingo's notion of a “takeover” and the “guerrilla gay bar movement” both resemble research on place ruptures in gay bars, when QTBIPOC patrons seize moments created by single songs to temporarily claim the bar as belonging to them (Greene,  ).

## DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Due to ethical requirements associated with the research, supporting data is not available. The participants of this study did not give written consent for their data to be shared publicly.

## REFERENCES
 

## Associated Data

## Data Availability Statement
Due to ethical requirements associated with the research, supporting data is not available. The participants of this study did not give written consent for their data to be shared publicly.