Environ Health Perspect253envhperEnvironmental Health Perspectives0091-67651552-9924American Chemical SocietyPMC1241381PMC1241381.1124138112413811261165310.1289/ehp.52031Research ArticleNuclear waste transportation: case studies of identifying stakeholder risk information needs.
DrewChristina HGraceDeirdre ASilbernagelSusan MHemmingsErin SSmithAlanGriffithWilliam CTakaroTimothy KFaustmanElaine MInstitute for Risk Analysis and Risk Communication, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.320031113122676263272010320030811200504092018The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) is responsible for the cleanup of our nation's nuclear legacy, involving complex decisions about how and where to dispose of nuclear waste and how to transport it to its ultimate disposal site. It is widely recognized that a broad range of stakeholders and tribes should be involved in this kind of decision. All too frequently, however, stakeholders and tribes are only invited to participate by commenting on processes and activities that are near completion; they are not included in the problem formulation stages. Moreover, it is often assumed that high levels of complexity and uncertainty prevent meaningful participation by these groups. Considering the types of information that stakeholders and tribes need to be able to participate in the full life cycle of decision making is critical for improving participation and transparency of decision making. Toward this objective, the Consortium for Risk Evaluation with Stakeholder Participation (CRESP) participated in three public processes relating to nuclear waste transportation and disposal in 1997-1998. First, CRESP organized focus groups to identify concerns about nuclear waste transportation. Second, CRESP conducted exit surveys at regional public workshops held by DOE to get input from stakeholders on intersite waste transfer issues. Third, CRESP developed visual tools to synthesize technical information and allow stakeholders and tribes with varying levels of knowledge about nuclear waste to participate in meaningful discussion. In this article we share the results of the CRESP findings, discuss common themes arising from these interactions, and comment on special considerations needed to facilitate stakeholder and tribal participation in similar decision-making processes.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlyyespmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes
 Environmental Health Perspectives * VOLUME 111 | NUMBER 3 | March 2003 263
Nuclear Waste Transportation: Case Studies of Identifying Stakeholder Risk
Information Needs
Christina H. Drew, Deirdre A. Grace, Susan M. Silbernagel, Erin S. Hemmings, Alan Smith, William C. Griffith,
Timothy K. Takaro, and Elaine M. Faustman
Institute for Risk Analysis and Risk Communication, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA
Citizens of the United States face many diffi-
cult challenges regarding nuclear waste
cleanup. Cleanup issues include the large vol-
umes of waste, the toxicity of the waste,
potentially severe human and environmental
impacts, technical complexity, lack of previ-
ous experience, a legacy of secrecy, staggering
costs, a history of inequitable practices, and a
jumble of intricate federal and state regula-
tions. Many entities, including decision mak-
ers; tribal, state, and local government
agencies; regulators; citizen groups; and con-
tractors, must be involved in the decision
process. Given the complexity of the cleanup,
including all these groups is difficult.
In this article we explore ways to deter-
mine what information stakeholders, and par-
ticularly Native American tribes, need to
become involved in nuclear waste cleanup
decisions. The term "stakeholder" is defined
as parties interested in or affected by U.S.
Department of Energy (DOE) cleanup. The
term generally includes citizens groups, regu-
lators, DOE managers and contractors, state
and local governments, and the general pub-
lic. Tribal peoples assert that their "govern-
ment-to-government" relationship with the
U.S. government means they do not fall
within standard definition of the term "stake-
holder." In this article we therefore use
"stakeholders and tribes" to refer to these
groups.
We focus on several questions: What are
the major issues? Who is involved and who is
absent from the discussions? What informa-
tion do people need, and how can it be best
presented? What tools and approaches enable
stakeholders and tribes to participate in mean-
ingful dialogue with these issues? Considering
such questions is critical to improving partici-
pation in these complex decisions. Toward
this objective, the Consortium for Risk
Evaluation with Stakeholder Participation
(CRESP) participated in three stakeholder
and tribal interactions involving nuclear waste
transport. CRESP is a national consortium of
university-based researchers operating under a
grant from the DOE (for more information,
see Boiko et al. 1996; CRESP-II 2001;
Goldstein 1998; van Belle et al. 1996).
An important goal for CRESP is to
improve the dialogue among decision makers,
technical specialists, and interested and
affected parties [we use these terms as identi-
fied in the National Research Council (NRC)
book Understanding Risk (NRC 1996)] to cre-
ate more sustainable, understandable, and
acceptable nuclear waste transport decisions.
We report the results of these activities here
jointly to leverage the lessons learned and
challenge the scientific community to develop
and evaluate approaches to improve public
involvement in the DOE context. In the next
section we briefly introduce nuclear waste
transport and discuss some of the cleanup chal-
lenges, which also apply to many other types of
complex decision problems informed by risk
assessment approaches. In the third section we
summarize each interaction as a mini-case
study. In the fourth section we highlight com-
mon themes and lessons that have emerged
from these interactions. Finally, in the conclu-
sion we make suggestions that may help scien-
tists and managers to develop information
stakeholders and tribes need to participate in
complex decision-making activities.
Tackling the Challenge of
Nuclear Waste Transportation
The DOE is responsible for cleaning up the
nuclear weapons production facilities--some
140 sites in 26 states and territories (U.S.
DOE 1999). Many of these sites are small,
just a few acres in size, while others are quite
large; the Idaho National Environmental
Engineering Laboratory (INEEL) in south-
eastern Idaho tops the list at > 900 square
miles. This vast former nuclear weapons com-
plex has produced a large amount of waste
both in terms of volume (36 million m3) and
radioactivity (1 billion Ci) (U.S. DOE
1997a). The DOE uses the term "waste" gen-
erally to refer to "solids or liquids that are
radioactive, hazardous or both" (U.S. DOE
Address correspondence to E.M. Faustman,
Department of Environmental Health, Institute for
Risk Analysis and Risk Communication, 4225
Roosevelt Way NE, Suite 100, Seattle, WA 98105-
6099 USA. Telephone: (206) 543-4299. Fax: (206)
616-4875. E-mail: faustman@u.washington.edu
We thank R. Gregory, J. Flynn, T. Michelena, the
League of Women Voters, and the anonymous
reviewers for valuable contributions and support.
Many individuals contributed to this work, but all
mistakes are our own.
This work was supported by U.S. Department of
Energy (DOE) grants DE-FC01-95EW55084 and
DE-FG26-00NT40938; the National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS)-sponsored
Center for Ecogenetics and Environmental Health
grant NIEHS P30ES07033; and the University of
Washington Center Grant for Child Environmental
Health Risks Research (NIEHS 1 PO1ES09601;
EPA-R826886-01-0).
Views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of
the DOE, NIEHS, or U.S. EPA.
Received 22 August 2001; accepted 15 July 2002.
The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) is responsible for the cleanup of our nation's nuclear
legacy, involving complex decisions about how and where to dispose of nuclear waste and how to
transport it to its ultimate disposal site. It is widely recognized that a broad range of stakeholders
and tribes should be involved in this kind of decision. All too frequently, however, stakeholders
and tribes are only invited to participate by commenting on processes and activities that are near
completion; they are not included in the problem formulation stages. Moreover, it is often
assumed that high levels of complexity and uncertainty prevent meaningful participation by these
groups. Considering the types of information that stakeholders and tribes need to be able to par-
ticipate in the full life cycle of decision making is critical for improving participation and trans-
parency of decision making. Toward this objective, the Consortium for Risk Evaluation with
Stakeholder Participation (CRESP) participated in three public processes relating to nuclear waste
transportation and disposal in 1997-1998. First, CRESP organized focus groups to identify con-
cerns about nuclear waste transportation. Second, CRESP conducted exit surveys at regional pub-
lic workshops held by DOE to get input from stakeholders on intersite waste transfer issues.
Third, CRESP developed visual tools to synthesize technical information and allow stakeholders
and tribes with varying levels of knowledge about nuclear waste to participate in meaningful dis-
cussion. In this article we share the results of the CRESP findings, discuss common themes arising
from these interactions, and comment on special considerations needed to facilitate stakeholder
and tribal participation in similar decision-making processes. Key words: environmental informa-
tion, hazardous waste, risk communication, risk perception, stakeholders. Environ Health Perspect
111:263-272 (2003). doi:10.1289/ehp.5203 available via http://dx.doi.org/ [Online 31 October
2002]
Research Articles
1997a). Waste comes in several forms, includ-
ing high-level waste, transuranic waste, low-
level waste, mixed low-level waste, residues
from mining operations called "tailings" or
11e(2) by-product material, hazardous waste,
and other waste (Table 1). These definitions
are codified in laws such as the Nuclear Waste
Policy Act [NWPA (1982)], the Atomic
Energy Act [AEA (1954)], the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act [RCRA
(1976)], and DOE Order 5820.2A (DOE
1988). Definitions are generally based on the
types of processes that produced the waste.
Although "high-level waste" generally emits
high radiation levels and the severity of its
potential impacts are high, "low-level waste"
may emit moderate levels of radiation and
does not necessarily translate to low risk.
These semantics cause some confusion about
nuclear waste disposal and transportation
among stakeholders and tribes. For a more
complete discussion of nuclear waste cate-
gories from both military and civilian nuclear
activities, see Ahearne (1997).
Cleaning up these wastes generally
involves activities to stabilize them by alter-
ing physical or chemical properties, by
changing the location of wastes, or by erect-
ing some physical or institutional barrier so
that wastes are less likely to come in contact
with people or the environment (examples of
physical and institutional barriers are fences
and deed restrictions, respectively). The
cleanup activities fall under the purview of the
Environmental Management program at the
DOE, which has a budget of roughly $6 bil-
lion per year (fiscal year 1992-fiscal year 2002)
(U.S. DOE 2000, 2002). Some cleanup plans
call for transporting nuclear wastes or haz-
ardous materials from one site to another.
For example, the current trend for low-level
and mixed low-level waste is toward a
"regional disposition," in which waste from
smaller sites will be consolidated at larger sites
(at Hanford in eastern Washington, the
Nevada Test Site, the INEEL, Los Alamos
National Laboratory in New Mexico, Oak
Ridge National Laboratory in Tennessee, and
the Savannah River Site in South Carolina)
(U.S. DOE 1997b). The rationale behind
this is to remove the waste from smaller sites
so they can be closed and used for alternative
purposes. Other strategies call for long-term
storage at special facilities such as the Waste
Isolation Pilot Plant (WIPP) near Carlsbad,
New Mexico. WIPP is designed to dispose of
transuranic waste and began receiving ship-
ments of waste in March 1999. Another spe-
cial facility proposed for high-level waste is
Yucca Mountain, Nevada. This project is
more than a decade behind schedule and
may never open due to technical and politi-
cal obstacles. The National Transportation
Program for DOE (DOE 2001a) is responsi-
ble for coordinating all nonclassified ship-
ments of hazardous materials, including
radioactive and mixed wastes for DOE's
Environmental Management program. DOE
has also established the Transportation
Resource Exchange Service (T-REX) to pro-
vide a virtual library of relevant documents.
Using T-REX, one can search for and learn
about shippers, packaging, routes, tribal
issues, regulations, and more (T-REX 2001).
Opposition to the transportation of
nuclear waste can be intense. For many years,
researchers have found that the public has a
higher fear of radiation risks than other types
of risks (Mills and Neuhauser 1998; Slovic et
al. 1979, 1991a). For example, as early as
1978, lay audiences (League of Women
Voters members and students) perceived
nuclear power to be involuntary, delayed,
unknown, uncontrollable, unfamiliar, poten-
tially catastrophic, dreaded, and severe--all
the extremes of the factors thought to con-
tribute to perceived risk (Fischhoff et al.
1978). In addition, the Yucca Mountain pro-
ject in Nevada has faced heavy opposition
from a variety of sources (Slovic 1991; Slovic
et al. 1991a, 1991b). According to several
surveys, the specific problem of waste trans-
portation is also problematic. A survey of
Oregon residents about transporting nuclear
waste using the state highway system found
that public concerns about health and safety
issues were high, while confidence and trust
in public officials were low (MacGregor et al.
1994). An Idaho survey indicated that there
may be a particular concern about using
trucks to transport nuclear waste (McBeth
and Oakes 1996). A survey of neighborhoods
adjacent to a radioactively contaminated site
(Feldman and Hanahan 1996) found that
more respondents favored off-site manage-
ment of wastes than on-site management, but
noted that
written comments indicated a concern with
exporting or transferring the problem elsewhere,
ensuring the careful transport of contaminated soil
while avoiding contamination of additional sites
through transport.
Articles | Drew et al.
264 VOLUME 111 | NUMBER 3 | March 2003 * Environmental Health Perspectives
Table 1. Waste definitions in the DOE complex.
Total Total radioactivity
Waste category Definition volume (m3) (million curies)
High-level waste Highly radioactive waste resulting from the 380,000 960
chemical processing of SNF and irradiated
target assemblies (DOE 1988, 1997a;
NWPA 1982)
TRU waste Contains alpha-emitting TRU elements with 220,000 4
half-lives > 20 years whose combined activity
level is at least 100 nCi/g of waste at the time
of assay (DOE 1988, 1997a)
Low-level waste Composed of all radioactive waste not classified 3,300,000 50
as high-level waste, TRU waste, SNF, or
natural uranium and thorium by-product
material defined under section 11e(2) of the
Atomic Energy Act (DOE 1997)
11e(2) By-product material The DOE's term for the tailings or waste 32,000,000 National figures
produced by the extraction or concentration not available
of uranium or thorium from any ore processed but can exceed
primarily for its source material (i.e., uranium 1,000 pCi/g
or thorium) content (DOE 1997a)
Mixed low-level waste Contains both hazardous waste subject to the 146,000 Likely to be
RCRA (1976), and source, special nuclear, or < 2.4
by-product material subject to the Atomic
Energy Act (DOE 1997a)
Hazardous wastes Defined under the RCRA, its implementing Information Not radioactive
regulations in 40CFR260-279, and not available
corresponding state regulations. A material is
a hazardous waste under the RCRA only if it
meets the definition of a solid waste; a solid
waste is considered hazardous if it is either
listed in the regulations as a hazardous waste
or exhibits a characteristic of corosivity,
ignitabilty, reactivity, or toxicity (DOE 1997a)
Other waste Some DOE waste does not fit into one of the 79,000 Not radioactive
previously defined categories because of its
chemical and radiologic composition [e.g., PCBs
and PCBs mixed with radioactive waste that are
subject to the TSCA but are not also subject to the
RCRA, asbestos, and 11e(2) waste mixed with
hazardous waste subject to the RCRA] (DOE 1997a)
Abbreviations: NWPA, Nuclear Waste Policy Act; PCBs, polychlorinated biphenyls; RCRA, Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act; SNF, spent nuclear fuel; TRU, transuranic; TSCA, Toxic Susbtance Control Act. Adapted from U.S. DOE
(1997a).
Finally, nearly all the site-specific advisory
boards (SSABs) and citizen advisory boards
(CABs), official committees that advise the
DOE on nuclear waste cleanup issues in gen-
eral, have provided official advice and com-
ments to DOE radioactive waste transportation.
Transportation issues are clearly important for
the SSABs, who are arguably the most
involved and active groups in site decision
making. [Information about the SSABs is
available on the Internet (DOE 2001b).]
The DOE recognized in the early 1990s
that its nuclear waste cleanup strategy required
a high level of public involvement. Issuing the
first in a series of requests, then Assistant
Secretary for Environmental Management
Thomas P. Grumbly asked the National
Academy of Sciences to evaluate the feasibility
and desirability of using risk assessment as a
means to build enough consensus among its
stakeholders to make lasting decisions about
DOE cleanup. The subsequent report,
Building Consensus Through Risk Assessment
and Management of the Department of Energy's
Environmental Remediation Program (NRC
1994), recommended that stakeholders be
included in dialogue about cleanup from the
beginning. A process to implement this recom-
mendation was initiated in 1994 with a
Plutonium Roundtable (League of Women
Voters of Washington 1997) in the Pacific
Northwest. The roundtable occurred during
several evenings in Seattle and Richland,
Washington (the latter being near the Hanford
Nuclear Reservation). It brought together a
broad array of stakeholders and tribes, as well
as the Russian Atomic Energy Deputy
Minister and staff. Participants addressed dis-
armament of the nuclear stockpile as well as
cleanup of contaminated sites. A major recom-
mendation from the workshop advocated that
DOE stakeholders and tribes develop a process
to generate debate about long-term cleanup
and disarmament strategies on a national scale.
Building on these recommendations, the
National League of Women Voters entered
into a cooperative agreement with the DOE
to facilitate the National Dialogue on Nuclear
Material and Waste Disposition in 1996. The
project was designed as a national initiative to
elicit stakeholder values and develop principles
to help guide DOE decision making regarding
its nuclear and toxic materials legacy, particu-
larly waste transportation issues. Pending deci-
sions about DOE-managed material and
waste at sites around the country affect not
only the areas in which those sites are located,
but also whole regions and communities along
transportation corridors. Therefore, the goal
of the national dialogue was to engage affected
citizens to develop a strategic and more equi-
table national policy for management and dis-
position of nuclear material and waste. The
national dialogue process began with a series
of regional pilot field workshops, followed by
subnational forums to formulate public values
and principles surrounding the transportation
and disposal of nuclear materials, including
plutonium, spent nuclear fuel, and transuranic
waste. A national forum on this topic was
originally envisioned by the League of
Women Voters, but was never implemented
by the DOE (League of Women Voters
Education Fund 1998). Four regional pilot
workshops were developed as educational,
public dialogues among diverse stakeholders,
tribes, and decision makers.
Involving the public in waste transporta-
tion decisions is clearly a good idea, but the
technical complexities of the material are still
assumed to be a barrier to meaningful partici-
pation (Feldman and Hanahan 1996; Probst
and Lowe 2000). Many researchers and deci-
sion makers believe that average citizens simply
cannot understand or discuss nuclear waste
transport issues, radiation hazards, or regulatory
requirements. In fact, there are documented
examples where lay people have grappled with
highly complex issues and have been able to
affect meaningful change (see, e.g., Kleinman
2000). Kaplan (2000) recounted the early his-
tory of citizen participation activities at the
DOE Hanford site and strongly disputed the
notion that citizens cannot handle complex-
ity. In addition, Bonano et al. (2000) showed
that stakeholders can work with experts on
highly technical DOE cleanup decisions to
formulate recommendations. Common to
these examples is a concerted effort to provide
participants with at least some degree of spe-
cialized knowledge, information, or training.
The challenge for scientists is to abandon
their assumptions and think more systemati-
cally about questions such as, what informa-
tion do participants need to engage in the
process, who is participating currently in
waste cleanup dialogues, and, perhaps more
important, who is missing from the discus-
sion? Finally, how can scientists present infor-
mation in ways that foster participation? We
believe that we face a major challenge in get-
ting people to engage in iterative dialogue
about defining and addressing nuclear waste
transportation and cleanup issues. How can
we develop accessible resources for stakehold-
ers and tribes so that their valuable input can
contribute to decision processes and out-
comes? These questions are explored in the
sections below.
Stakeholder Information
Needs: Three Case Studies
We used a case study evaluation design to
synthesize the results from these three interac-
tions because the how and why orientation of
our research questions is well-suited to case
studies (Yin 1994). For this study, we used a
mixture of quantitative and qualitative data
collection techniques including focus groups,
intake surveys, and literature reviews. Our
analysis techniques included content analysis
and descriptive statistics. Several themes and
lessons emerged from a synthesis of the three
cases. Looking at the studies together
strengthens the impact of our findings and
allows for broader generalization.
Community focus groups. CRESP worked
with Decision Research (Eugene, OR) to con-
duct focus groups to help identify local con-
cerns related to nuclear waste transportation.
(Decision Research has a wealth of expertise in
the field of risk perception and extensive
research experience on nuclear issues, particu-
larly transportation; see, e.g., Decision Research
2002; Flynn et al. 1997; MacGregor et al.
1994; Slovic 1991). The purpose of the focus
groups was to gain better insight into the issues
of concern to various stakeholder groups. We
wanted to work with stakeholders and tribes to
understand their priorities and concerns about
transporting waste. Specifically, we hoped to
gain insight into the factors that led people to
have a particular set of opinions about this
issue. In addition, we wanted to determine
what information stakeholders need to under-
stand waste transportation issues and con-
tribute meaningfully to cleanup decision
processes. Our overall objective was to facili-
tate meaningful stakeholder input into these
decisions by understanding some of these
processes and perspectives.
Focus groups are small, facilitated group
interviews that, in our case, followed an open
ended-interview format (Patton 1990). Focus
groups are often used as part of an exploratory
research protocol to identify questions of
interest for further inquiry. Although sample
size is small, in-depth group discussions pro-
vide an opportunity for participants to give
opinions and hear those of others. This allows
researchers and participants to think about
their views in the context of others' views.
Our intention was to scope out the issues
with participants of differing job descriptions,
employment, geographic location, and famil-
iarity with the topic.
Facilitators from Decision Research devel-
oped a script of key questions that should be
covered during the discussion to aid in the
consistency of discussion across focus groups.
The script was built from issues defined in
scientific literature and from experience
working with nuclear waste transportation
issues. During each focus group session, two
facilitators shared responsibilities: one man-
aged the group discussion, probing partici-
pants for concerns about nuclear waste
transportation, and another recorded com-
ments. Facilitators developed a summary of
each group and then synthesized a common
list of ideas and concerns. A follow-up group,
made up of at least one participant from each
Articles | Identifying stakeholder risk information needs
Environmental Health Perspectives * VOLUME 111 | NUMBER 3 | March 2003 265
group, was convened to review the major
themes.
Four topical areas were investigated: eco-
logical risks, human health risks, regulator and
public agency concerns, and stakeholder and
emergency response concerns (Table 2). Each
focus group contained between 4 and 12 par-
ticipants. Three focus groups were held in the
Seattle area of western Washington, and three
were held in the tri-cities area of eastern
Washington, near the Hanford site. The focus
groups were held in autumn 1997 and winter
1998. CRESP outreach coordinators identi-
fied focus group participants. Most knew of
CRESP and represented groups with whom
the project has had regular involvement.
However, some participants, especially the
public-at-large focus groups, were unfamiliar
with the CRESP project. The participants in
these public-at-large groups were invited
specifically for their diversity of interests and
backgrounds.
Examples of specific concerns that
emerged from the discussions are also pro-
vided in Table 2. Despite differences in per-
spective between the focus groups and
between individual participants, many com-
mon themes emerged. Concerns over the fol-
lowing issues were raised in several groups:
* Economic impacts or negative image of the
tri-cities resulting from a proposed increase
in the number of waste shipments to and
from Hanford
* How waste form and packaging specifications
affect accident scenarios
* The adequacy of safety preparation and
emergency response capabilities along trans-
portation corridors
* Potential impacts to human and environmen-
tal health resulting from a potential accident
* Fairness and equity of decisions calling for
the consolidation of waste to a few major
sites (many focus group participants, particu-
larly those in the public-at-large groups,
questioned whether there was sufficient justi-
fication to move wastes between sites, or if it
were less risky to just leave the waste alone)
* Whether transportation of nuclear waste
could be done safely, including whether dri-
vers are adequately trained and if there are
strict protocols for packaging and tracking
shipments
* Lack of trust in and credibility of the DOE,
concern that the DOE will not always make
the most prudent choices, a general consen-
sus that decisions made at more local gov-
ernment levels would be viewed with greater
trust. This perception highlights the contin-
uing need for transparency in, and stake-
holder access to, DOE decision making and
points to the need to partner with local offi-
cials both to generate the best information
and ensure credibility.
Some differences among the groups were
also evident. One of the clearest differences
was the varied information base that even
specialized participants--experts in various
fields--brought to the discussion. Expertise
tended to be focused on specific aspects of the
issue and did not necessarily include knowl-
edge across multiple aspects. Although there
were important information gaps in all
groups, in the public-at-large groups in par-
ticular there was a lack of knowledge of the
kind and amount of waste currently being
shipped through the community, as well as a
lack of knowledge about differences between
the kinds of waste being discussed, including
those differences directly related to potential
health threats.
There were several gaps in information or
understanding that were specifically identified
by participants. These included risks associ-
ated with different transportation modes
(such as truck, rail, or barge); risks and failure
rates associated with different types of pack-
aging, including the form of the waste being
transported (solid, liquid, or gas), and
whether it was mixed with solids or formed
into bricks; current protocols for handling
wastes, including training standards for truck
drivers; current volumes and types of waste
shipped to and from Hanford; decision-mak-
ing power (e.g., several agencies have author-
ity to make decisions regarding transportation
issues: the DOE, the U.S. Department of
Transportation, state departments of trans-
portation, state patrols, and/or other emer-
gency responders); clarification about what
transportation decisions have already been
made and which are still pending, and at
what point in the process was, or will, stake-
holder input be sought and used; and the cri-
teria for selecting general transportation
strategies and specific modes and routes.
The focus group discussions emphasized
the need for communication between the
DOE and people affected by and interested in
its policies and practices. Stakeholders and
tribes need information about the decisions
the DOE is making and why they are being
made. In turn, the DOE needs information
about stakeholder and tribal concerns, priori-
ties, alternatives, and their origins before it can
Articles | Drew et al.
266 VOLUME 111 | NUMBER 3 | March 2003 * Environmental Health Perspectives
Table 2. Focus groups: participant's organizations and examples of specific concerns.
Focus group Participant's organizations Specific concerns (examples)
Ecological risk group (n = 6) Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Biodiversity and the presence of sensitive ecosystems
CRESP Ecological Task Group, Washington or species need to be included in DOE decision-making
Department of Ecology, private consultant criteria
working on environmental health issues Ecological impact of roadway construction and
maintenance need to be adequately considered
Human health risk group (n = 6) Oregon State University, U.S. EPA Region 10, Need for better education to promote lay understanding
University of Washington School of Medicine, of the differences between uncertainty and variability
private physician working with the Hanford in data to help raise public understanding of risk
Health Information Network, CRESP researcher Need for scientists to better understand long-term
health effects of low-level radiation exposures via
air, water, and soil
Regulator group (n = 5) Washington Department of Ecology, Oregon Office Transportation represents the lowest risk in comparison
of Energy Nuclear Waste Transfer Program, to waste storage and handling
U.S. EPA Region 10, INEEL Oversight Program, Do not move wastes unless you have a very good reason
U.S. Department of Transportation Need for the worst case scenarios to be treated credibly
and seriously
Public-at-large group 1 (n = 6) First response fire unit, Tri-City Industrial Development, Emergency response infrastructure is inadequate and
CRESP, Disarmament Coalition, Yakama underfunded
Indian Nation Need for better and more comprehensive emergency
Public-at-large group 2 (n = 12) Engineer, two realtors, two staff members of a nonprofit response training, especially in rural areas and within
human service organization, a homemaker, two tribal communities
small business owners, a court reporter, an Need for better, more timely, notification and
environmental educator, a city planning director, and general information about nuclear waste transport
the owner of a local mortgage company
Follow-up overview group (n = 4) Four participants from previous groups were reconvened
to review outcomes
make effective and enduring decisions.
Stakeholders and tribes must have access to
information; they must know what informa-
tion they need, where to get it, and what it
means, and their access to that information
must be practical and unencumbered. Likewise,
DOE decision makers need to understand
what information they need from stakeholders
and tribes and where to get it. The DOE's
access to information from interested parties
must be practical and unencumbered, as well.
In summary, these focus groups have suggested
some of the ideas that need further attention,
but they also raise many questions, such as
how best to provide the information, who
needs it, when, and in what format.
Regional nuclear waste transportation
workshops: participant surveys. Pilot work-
shops were held during the summer and fall of
1997 in four regions across the United States.
The Washington League of Women Voters
and the Washington Physicians for Social
Responsibility hosted the pilot workshops in
the Pacific Northwest. The workshops were
held in Richland, Spokane, and Seattle,
Washington, and in Portland, Oregon. They
drew more than 400 participants who gathered
to discuss issues related to nuclear material and
waste, including storage, treatment, worker
and public health and safety, transportation,
and disposal technologies.
Workshops were divided into three main
components. The first segment provided an
opportunity for participants to collect back-
ground information and handouts, view
graphic displays and videos, and engage in
informal discussions with resource people
who were on hand from various sites, tribes,
and interest groups. The second segment con-
sisted of presentations by a panel of "resource
people" from various sites. During the final
segment, small groups of 8-10 participants
were convened to voice concerns and formu-
late values and underlying principles that the
DOE should apply when making decisions.
Facilitators at each table recorded the con-
cerns, values, and principles raised during the
discussion. The small groups then reconvened
in a large group for an open-microphone dis-
cussion of the key points raised by each of the
small tables.
A workshop report by the League of
Women Voters of Washington (1997) includes
a summation of the values and principles
developed among participants in the Pacific
Northwest, the results of a survey on substan-
tive waste storage and disposal issues, and an
evaluation of the workshop process itself. The
initial reports on the regional pilot workshops
were designed to help the DOE decide
whether the national dialogue should proceed
at the subnational and national level.
In addition, CRESP conducted an intake
survey for participants at the four northwest
regional field workshops. Survey questions
focused on two main themes: demographics
and outreach methods. The first theme per-
tained to demographic characteristics of the
workshop participants including sex, age,
race/ethnicity, highest level of education,
occupation, class of worker, household
annual income, and place of residence. The
second theme included questions designed to
ascertain how participants found out about
the workshop, the timeliness of outreach
efforts, and which outreach methods were
most effective. Participants were also asked to
identify stakeholder groups that were missing
from the public workshop process.
The intake survey was made available to
workshop participants after the meeting con-
cluded but was not mandatory. Because it
was one of three different surveys that were
circulated at the workshops, we were not sur-
prised that fewer than half of the participants
(201 of 426; 47%) responded (Figure 1).
Response rates varied by workshop: roughly
50% of the Seattle and Spokane participants
returned the forms, while almost 60% of the
Richland participants and only 26% of
Portland participants returned forms. Of the
201 surveys received, 15% came from the
Portland workshop, 25% from the Richland
workshop, 19% from the Spokane workshop,
and 41% from the Seattle workshop.
Demographic data from the combined sur-
vey responses were compared to Washington
and Oregon census data from 1990. We found
that workshop participants differed from the
average population in respect to age, race/eth-
nicity, education level, and income (Figure 2).
Underrepresented populations included per-
sons < 30 years of age, native Spanish speakers,
persons without a college degree, and persons
living in households with an annual income
< $40,000. Overrepresented groups included
persons > 40 years of age, persons of Native
American or other (biracial/mixed) heritage,
persons with college or professional degrees,
and persons living in households making
> $55,000/ year. When asked who was miss-
ing from the workshop, respondents repeat-
edly indicated that "the general public,"
"elected officials" (decision makers), and "peo-
ple of color" should be included in the work-
shops. These results suggest that future
outreach and communication activities should
be targeted to improve representation of
underrepresented groups.
The workshops were advertised through
several different mechanisms. These were
designed to target stakeholders who were
actively involved in nuclear cleanup issues, as
well as citizens who were not previously
involved in nuclear cleanup issues (Hemmings
1998). To inform the active stakeholder
community, invitations were mailed directly
to affected Hanford Tribes, the Nuclear
Disarmament Coalition, Hanford Advisory
Board members, local elected officials, League
of Women Voters members, Washington
Department of Ecology mailing list sub-
scribers, and various organizations; press pack-
ets were distributed to local media; and
announcements were placed in routine DOE-
Hanford mailings and electronic bulletin
boards. To reach members of the public not
already involved, invitations were sent to
minority community leaders and organiza-
tions, advertisements were placed in local
newspapers and radio, op-ed (opinion-editor-
ial) pieces were written for Seattle newspapers,
and the workshop steering committee made
personal phone calls to contacts in Latino and
African-American communities.
Most survey respondents heard about the
workshops 2-6 weeks in advance and were sat-
isfied with that time frame. They reported
learning about the workshops from direct
mailings (30%), specific organizations (includ-
ing workplace postings; 24%) friends or rela-
tives (17%), and the DOE public involvement
calendar (12%; Table 3). There were impor-
tant differences between what communications
were expected to be effective and how partici-
pants actually heard about the workshops. For
example, only 5% learned about the meeting
through the newspaper or on the radio, but
most respondents (40%) reported that news-
papers or radio announcements were the best
means of advertising similar events. These
findings suggest that perceptions of effective
communication methods may be quite differ-
ent from methods that are actually effective.
The pilot workshops were clearly more vis-
ible than routine public involvement activities
typically conducted by the DOE (Hemmings
1998). Despite the vigorous approach to out-
reach, intended to draw in members of the
previously inactive public, > 90% of the survey
respondents identified themselves as belonging
Articles | Identifying stakeholder risk information needs
Environmental Health Perspectives * VOLUME 111 | NUMBER 3 | March 2003 267
Figure 1. Composition of surveys distributed at
regional pilot workshops on nuclear material and
waste in 1997 (n = 426 participants).
250
200
150
100
50
0
Surveys
completed
Surveys not
completed
No.
of
surveys
Portland, OR, 20 October
Richland, WA, 21 October
Spokane, WA, 22 October
Seattle, WA, 22 October
to an existing stakeholder group. This seems to
be a typical finding for DOE public involve-
ment activities. We are unaware of empirical
studies that show how few members of the
public participate in public meetings on behalf
of themselves only (as opposed to an organiza-
tion for whom they volunteer or that pays
them to be there). However, based on our
experiences, it is rare to see someone from the
public stand up at a public meeting and make
a comment. For example, in the entire 36-
month history of the Hanford Openness
Workshops, not a single person took advan-
tage of the public comment period to make a
statement (Kern 1998, 1999).
There were many positive aspects of the
regional nuclear waste transportation work-
shops, such as encouraging participants to
interact with technical specialists in small
groups, providing an opportunity for partici-
pants to build one-on-one relationships, allow-
ing a range of perspectives to be expressed,
addressing the big picture by looking at the
interactions among all the sites in the complex
(not just one site in isolation from others), and
using trained facilitators. As an independent,
credible institution, the direction and involve-
ment of the League of Women Voters gave the
workshops a certain level of legitimacy.
However, participants were given little specific
information about risks. For example, there
was no discussion of how different cleanup
alternatives require different trade-offs in terms
of risks to workers, the public or the environ-
ment (i.e., that cleanup designed to reduce
future risks to the general public often trans-
lates to increased risks to workers and the envi-
ronment in the near term--due to the cleanup
activities themselves). Moreover, participants
"lacked sufficient information to fully under-
stand the impacts of accepting vast new
quantities of hazardous materials at a given
site" (Hemmings 1998, p. 23). Specifically,
participants wanted more information about
transportation modes, the likelihood and
consequences of major highway accidents,
waste packaging information, route-specific
guidelines, and local emergency response.
Developing and evaluating visual tools to
aid complex discussion. In June 1998, the
League of Women Voters organized a second
round of dialogue with stakeholders on trans-
portation issues called the Inter-site Discussion
on Nuclear Material and Waste. Discussions
took place at San Diego State University in
San Diego, California, and at Loyola
University in Chicago, Illinois, for 2.5 days
each. The workshop design differed from the
one originally proposed by the League of
Women Voters, but the DOE decision mak-
ers and those affected by decisions were
brought together to discuss intersite waste
transportation issues (League of Women
Voters Education Fund 1998). A variety of
interactive formats (small group presentations,
one-on-one discussions, break-out activities,
and plenary sessions) were combined in an
unprecedented way to create a common
learning experience and an exchange of per-
spectives. Results reported here were compiled
from the League of Women Voters final work-
shop report (League of Women Voters
Education Fund 1998), our notes taken dur-
ing the workshops, and discussions with other
observers and participants at the workshops.
For one workshop exercise, CRESP
worked with Toby Michelina of Global
Environmental Strategies, Inc. (Albany, NY)
to prepare an interactive display of nuclear
waste for workshop participants (Figure 3).
The display used Lego blocks (Lego Company,
Billund, Denmark) to represent the type and
volume of waste stored at various sites across
the United States. Different colored blocks
represented the different waste types, and each
dot on the blocks represented a certain volume
of waste in cubic meters or metric tons (Figure
3). The Legos were placed on a large base map
of the United States (5 feet x 4 feet). The map
included state outlines, waste site locations,
waste repository locations, Native American
Indian reservations, and transportation routes
(highways and railway lines to be used).
Articles | Drew et al.
268 VOLUME 111 | NUMBER 3 | March 2003 * Environmental Health Perspectives
Figure 2. Combined participant demographics of the four regional pilot workshops on nuclear material and waste as compared to 1990 Census data for
Washington and Oregon. (A) Age. (B) Annual household income. (C) Highest level of education received. (D) Race/ethnicity. Because the survey participants
were not a random sample, the statistical significance of the difference could not be determined. Instead the proportion of workshop participants within each
demographic category were compared with the proportions from the combined population totals for Oregon and Washington. Differences were noted here if the
observed data differed from the expected mean [based on 1990 Census (U.S. Census Bureau 1990)] by at least two standard deviations.
40
30
20
10
0
Percent
Workshop participants
Populations of
Oregon and Wahington
(1990 Census)
 to 12th
grade, no
diploma
Age (years)
21-29 30-39 40-49 50-59 60-69 70
30
25
15
10
5
0
Percent
50
40
30
20
10
0
Percent
 14,999 15,000-
24,999
25,000-
39,999
40,000-
54,999
55,000-
74,999
 75,000
Annual household income (U.S. $)
High school
graduate (or
equivalency)
Some college,
no degree
Associate
degree
Bachelor's
degree
Graduate or
professional
degree
100
80
60
40
20
0
Percent
White Hispanic African
American
Asian/Pacific
Islander
Native
American
Other
(biracial, mixed)
Highest level of education
Race/ethnicity
A B
C
D
 20
Table 3. Expected method compared to actual communication methods for workshop advertising.
Percentage of respondents who
Expected this method Learned of event
Method to be most effective in this way
Newspaper 25 4
Radio advertisement 15 1
Direct mail announcement 14 30
TV advertisement 10 1
Through a specific organization 7 24
DOE public involvement calendar 1 12
Friend or relative 0 17
Because workshop organizers were interested
in environmental justice issues, the map also
showed minority population statistics (percent
nonwhite from the 1990 Census). Workshop
participants used this Lego map to consider
risk-risk trade-offs related to waste disposition
and transportation decisions. Participants
engaged in a small-group exercise in which
they chose final disposition of the waste
streams, chose transportation routes and
modes (rail or truck), and simulated move-
ments of wastes from one site to another with
toy cars.
The League of Women Voters summa-
rized participant evaluations and facilitator
assessments in their report to the Secretary of
Energy (League of Women Voters Education
Fund 1998). Participants evaluated all major
segments of the workshop (Figure 4). Sixty-
six percent rated the map exercise favorably,
only 9% rated it unfavorably, and it had the
highest percentage of favorable ratings of all
the different workshop segments. In addition,
open-ended questions were asked about the
most (and least) helpful aspect of the work-
shop. Out of 139 responses, 20 specifically
mentioned the Lego map as the most helpful
aspect, and none cited it as the least helpful.
[The Lego map was the second most frequent
response in the "most helpful" aspect ques-
tion. The most frequent response category (n
= 57) included comments praising the oppor-
tunity to engage with a broad spectrum of
ideas.] Participants and observers found that
the Lego map was an effective way for partici-
pants to conceptualize the types of waste
streams involved, visualize the volume and
magnitude of the waste to be disposed,
understand the limited route alternatives
(road vs. rail), and discuss concerns of specific
demographic groups that live along trans-
portation corridors. Participants reported that
the three-dimensional Legos provided a more
concrete way to understand the volume of
waste and its distribution among the sites,
allowing them to simulate management deci-
sions about intersite transfer more realisti-
cally. The Lego map exercise enabled
participants to discuss risk-related trade-offs,
routes, and other complex issues amongst
themselves and with technical advisors. In so
Articles | Identifying stakeholder risk information needs
Environmental Health Perspectives * VOLUME 111 | NUMBER 3 | March 2003 269
Figure 3. Photograph of the Lego map, an interactive display of nuclear waste for workshop participants. Lego blocks indicating waste types and volumes were
overlaid on a U.S. map showing repository locations, transportation routes, Native American Indian reservations, and population statistics from the 1990 Census
(U.S. Census Bureau 1990).
Lego color Material/waste Volume conversion
High-level waste 1 dot = 250 m3
Transuranic waste 1 dot = 250 m3
Low-level waste 1 dot = 250 m3
WHITE Mixed waste 1 dot = 250 m3
Plutonium 1 dot = 5 metric tons
Spent nuclear fuel 1 dot = 5 metric tons
Highly enriched uranium 1 dot = 5 metric tons
Depleted uranium hexafluoride 1 dot = 250 m3
Contaminated solid media 1 dot = 10,000 m3
Contaminated liquid 1 dot = 2,000,000 m3
Percent nonwhite population
52-95
33-52
19-33
7-19
0-7
Indian reservations
Interstate system and selected highways
Potential rail routes
doing, the Lego map served as a new form of
risk communication tool. Overall, partici-
pants in the map exercise felt that the Lego
map was more inviting, dynamic, and accessi-
ble to lay people than simple maps, data
tables, and charts.
During the map exercise, observers
noticed that participants were open to a wide
range of options and alternatives so as to
address the waste transportation problem
fairly. Participants seemed surprised at how
often the proposed transportation routes
routed nuclear waste through areas of high
nonwhite populations. Although this was a
simulation exercise and not an actual decision-
making procedure, this open-mindedness
refutes the prevailing belief among many sci-
entists that stakeholders and tribes automati-
cally assume a NIMBY (not-in-my-backyard)
stance. The interactions support claims by
Kaplan (2000) and Bonano (2000) that, with
enhanced technical support, stakeholders and
tribes can indeed understand complex issues
that arise in risk-related decision processes and
remain open to a wide range of solutions.
The Lego map display has, by far, been the
most popular and requested risk communica-
tion device that CRESP has contributed to. It
was presented not only at the National Equity
Dialogue workshops in San Diego and
Chicago but also at several scientific meetings
(Hanford Health of the Site and the Society
for Risk Analysis), in discussions with advisory
boards at the Hanford, Fernald (Cincinnati,
OH), and Sandia (Albuquerque, NM) sites,
and in classrooms at the University of
Washington. The success of using Lego blocks
as colorful tools to illustrate waste class and
volume was attributable to their use in a man-
ner that aided visualization without trivializing
the difficult decisions at hand.
Common themes and lessons. Several com-
mon themes and lessons have emerged from
these three examples. First, scientists need to
work with stakeholders and tribes to develop
creative methods to make complex informa-
tion accessible to the lay public. The Lego map
is a good example of how simple objects can be
used to represent complex ideas. It also
demonstrates how visualizing spatial dimen-
sions of complex problems can contribute to a
broader understanding of those problems.
Increasingly, researchers and decision makers
are turning to geographic information tools,
ranging from simple maps to intricate
Geographic Information Systems (GIS), for
environmental problem solving (McMaster et
al. 1997; Nyerges et al. 1997a, 1997b; Tim
1995). Not only can GIS packages be informa-
tive for public participation (Jankowski and
Nyerges 2001), but certain GIS features such
as three-dimensional visualization techniques
(e.g., the 3D-Analyst extension for ESRI's
Arc\View GIS package; Environmental
Systems Research Institute, Redlands, CA) can
also provide new perspectives on old problems
such as worker radiation exposure (Hedley et
al. 1999). We are not advocating tool develop-
ment as an end in itself; the objective should
be more effective and representative stake-
holder and tribal participation. Toward that
end, researchers should not only continue to
explore creative applications but also evaluate
their contributions to public participation
processes. To date, relatively few studies that
evaluate the effectiveness of geographic infor-
mation tools on public participation processes
have been conducted, and this is a significant
area for future research. Nyerges et al. (2002)
provide suggestions for developing research
strategies in this area.
Second, underrepresented groups may
require specialized communication efforts to
ensure participation. The underrepresenta-
tion of Spanish-speaking populations in
DOE stakeholder contexts has been previ-
ously documented but remains largely
unsolved (Boiko et al. 1996). As members of
an educational institution, we believe reach-
ing younger people through classroom inter-
actions and service learning opportunities are
ways we can work with the community to get
youth and young adults involved in complex
issues. Through the Institute for Risk Analysis
and Risk Communication at the University of
Washington and CRESP, we have partici-
pated in several initiatives intended to reach
underrepresented populations. For example,
on several occasions, CRESP has worked with
tribes to address tribal risk information needs
and concerns. A workshop was held at the
University of Washington (Seattle, WA) in
1995 to discuss opportunities for collaboration
(CRESP 1996), a Tribal Risk Roundtable was
held at the Wildhorse Resort (near Pendleton,
OR) in 1998 (Risk Roundtable Steering
Committee 1998), and a Tribal Openness
Workshop (Spokane, WA) was held in June
1999 as a component of the Hanford
Openness Workshops (Kern 1998, 1999). In
addition, the Center for Child Environmental
Health Risks Research at the University of
Washington is working to define children's
susceptibility to pesticides by working with
farm worker families in the Yakima Valley, a
major agricultural area in Washington State
(University of Washington 2001). The com-
munity intervention portion of the project
works to break the pathway by which agricul-
tural pesticides are transferred from work to
home. Special bilingual outreach materials
have been developed for school-based presenta-
tions and a coloring book for children. Efforts
to define and meet information needs of spe-
cific groups should continue to be a priority
for the academic research community.
Third, multiple approaches and iterative
processes are needed to ensure that dialogue
includes technological, stakeholder and tribal
expertise. There are several barriers to authen-
tic (King et al. 1998) participation in complex
issues such as nuclear waste transportation.
For example, in a recent survey (Mercer
1999), stakeholders from the mailing list of
the INEEL were asked to rank their top three
reasons for not attending public meetings
about INEEL. The most common reason for
not participating was being too busy, but
more than half said that they let citizens
groups or legislators represent them. Other
important factors were not knowing enough,
feeling that other issues were more important,
that there were better ways to influence
INEEL, and that INEEL meetings were not
informative. Looking more broadly, Probst
and Lowe (2000) explored the national indif-
ference to DOE cleanup issues in a major
report from Resources for the Future. The
authors noted that people are simply not
aware of or interested in DOE cleanup
because the issues are extremely complicated,
the geographic concentration of the problems
and relative isolation of the sites have left
them invisible to most of the public, and the
cleanup budget is a "small fish" in the "big
pond" of defense spending.
It is beyond the scope of this article to list
all characteristics and recommendations for
successful public involvement activities.
Indeed, no single approach to stakeholder or
public involvement is appropriate; multiple
involvement mechanisms are needed to reach
different types of audiences. All of our case
studies indicate that breaking into small
group discussions can help build the mean-
ingful and lasting relationships that foster
deeper understanding, especially when a
range of different perspectives are repre-
sented. But successful interactions take time.
Participants need time to learn, interact with
experts, discuss options, weigh trade-offs, and
make recommendations. Thus, it is critical to
Articles | Drew et al.
270 VOLUME 111 | NUMBER 3 | March 2003 * Environmental Health Perspectives
Figure 4. Ratings of major workshop segments from
the League of Women Voters intersite workshop
(League of Women Voters Educational Fund 1998).
No. of responses
Favorable
OK
Unfavorable
Indeterminate
Opening
plenary
Site
presentations
Interest
sector
mapping
Closing
plenary
Mapping
exercise
0 20 40 60 80
n = 89
n = 105
n = 79
n = 99
n = 73
develop iterative processes that build on past
relationships and knowledge that has been
gained but also leaves room to incorporate
emerging information and new voices. Other
important considerations include establishing
commitment from the responsible agency to
use the results of activity, determining the
appropriate level of interaction, engaging
elected officials, working with key community
group leaders early and often, holding meet-
ings at a variety of times and locations, and so
on. Good public involvement resources
include the International Association of Public
Participation (IAP2 2002), which charts pub-
lic participation in terms of increasing levels of
impact--from informing to consulting,
involving, and collaborating all the way to
empowering--each with its own objective; the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's
(EPA's) stakeholder website (U.S. EPA
2002); and Fairness and Competence in
Citizen Participation: Evaluating Models for
Environmental Discourse (Renn et al. 1995).
In addition, there is much to learn from
new models of participation that indicate
nonexperts can be meaningfully involved in
highly complex and technical decisions. For
example, following an example from
Denmark, the Loka Institute convened a citi-
zens panel on telecommunications policy in
1997 (Sclove 2000). Fifteen lay participants
were recruited for three weekend workshops.
The first two provided background material,
and at the third, participants heard testimony
from a variety of experts, government repre-
sentatives and other stakeholders. By the end
of the weekend, the participants developed
several specific recommendations about regu-
lating Internet and telecommunications pol-
icy. According to Sclove (2000),
[It] was the first time in modern U.S. history that
a diverse group of everyday citizens ... gathered to
learn and deliberate on a scientific or technologi-
cal topic of this breadth or complexity.
Other examples of innovative stakeholder
involvement approaches at Hanford include
the Hanford Openness Workshops (Kern
1998, 1999) and the Columbia River
Comprehensive Impact Assessment process
(CRCIA Management Team and Pacific
Northwest National Laboratories 1998) and
associated stakeholder involvement relating to
long-term stewardship. Public meetings are
but one in a suite of public/stakeholder partic-
ipation options. Increasingly, Internet activi-
ties are providing a supplemental venue for
engaging the public. Examples include the
U.S. EPA's recent Internet Dialogue (U.S.
EPA 2002), Argonne National Laboratories
electronic environmental impact statement
(2002), and a pilot project called the Decision
Mapping System (Drew 2002). Although we
have come a long way in improving Arnstein's
(1969) "ladder of citizen participation," much
research in these areas is still needed.
Fourth, the need for transparent decision
processes and outcomes has emerged from all
three case studies. To be transparent, those
who are interested in a decision must under-
stand what is being done, and why (Drew and
Nyerges. In press). Transparency is particu-
larly important in the context of nuclear waste
cleanup and transport, because nuclear mate-
rials persist in the environment for very long
periods of time (Applegate 1995) and because
people are generally fearful of nuclear waste
(Slovic et al. 1991a). Another important
aspect of transparency involves institutional
capacity, consistency, and longevity. In order
for processes to be transparent to, understood
by, and engaging to stakeholders and tribes,
these groups must have faith that process A
will lead to decision B, which results in action
C, consistently over time. One of the contin-
uing and most problematic challenges for the
DOE and its stakeholders continues to be the
ever-changing decision-making framework.
This is especially true for this arena over other
governmental processes because of the inher-
ently long-term timeline of the issues in ques-
tion. Because nuclear waste disposition and
transportation issues operate over a long time
scale (decades), they easily eclipse the political
and institutional time frame (4-6 years). The
dissolution of the national dialogue discus-
sions is a prime case in point. Although it is
not entirely clear why DOE failed to con-
tinue the national dialogue workshops as
planned by the League of Women Voters, a
change in the DOE leadership during this
period was probably a significant factor. Over
time, the continuity provided by stakeholders
and tribes may be the only stable knowledge
base available for complex sites like Hanford.
A knowledgeable and engaged citizenry is,
therefore, vital, but it will not be achieved
without greater transparency and understand-
ing of both the decision processes as well as
the technical issues.
Conclusion
In this article we have described three interac-
tions with stakeholders and tribes on the topic
of nuclear waste transportation. We found
that stakeholders and tribes are willing to
engage in these issues, but they generally
believe that they need access to more technical
information to be effective participants in the
decision-making processes. Meaningful
involvement requires that decision processes
and technical information be transparent and
accessible to a wide range of potential partici-
pants. We also found that participants need
technical resources to participate in the dia-
logue, but the format of those resources is a
topic for future research. Moreover, partici-
pants engaged well when presented with an
opportunity to interact with technical experts
in small group settings. Clearly, creative tools
that present information in a way that can be
easily grasped (such as the Lego map) should
be developed. Other tools that help partici-
pants visualize impacts, uncertainties, and
trade-offs are also needed. We thus extend a
challenge to the academic community: that
we work with stakeholder and tribal groups to
develop programs that provide the technical
resources needed for meaningful citizen par-
ticipation in these complex decisions.
REFERENCES
Ahearne JF. 1997. Radioactive waste: the size of the problem.
Phys Today 50:24-30.
Applegate JS. 1995. A beginning and not an end in itself: the
role of risk assessment in environmental decision making.
University of Cincinnati Law Review 63:1643-1677.
Argonne National Laboratory. TAPs Renewal EIS. Available:
http://tapseis.anl.gov/eis/index.cfm [accessed 28 June 2002].
Arnstein S. 1969. Ladder of citizen participation. J Am Inst
Planners 35:216-224.
Atomic Energy Act. 1954. Public Law 83-703. Available:
http://www.nrc.gov/who-we-are/governing-laws.html
[accessed 8 January 2003].
Boiko PE, Morrill RL, Flynn J, Faustman E, vanBelle G, Omenn
GS. 1996. Who holds the stakes? A case study of stake-
holder identification at two nuclear weapons production
sites. Risk Anal 16:237-249.
Bonano EJ, Apostolakis GE, Salter PF, Ghassemi A, Jennings S.
2000. Application of risk assessment and decision analysis
to the evaluation, ranking and selection of environmental
remediation alternatives. J Hazard Mater 71:35-57.
CRCIA Management Team, Pacific Northwest National
Laboratories. 1998. Screening Assessment and Requirements
for a Comprehensive Assessment (Columbia River
Comprehensive Impact Assessment). DOE/RL-96-16.
Available: http://www.hanford.gov/docs/rl-96-16/ [accessed
19 December 2002].
CRESP. 1996. Tribal Nations and CRESP at Hanford: Opportunities
for Collaboration. Proceedings of the Consortium for Risk
Evaluation with Stakeholder Participation, Yakama Indian
Nation, Confederated Tribes of The Umatilla Indian
Reservation, Nez Perce Tribe, 27 October 1995, Seattle,
Washington. Seattle, WA:University of Washington.
CRESP-II. Consortium for Risk Evaluation with Stakeholder
Participation - II. Available: http://www.cresp.org [accessed
15 August 2001].
Decision Research Homepage. Available http://
www.decisionresearch.org/ [accessed 28 June 2002].
DOE. 1988. DOE Order 5820.2A. Radioactive Waste
Management. Washington DC:U.S. Department of Energy.
Office of Defense Waste and Transportation Management.
------. 1997a. Linking Legacies: Connecting the Cold War
Nuclear Weapons Production Processes to Their
Environmental Consequences. DOE/EM-0319. Washington,
DC:U.S. Department of Energy.
------. 1997b. Final Waste Management Programmatic
Environmental Impact Statement for Managing Treatment,
Storage, and Disposal of Radioactive and Hhazardous
Waste DOE/EIS-0200F. Washington, DC:U.S. Department
of Energy.
------. 1999. From Cleanup to Stewardship: A Companion
Report to Accelerating Cleanup: Paths to Closure and
Background Information to Support the Scoping Process
Required for the 1998 PEIS Settlement Study DOE/EM-
0466. Washington, DC:U.S. Department of Energy,
Environmental Management Program, Office of Strategic
Planning and Analysis.
------. 2000. Environmental Management Historical Funding
Profile. Available: http://www.em.doe.gov/ftplink/budget/
emhistory_by_fo.pdf [accessed 11 February 2002].
------. 2001a. National Transportation Program. Available:
http://www.ntp.doe.gov/ [accessed 15 August 2001].
------. 2001b. Site-Specific Advisory Boards. Available:
http://www.em.doe.gov/public/ssab/ [accessed 18
December 2002].
Articles | Identifying stakeholder risk information needs
Environmental Health Perspectives * VOLUME 111 | NUMBER 3 | March 2003 271
------. 2002. Environmental Management Executive Summary.
Available: http://www.em.doe.gov/Budget2003/Defem/
defem.pdf [accessed 11 February 2002].
Drew C. 2002. Decision Mapping System. Available:
http://nalu.geog.washington.edu/dms [accessed 28 June
2002].
Drew CH, Nyerges TL. In press. Decision transparency for
long-term stewardship: a case study of soil cleanup at the
Hanford 100 area. J Risk Res.
Feldman DL, Hanahan RA. 1996. Public perceptions of a
radioactively contaminated site: concerns, remediation
preferences, and desired involvement. Environ Health
Perspect 104:1344-1352.
Fischhoff B, Slovic P, Lichtenstein S, Read S, Combs B. 1978.
How safe is safe enough? A psychometric study of atti-
tudes toward technological risks and benefits. Policy Sci
9:127-152.
Flynn J, Kasperson RE, Kunreuther H, Slovic P. 1997. Redirecting
the U.S. high-level nuclear waste program. Environment
39(7-11):25-30.
Goldstein BD. 1998. CRESP: an experiment in developing
research responsive to stakeholder concerns. Risk Policy
Rep (20 November) 5(11):39-41.
Hedley NR, Drew CH, Arfin E, Lee A. 1999. Hagerstrand revisited:
interactive space-time visualization of complex spatial data.
Informatica 23:155-168.
Hemmings ES. 1998. Public Participation in Nuclear Decision
Making: An Evaluation of the Pacific Northwest Pilot
Regional Workshops [Master's Thesis]. Seattle,
WA:University of Washington.
International Association of Public Participation. IAP2
Homepage. Available: http://www.iap2.org [accessed 11
February 2002].
Jankowski P, Nyerges TL. 2001. Geographic Information Systems
for Group Decision Making: Towards a Participatory,
Geographic Information Science. London:Taylor and
Francis.
Kaplan L. 2000 Public participation in nuclear facility decisions:
lessons from Hanford. In: Science, Ttechnology and
Democracy (Kleinman DL, ed). Albany, NY:State University
of New York Press, 67-83.
Kern M, ed. 1998. Hanford Openness Workshops October
1997-May 1998: Final Report. Seattle, WA:Hanford
Openness Workshops.
------. 1999. Is Openness Working? A Progress Report.
Seattle, WA:Hanford Openness Workshops.
King CS, Feltey KM, Susel BON. 1998. The question of partici-
pation: toward authentic public participation in public
administration. Public Adm Rev 58:317-326.
Kleinman DL, ed. 2000. Science, Technology and Democracy.
Albany, NY:State University of New York Press.
League of Women Voters Education Fund. 1998. Report to the
Secretary of Energy: Inter-site Discussions on Nuclear
Material and Waste: A National Workshop. Washington,
DC:League of Women Voters. Available: http://www.lwv.org/
where/protecting/waste_rpt.html [accessed 18 December
2002].
League of Women Voters of Washington. 1997. National
Dialogue on DOE-Managed Nuclear Material and Waste:
Pilot Field Workshops for Washington and Oregon. Final
Report with Attachments. Seattle, WA: League of Women
Voters of Washington.
MacGregor DG, Slovic P, Mason RG, Detweiler J, Binney SE,
Dodd B. 1994. Perceived risks of radioactive waste trans-
port through Oregon: results of a statewide survey. Risk
Anal 14:5-14.
McBeth MK, Oakes AS. 1996. Citizen perceptions of risks associ-
ated with moving radiological waste. Risk Anal 16:421-427.
McMaster RB, Leitner H, Sheppard E. 1997. GIS-based envi-
ronmental equity and risk assessment: methodological
problems and prospects. Cartography and Geographic
Information Systems 24:172-189.
Mercer DG. 1999. The Nature of Fairness: What the Biggest
Land Cleanup Project in World History Has to Say about
the Culture of American Environmental Management
[Ph.D. Dissertation]. Seattle, WA:University of Washington.
Mills GS, Neuhauser KS. 1998. Urban risks of truck transport of
radioactive material. Risk Anal 18:781-785.
National Research Council (NRC). 1994. Building Consensus
through Risk Assessment and Management of the
Department of Energy's Environmental Remediation
Program. Washington, DC:National Academy Press.
------. 1996. Understanding Risk: Informing Decisions in a
Democratic Society. Washington, DC:National Academy
Press.
Nuclear Waste Policy Act (NWPA) of 1982. 1982. Public Law
97-425 (amended by Public Law 100-202 and Public Law
100-203 on 22 December 1987). Available: http://
www.nrc.gov/who-we-are/governing-laws.html
[accessed 8 January 2003].
Nyerges T, Jankowski P, Drew C. 2002. Data-gathering strategies
for social-behavioral research about participatory geo-
graphical information system use. Int J Geogr Information
Sci 16:1-22.
Nyerges TL, Montejano R, Oshiro C, Dadswell M. 1997a. Group-
based geographic information systems for transportation
improvement site selection. Transportation Research Part
C: Emerging Technologies 5C:349-369.
Nyerges T, Robkin M, Moore T. 1997b. Geographic information
systems for risk evaluation: perspectives on application to
environmental health. Cartography and Geographic
Information Systems 24:123-144.
Patton MQ. 1990. Qualitative Evaluation and Research Methods.
Newbury Park, CA:Sage Publications.
Probst KN, Lowe AI. 2000. Cleaning Up the Nuclear Weapons
Complex: Does Anybody Care? Washington, DC:Resources
for the Future.
Renn O, Webler T, Wiedemann P, eds. 1995. Fairness and
Competence in Citizen Participation: Evaluating Models
for Environmental Discourse. Dordrecht, the Netherlands:
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) of 1976.
42USC 321.
Risk Roundtable Steering Committee. 1998. Roundtable sum-
mary. In: The Risk Roundtable: Evaluating Risk from a Tribal
Perspective, January 26-29, 1998, Pendleton, Oregon.
Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian Reservation and
the Consortium for Risk Evaluation with Stakeholder
Participation. Seattle, WA:University of Washington.
Sclove RE. 2000 Town meetings on technology: consensus
conferences as democratic participation. In: Science,
Technology and Democracy (Kleinman DL, ed). Albany,
NY:State University of New York Press, 33-48.
Slovic P. 1991. Perceived risk, stigma, and economic impacts
of a high-level nuclear waste repository in Nevada. Risk
Anal 11:683-969.
Slovic P, Fischhoff B, Lichtenstein S. 1979. Rating the risks.
Environment 21(14-20):36-39.
Slovic P, Flynn JH, Layman M. 1991a. Perceived risk, trust, and
the politics of nuclear waste. Science 254:1603-1607.
Slovic P, Layman M, Flynn JH. 1991b. Lessons from Yucca
Mountain. Environment 33(6-11):28-30.
T-REX. Transportation Resource Exchange Center. Available:
http://www.trex-center.org [accessed 15 August 2001].
Tim US. 1995. The application of GIS in environmental health sci-
ences: opportunities and limitations. Environ Res 71:75-88.
Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) of 1976. 1976. 15USC2306.
University of Washington. 2001. Center for Child Environmental
Health Risks Research Homepage. Available: http://
depts.washington.edu/chc/index.html [accessed 9
January 2003].
U.S. Census Bureau. 1990. Summary Tape File 3 (STF3).
Washington D.C. U.S. Department of Commerce. Available
http://homer.ssd.census.gov/cdrom/lookup [accessed 6
January 2003].
U.S. EPA. Public Involvement at EPA. Available: http://
www.epa.gov/stakeholders/index.htm [accessed 11
February 2002].
van Belle G, Omenn GS, Faustman EM, Powers CW, Moore JA,
Goldstein BD. 1996. Dealing with Hanford's lethal legacy.
Washington Public Health 14(Spring):16-21. Available:
http://healthlinks.washington.edu/nwcphp/wph/
hanford.html [accessed 19 December 2002].
Yin RK. 1994. Case Study Research: Design and Methods, Vol 5.
Thousand Oaks, CA:Sage Publications.
Articles | Drew et al.
272 VOLUME 111 | NUMBER 3 | March 2003 * Environmental Health Perspectives