694bmjgroupBritish Journal of Sports MedicineBr J Sports MedPMC1178540811785408117854083673190810.1136/bjsports-2022-106158Aspetar clinical practice guideline on rehabilitation after anterior cruciate
ligament reconstruction
KotsifakiRoula KorakakisVasileios KingEnda BarbosaOlivia MareeDustin PantouverisMichail BjerregaardAndreas LuomajokiJulius WilhelmsenJan WhiteleyRodney 1
Rehabilitation Department,
Aspetar Orthopaedic and Sports Medicine Hospital, Doha, Qatar
✉
Correspondence to Dr Roula Kotsifaki, Rehabilitation Department, Aspetar
Orthopaedic and Sports Medicine Hospital, Doha, Qatar;
argyro.kotsifaki@aspetar.com

✉Corresponding author.
222023579500500–5143112025© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. Re-use permitted under
CC BY-NC. No commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by
BMJ.This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the Creative
Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which permits others to
distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially, and license their
derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is properly cited,
appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the use is non-commercial.
See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.

## Abstract
This guideline was developed to inform clinical practice on rehabilitation after anterior
cruciate ligament reconstruction (ACLR) and was performed in accordance with the Appraisal
of Guidelines for REsearch & Evaluation II (AGREE II) instrument and used the
Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) approach. A
Guideline Development Group systematically searched and reviewed evidence using randomised
clinical trials and systematic reviews to evaluate the effectiveness of rehabilitation
interventions and guide clinicians and patients on the content of the optimal
rehabilitation protocol after ACLR.
The guideline targets patients during rehabilitation after ACLR and investigates the
effectiveness of the available interventions to the physiotherapist, alone or in
combination (eg, exercise, modalities, objective progression criteria). Exercise
interventions should be considered the mainstay of ACLR rehabilitation. However, there is
little evidence on the dose–response relationship between volume and/or intensity
of exercise and outcomes. Physical therapy modalities can be helpful as an adjunct in the
early phase of rehabilitation when pain, swelling and limitations in range of motion are
present. Adding modalities in the early phase may allow earlier pain-free commencement of
exercise rehabilitation. Return to running and return to training/activity are key
milestones for rehabilitation after ACLR. However, there is no evidence on which
progression or discharge criteria should be used.
While there is a very low level of certainty for most components of rehabilitation, most
of the recommendations provided in this guideline were agreed to by expert clinicians.
This guideline also highlights several new elements of ACLR management not reported
previously.
Keywords: exercise, anterior cruciate ligament, knee injuries, rehabilitation, consensus

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoAccepted 2023 Jan 10; Issue date 2023 May.

## Introduction
Rehabilitation is a key component of the recovery process after an anterior cruciate
ligament reconstruction (ACLR). The fundamental goal for the athlete is to return to sport
as quickly as possible, preferably performing at the same level as preinjury, while
minimising the risk of reinjury. Around 80% of ACL-reconstructed patients return to
some kind of sporting activities, but only 65% return to their preinjury level and
55% to competitive level sports. Aside from
graft failure, short-term (eg, muscle injuries) and long-term (eg, knee-related quality of life,
meniscal or chondral injuries and osteoarthritis) comorbidities of ACLR may also be negatively associated with an
individual’s rehabilitation.
There is evidence that inadequate rehabilitation combined with a premature and
non-objectively evaluated return to sports may limit sporting performance and predispose to
subsequent injury. There is substantial
heterogeneity in the available ACL rehabilitation protocols in the scientific
literature. There are also a
variety of available tools to the physiotherapist (eg, exercises, modalities, progression
criteria, etc) but no consensus regarding the content of the rehabilitation programme after
ACLR nor the effectiveness of these rehabilitation interventions. Importantly, there is no agreement on the
objective progression criteria, or the discharge criteria before return to sport. 

A recent systematic review summarised the recommendations and appraised the quality of the
available clinical practice guidelines for rehabilitation after ACLR. Also, recent published work provided an overview of systematic reviews
on the effectiveness of rehabilitation interventions after ACLR. However, previous clinical practice guidelines and the recent systematic review fail to provide clinically relevant information required for daily practice,
including advice for exercise initiation, eccentric training, plyometrics training,
cross-education. The following guideline document translates the available evidence into
clinical recommendations based on expert consensus to informing the treating clinician.
This clinical practice guideline aims to inform clinical practice after ACLR. We evaluated
the effectiveness of interventions and provide evidence-based recommendations for the
various interventions during rehabilitation. We also propose return to running and return to
sport criteria based on the current literature and our clinical expertise.

## Methods

## Purpose: statement of intent
The purpose of this clinical practice guideline document is to describe the evidence of
effectiveness for the components of rehabilitation after ACLR. This information can then
be used to inform ACLR rehabilitation protocols. This guideline is intended to be used by
physiotherapists managing patients after ACLR in outpatient clinics. Physicians,
orthopaedic surgeons, athletic trainers, nurse practitioners and other healthcare
professionals may also benefit from this guideline. Insurance payers, governmental bodies
and health-policy decision-makers may also find this guideline to be useful as an evolving
standard of evidence regarding rehabilitation after ACLR. Additional key users of this
guideline include researchers since this document may highlight gaps in the literature and
grey areas that require future research.

## Development process
We followed the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions and the Prisma in Exercise, Rehabilitation, Sport
medicine and SporTs science tool. We adhered to
the refined Appraisal of Guidelines for REsearch & Evaluation (AGREE II)
instrument to ensure the methodological rigour
and transparency.
A Guideline Development Group (GDG) was established comprising impartial clinical and
methodology experts (nine physiotherapists/researchers, RK, VK, OB, DM, MP, AB, JL, JW and
RW) from Aspetar, Orthopaedic and Sports Medicine Hospital, Doha, Qatar. The GDG consisted
of two women (one as first author) and seven men, junior, mid-career and senior
researchers of different ethnicities. A patient after ACLR (also physiotherapist) was part
of the guideline’s development group. We did not include patient opinion or other
stakeholders via focus groups.
At the first meeting, the GDG reviewed and finalised the scope of the guideline and
agreed on the set of population, intervention or exposure, comparator, outcome questions,
and critical and important outcomes to be assessed. Selected outcomes included: adverse
events, return to activity, pain, laxity, strength, muscle atrophy, range of motion,
subjective function using patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs), swelling, functional
activities, proprioception and balance. Next, the chair of the GDG coordinated the
commissioning of literature searches and systematic evidence reviews and the GDG
subworking groups met to review the literature.
The following databases were searched from inception to 27 December 2021: MEDLINE
(PubMed), EMBASE (Elsevier), Cochrane Library (Wiley), CINAHL (EBSCO) and SPORTDiscus
(EBSCO) ( —systematic search strategy). We included peer reviewed, English
language, randomised clinical trials (RCTs) in patients after ACLR that compared between
physical therapy interventions or against no intervention, placebo or standard care. We
excluded randomised trials in patients after ACL treated non-operatively, in patients
after completion of their rehabilitation, children (<16 years), studies reporting
only biomechanical results, studies reporting only on concomitant injuries such as other
knee ligament injuries, meniscal or cartilage injuries, surgical decisions (eg, brace),
nutritional and psychological interventions ( —study selection and criteria). As it
would be unethical to assign patients to return to sport without meeting criteria, it is
unlikely there will ever be RCT data on this aspect. Accordingly, for the recommendations
regarding return to activities, we included only systematic and scoping reviews.
Supplementary data
bjsports-2022-106158supp001.pdf

All eligible articles were first screened by title and abstract independently by three
pairs of two GDG members, and subsequently the full texts of trials that were identified
as potentially eligible were retrieved and assessed. For each eligible trial, pairs of GDG
members extracted data independently using a standardised, pilot tested, data extraction
form developed in accordance with the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of
Interventions. GDG members collected
information regarding patient characteristics (age, sex, type of graft used) and outcomes
of interest (means or medians and measures of variability for continuous outcomes, the
number of participants analysed and the number of participants who experienced an event
for dichotomous outcomes).
We used a priori-defined rules for data extraction: (1) We did not include manual testing
as a valid method to measure strength. (2) If
data are reported in several ways, we chose to extract results in the following order:
difference from baseline>limb symmetry index>raw data. (3) Swelling outcome
was extracted if measured at mid-patella (not above or below). (4) Atrophy outcome was
extracted if measured>7.5 cm above patella. Data were extracted from figures
and graphs when necessary. Continuous data were transformed to mean and SD. Discrepancies
were resolved by discussion and, when necessary, with adjudication by the GDG chair.
Extracted data were imported to Review Manager V.5.4 (Copenhagen: The Nordic Cochrane
Centre, The Cochrane Collaboration, 2014) for analysis. We summarised the effect of
interventions on continuous outcomes, using the standardised mean difference (random
effects) and corresponding 95% confidence interval. For dichotomous outcomes, we
used the risk ratio and corresponding 95% confidence interval. When more than one
study reported results for the same outcome, data was pooled. Cohen’s criteria were
used to interpret pooled standardised mean difference: large effect≥0.8, moderate
effect 0.5–0.8 and small effect 0.2–0.5. 

Risk of bias was assessed using a revision of the Cochrane tool for assessing risk of
bias in randomised trials (RoB V.2.0). Risk of
bias for systematic reviews included in the recommendations was assessed using the ROBIS
tool. 

We followed the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation
(GRADE) approach (https://gdt.gradepro.org/app/handbook/handbook.html), and used the GRADEpro
Guideline Development Tool online software (https://www.gradepro.org/) to assess
the quality of the body of evidence and develop and report the summary of findings tables
( —summary of findings tables). We rated the certainty of evidence for
each comparison and outcome as high, moderate, low, or very low, based on considerations
of: risk of bias, inconsistency, indirectness and imprecision ( —GRADE
evidence assessment) ( ). To assess
publication bias, we planned to generate funnel plots for meta-analyses including at least
10 trials. 

 As an additional step, we summarised the evidence findings, in a clinically meaningful
way, following the a priori-defined rules: (1) When available, we prioritised pooled
results coming from more than one study, over results from single studies. (2) For muscle
strength outcomes, we prioritised concentric assessment over isometric. (3) For isokinetic
outcomes, we prioritised results in slower-speed over results in higher-speed
(degrees/second). Findings were stratified according to the rehabilitation period in
phases: very early (<1 month), early (1–2 months), intermediate
(2–4 months) and advanced (>4 months).
For better understanding and interpretation of the evidence findings, the wording of the
summary reads as follow: (1) ‘might/can/may’ for suggestive of improvement
or relatively consistent beneficial effect; (2) the ‘size of effect’ or
‘no effect’ when consistent significant and clinically relevant findings
(either in favour or against); and (3) ‘conflicting’ when findings were both
in favour or against. Due to the extensive list of outcomes ( —summary of
critical and important outcomes), we opted to report those deemed clinically important in
the results section and the full report of findings is available as (summary of
findings tables).

## Going from evidence to recommendations
Initial recommendations were formulated by the chair of the GDG considering: effect size,
certainty of evidence, cost of intervention and patient outcomes (desirable, undesirable).
These recommendations were discussed at in person or video-conference meetings among the
GDG members. Once agreement was achieved within the GDG members, we drafted the
provisional recommendations. In total, 24 provisional recommendations were circulated
through a survey to a group of experts in our institution (Aspetar, Orthopaedic and Sports
Medicine Hospital, Doha, Qatar) for their feedback and the level of agreement (17
physiotherapists, 7 orthopaedic surgeons, 4 sports physicians and 1 physical coach). Each
recommendation was graded anonymously on a 7-point Likert Scale, with 1 indicating
complete disagreement, 4 neither agreement nor disagreement and 7 complete agreement (and
an option for ‘no opinion’). Mean scores and 95% CIs of agreement for
each recommendation were calculated. This information was used by the GDG to finalise the
guideline in a final in person/video-conference meeting.
The GDG members were responsible for reviewing and approving the final version of the
guideline. All recommendations are ultimately reviewed and approved by the GDG members
before publication.

## Results
Study selection flowchart and details on the included patient’s characteristics are
provided in the . In short, 140 RCTs were included that evaluated the effectiveness of
rehabilitation interventions after ACL surgery. There were 5231 participants studied
(70% male, 25% female and 5% where sex was not reported). The mean age
of the participants (from studies where this was reported) was 27.9 years ( —patient
demographics). In 94% of the cases, the graft used was bone–tendon–bone
(BTB) or hamstring (HS), equally distributed. The critical and important outcomes for each
intervention and the risk-of-bias assessment for each outcome are presented in the . Most studies
were judged with some concerns or high risk of bias for all outcomes ( —risk-of-bias assessment). For the return to activities criteria, there
were six systematic reviews identified. Systematic reviews were of high risk of bias, except
one (some concerns). Finally, the level of
agreement for the proposed recommendations and comments are described in the .
All results are presented in detail in the summary of findings tables ( ).

## Timing and structure of rehabilitation

## Preoperative rehabilitation
Three studies reported the effects of a (3–6 weeks) preoperative intervention on
postoperative outcomes compared with postrehabilitation only. Two studies investigated the effect of the addition of perturbation training to a
standard preoperative strengthening programme.
Summary
Preoperative rehabilitation can improve the knee flexion and extension at the early
postoperative phase. [D]
There is a moderate effect of preoperative rehabilitation on improved quadriceps
strength 3 months after surgery. [D]
Preoperative rehabilitation might decrease the time to return to preinjury level of
activity. [D]
There is no effect of preoperative rehabilitation on HS strength, muscle atrophy,
laxity or subjective function. [D]
There is no effect with the addition of perturbation in the preoperative
rehabilitation protocol for postoperative strength, functional activities or
subjective function. [D]

## Unsupervised versus supervised rehabilitation
Nine studies investigated the effectiveness of independently executed (unsupervised)
compared with supervised rehabilitation after ACLR. Independently executed
rehabilitation is a coached and periodised programme executed at home/other venue (gym),
without a physiotherapist’s supervision.
Summary
There was no difference between the unsupervised and the supervised programme for
laxity [C], subjective function, functional outcomes, strength and atrophy [D].

## Rehabilitation duration
One study compared rehabilitation with either
a 19-week or a 32-week programme after ACLR with a BTB graft. Another study compared a 19-week to a 24-week programme in
patients after ACLR with HS autograft.
Summary
A 19-week rehabilitation protocol showed no differences on knee laxity or other
outcomes (strength, functional, proprioception and subjective function) compared
with a longer duration protocol. [D]
Box 1

## Timing and structure of rehabilitation recommendations

Preoperative rehabilitation might improve postoperative quadriceps
strength, knee range of motion and may decrease the time to return to sport. We
recommend at least one visit to ensure that there is adequate voluntary muscle
activation and no flexion contracture that may require further preoperative visits and
to educate the patient regarding the postoperative rehabilitation course.
Modal agreement: ‘strongly agree’ (mean: 96.1%,
93%–100%)

Unsupervised exercise execution might be followed by patients after
anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction who cannot afford supervised rehabilitation,
have reduced access to physiotherapy or have high motivation and are compliant to
perform their rehabilitation independently. Irrespective, patients should have their
programmes individually prescribed and be monitored regarding the execution of the
rehabilitation protocol and to ensure the progression without adverse events.
Modal agreement: ‘strongly agree’ (mean: 84.7%,
77%–93%)
The duration of the rehabilitation protocol is individual specific and
depends on the patient demonstrating their ability to safely return to their preinjury
activity level (criteria based). Accelerated timelines under the right conditions can
be used without adverse events. Specific criteria should be used to progress
rehabilitation mindful of minimum time requirements for graft protection and
healing.
Modal agreement: ‘strongly agree’ (mean: 97%,
95%–99%)

## Physical therapy modalities
There are 65 studies that investigated the effect of various modalities during
rehabilitation after ACL surgery.

## Continuous passive motion (CPM)
Four studies compared the use of CPM with no CPM, three studies compared the use of CPM with
active motion and one
study compared the short-term versus
long-term use of the CPM.
Summary
There was a beneficial effect on pain medication used, knee flexion and swelling
during the first 3 postoperative days when CPM was compared with no CPM. [D]
There was no difference reported in knee range of motion, pain and swelling when
CPM was compared with active knee motion exercises. [D]

## Cryotherapy
Nine studies investigated the effectiveness of cryotherapy compared with no cryotherapy
in post-ACLR outcomes. In one study, the
cryotherapy application was done preoperatively and in the remaining studies cryotherapy
was applied immediately postoperatively (0–3 days). There was no study
that investigated the effect of cryotherapy on the ACLR outcomes later than 2 weeks
after the surgery. Four studies compared the effectiveness of compressive cryotherapy and
cryotherapy alone. One study compared the
compressive cryotherapy to usual care (no compressive cryotherapy). Two studies applied
the compressive cryotherapy for longer than the immediate post-operative period
(1–3 days); one for 2 weeks and
one for 6 weeks. 

Summary
There is an effect of cryotherapy on reduced medication use, subjective pain and
patient’s satisfaction in the first 3 days after surgery. [D]
There is no effect of 3 days of ice application in swelling reduction during the
first 2 weeks after surgery. [D]
There might be an improvement in knee flexion but not in knee extension. [D]
Compressive cryotherapy further decreased the medication consumption, pain and had
a small effect on swelling reduction compared with cryotherapy alone. [D]

## Neuromuscular electrical stimulation (NMES)
Fourteen studies studied the effectiveness of the addition of NMES in the
rehabilitation protocol. 
Three studies investigated the effectiveness of NMES application during functional
activities. Two of them used usual rehabilitation as the comparator group and one used isolated NMES only (not NMES
with exercise) as the comparator group. 

Summary
The addition of NMES in usual rehabilitation had a moderate improvement in
quadriceps strength [C] and no effect in HS strength [D].
There was a large reduction in knee joint swelling during the early phase and a
moderate reduction in the intermediate and advanced phases. [D]
There were no significant changes regarding range of motion, laxity, subjective
function and time to return to sport. [D]
The use of NMES during functional activities further improved quadriceps strength
and force symmetry restoration. [D]

## Electromyographic biofeedback
In patients after ACLR, only two studies explored the effect of the addition of
electromyographic biofeedback in the usual rehabilitation protocol. 

Summary
There might be a potential benefit of electromyographic biofeedback on quadriceps
strength and knee extension deficit. [D]
We cannot make any recommendation based on the additional cost and the uncertain
beneficial outcomes (very low level of evidence and small sample size) of the
intervention.

## Low load blood flow restriction training
Five studies 
evaluated the effect of additional low load blood flow restriction training after
surgery compared with usual rehabilitation. Two additional studies investigated the effect of preoperative low load blood flow
restriction training in the postoperative outcomes.
Summary
Low load blood flow restriction training might improve quadriceps and HS strength
and prevent disuse atrophy at the early phase. [D]
There was a large effect on swelling and subjective pain reduction during training.
[D]
Preoperative low load blood flow restriction training produced improved results in
rectus femoris muscle volume and comparable results to standard exercise in
quadriceps isometric strength. There was no effect on vastii muscle volume or
balance. [D]

## Kinesio-taping
Six studies 
investigated the effectiveness of kinesio-tape application compared with no kinesio-tape
or sham application in rehabilitation after ACL surgery.
Summary
There are contradictory results on the effectiveness of kinesio-tape application on
pain, swelling, range of motion and quadriceps strength. [D]
An improvement on HS strength was reported in the very early phase of
rehabilitation. [D]
There is no effect on balance and functional activities at the advanced
rehabilitation phase. [D]
Kinesio-tape is of low cost and there are no reported adverse events. However, the
available evidence suggests any therapeutic effect of its use is likely small to
non-existent.

## Dry needling
One study reported the effect of adding vastus medialis trigger point dry needling (one
session) in the very early phase of rehabilitation (7–21 days post ACLR). 

Summary
A 14% risk of adverse events was reported (haemorrhages). [D]
A significant increase in pain the first hour post intervention. [D]
There was a significant improvement in ROM and subjective function during the early
phase of rehabilitation. [D]

## Whole-body vibration
Six studies applied a series of whole-body vibration programmes in addition to standard
rehabilitation lasting from 2 to 16 weeks. One study only applied a
single session of whole-body vibration. One
study replaced strength training and proprioception training in conventional
rehabilitation by an independent whole-body vibration programme. 

Summary
There is a positive effect of whole-body vibration training on aspects of static
balance. [C]
There is no effect on quadriceps and HS strength at the early and intermediate
phases. There are conflicting results about its effect on quadriceps and HS strength
at the advanced phase. There was improved quadriceps strength when whole-body
vibration was used in combination with conventional rehabilitation but not when it
replaced conventional rehabilitation. [D]
There is no effect with the addition of whole-body vibration on range of motion,
laxity, proprioception and subjective knee function. [D]

## Local vibration
One study evaluated the effect of local mechanical vibration of quadriceps when the
muscle was isometrically contracted, 1 month after ACLR. Vibration was applied
for short periods over 3 consecutive days. 
One study applied local body vibration with built-in vibroacoustic sound for the first 8
weeks after ACLR. One study added
1 hour local vibration sessions at the end of each rehabilitation session for the
first 10 weeks after ACLR. 

Summary
There is a large beneficial effect of the addition of local vibration to usual care
on quadriceps and HS strength, postural control, range of motion, subjective
function and pain. There is no effect on functional activities. [D]
Despite the reported positive effects of local vibration, we are reluctant in making a
recommendation for or against this intervention using the current available
evidence.
Box 2

## Modalities recommendations
There is no additional benefit for pain, range of motion or swelling in using
continuous passive motion compared with active motion exercises. We
recommend against using it in the rehabilitation protocol as it is time-consuming and
costly.
Modal agreement: ‘strongly agree’ (mean: 75.5%,
65%–86%)

Cryotherapy can be applied inexpensively, it is easy to use, has a high
level of patient satisfaction and is rarely associated with adverse events, therefore
it is justified in the early phase of postoperative management after anterior cruciate
ligament reconstruction. However, patients should be educated on safe ice application
to avoid injury. Compressive cryotherapy, if available, might be more effective than
cryotherapy alone.
Modal agreement: ‘strongly agree’ (mean: 97%,
95%–99%)
We recommend the use of neuromuscular electrical stimulation (NMES) in
the very early phase after surgery to stimulate muscle activation or minimise the
expected disuse atrophy. At the early phase, NMES might be used during functional
activities to further facilitate strength gains.
Modal agreement: ‘strongly agree’ (mean: 93.4%,
91%–96%)
Low load blood flow restriction training might be used in addition to
standard care in the early phase of rehabilitation to improve quadriceps and hamstring
strength, particularly when patients have increased knee pain or cannot tolerate high
knee joint loads. However, clinicians should be aware of the contraindications (eg,
cardiovascular disease, extensive swelling, skin irritation, etc).
Modal agreement: ‘strongly agree’ (mean: 92.6%,
89%–97%)
We do not recommend the use of vastus medialis trigger point dry
needling in the very early rehabilitation phase due to increased risk of
haemorrhage.
Modal agreement: ‘strongly agree’ (mean: 67.6%,
53%–83%)

Whole-body vibration might be used as an additional intervention to
improve quadriceps strength and static balance but cannot replace conventional
rehabilitation. Given the additional cost, and the reported complications (pain or
swelling) when using this intervention, we suggest not including this in the
rehabilitation protocol.
Modal agreement: ‘agree’ (mean: 83.2%,
75%–91%)

## Exercise initiation
The accelerated early rehabilitation protocol is characterised by early unrestricted
motion and weight-bearing, without the use of an immobilising brace and commencing early
strength training. 

Eight studies investigated the effect of early knee joint mobilisation.
Immediate weight-bearing was investigated by only one study. 

Two studies investigated the effect of adding open kinetic chain exercises early (4
weeks) in the rehabilitation protocol compared with later (12 weeks). The protocol in one study started with seated knee extension with no resistance at week 4 from
90° to 40° of knee flexion, at week 5 from 90° to 20° and at
week 6 from 90° to 0°. The other study initiated the open kinetic chain protocol with seated knee extension at week
4 from 90° to 45° of knee flexion and maintained this until 12 weeks (HS
graft patients).
One study investigated the effectiveness of
quadriceps exercises (straight leg raises and isometric quadriceps contractions)
throughout the first 2 postoperative weeks.
One study evaluated the addition of quadriceps
and HS strengthening exercises with an eccentric and concentric component such as leg
press at 3 weeks post operative.
One study compared the effect of starting
isokinetic HS strengthening at either 3 or 9 weeks after ACLR in patients with
bone-patellar tendon autograft.
Gerber et al, published three studies evaluating progressive eccentric exercise
using recumbent eccentric ergometer starting at 3 weeks after ACLR compared with
starting at 12 weeks.
Summary
Early mobilisation can improve early phase knee flexion and extension range of motion
without compromising knee laxity, regardless of the graft type used. [D]
A large effect on patellofemoral pain reduction in patients with bone-patellar tendon
graft from 35% to 8% was demonstrated compared with patients who kept
non-weight-bearing for 2 weeks. There was no effect on laxity, range of motion or
subjective knee function at 1-year follow-up. [D]
There were no differences between starting open kinetic chain exercises early or late
in terms of laxity, strength, pain, range of motion, knee function, functional
activities and balance. HS grafts might be more vulnerable to the early introduction
of open kinetic chain compared with BTB grafts. There is no evidence of the effect on
starting open kinetic chain earlier than the fourth week after surgery. [D]
Isometric quadriceps exercises including static quadriceps contractions and straight
leg raises can be safely prescribed during the first 2 postoperative weeks and confer
advantages for faster recovery of knee range of motion (at 1 month) without
compromising stability. [D]
Starting leg press at 3 weeks can improve subjective knee function and functional
outcomes, but no gains in strength at 4 months after surgery. [D]
Starting isokinetic HS strengthening at 3 weeks after ACLR with bone-patellar
tendon autograft improved HS strength, patient-reported knee function and had no
effect on quadriceps strength and no harmful effects. [D]
Eccentric cycle ergometer training may result in greater strength gains, better daily
activity level and greater quadriceps muscle hypertrophy if initiated at 3 weeks
instead of 12 weeks after surgery, with the beneficial effects persisting
1 year after ACLR. There was no effect on laxity, pain or swelling. [D]
Box 3

## Exercise initiation recommendations

Active knee motion should begin immediately after surgery, mindful of any
surgical instruction. Immobilisation does not decrease pain and can lead to muscle
atrophy, which slows the recovery of function.
Modal agreement: ‘strongly agree’ (mean: 97%,
95%–99%)

Early weight-bearing (first week) should be done in a progressive,
controlled manner, as tolerated by each patient, mindful of any surgical
instructions.
Modal agreement: ‘strongly agree’ (mean: 95.6%,
90%–100%)
Patient may start open kinetic chain exercises in limited range of motion
(90°−45° of knee flexion) from the fourth week after surgery
without compromising knee stability. Clinicians and patients should monitor for anterior
knee pain and adjust the knee load and the progression of strengthening accordingly.
Modal agreement: ‘strongly agree’ (mean: 88.8%,
84%–93%)

Isometric quadriceps exercises including static quadriceps contractions and
straight leg raises might have a small effect on faster knee flexion recovery, but not
on quadriceps strength. They may be prescribed during the first 2 weeks after surgery
without compromising the graft integrity.
Modal agreement: ‘strongly agree’ (mean: 84.7%,
76%–93%)

Leg press may be initiated as early as 3 weeks after surgery in patients
with hamstring graft, using a functional pattern similar to a half squat
(0°−45°) to improve quadriceps and hamstring strength, functional
activities and subjective function. Anterior knee pain should be monitored, with load
progressed accordingly.
Modal agreement: ‘agree’ (mean: 88.3%,
84%–92%)

Early quadriceps eccentric strengthening, using eccentric cycle or stepper
ergometer, between 20° and 60° of knee flexion, may be initiated at 3
weeks after surgery in patients with patellar tendon or hamstring autograft to improve
quadriceps strength and hypertrophy without compromising graft integrity.
Modal agreement: ‘agree’ (mean: 82.7%,
76%–90%)

## Strength and motor control training

## Open versus closed kinetic chain exercises
Nine studies explored the differences between open and closed kinetic chain
exercises in the rehabilitation after ACL surgery.
Summary
There was no significant difference in anterior tibial laxity between open and
closed kinetic chain exercises. No differences were reported in subjective knee
function, range of motion, atrophy or functional activities between open and closed
kinetic chain exercises. [D]
Evidence recommends the use of both open and closed kinetic chain exercises
post-ACLR for regaining quadriceps strength. [D]
Open kinetic chain exercises might induce more anterior knee pain compared with
closed kinetic chain exercises. [D]
Evidence reports that both types of exercise improved functional activities.
[D]

## Eccentric training
Three studies 
investigated the effect of eccentric training in the rehabilitation protocol after ACL
surgery. One study investigated if a 12-week quadriceps strength training with eccentric
overload is more efficient to induce muscle regeneration than conventional
concentric/eccentric strength training. The
second study evaluated the difference between concentric and eccentric training in an
isokinetic cycle ergometer. The third study
assessed the effect of 6 weeks (initiated at 3 months after ACLR) of eccentric training,
plyometric training or a combination of these two modalities (eccentric/plyometric) on
the outcomes after ACL surgery in elite female athletes. 

Summary
Both concentric and eccentric training improved quadriceps [D] and HS [C] strength
without differences between groups. Eccentric overload training did not enhance
quadriceps strength gains.
Eccentric training might improve functional outcomes and psychological readiness to
return to sport. [D]
Adding eccentric training to the usual care did not improve subjective outcomes and
balance. [D]
A combination of eccentric and plyometric exercises was more effective in improving
balance, functional activities, subjective knee function and psychological readiness
than eccentric or plyometric training in isolation. [D]

## Isokinetic training
Two studies investigated the
effectiveness of isokinetic training in rehabilitation. One study assessed three groups;
one using only isotonic strengthening exercises, one using exclusively isokinetic
strengthening exercises and a third group trained with a combined programme of
isokinetic and isotonic exercises. The second
study compared the effects of conventional
(constant load) eccentric training and a 6-week (two sessions/week) isokinetic eccentric
training on quadriceps muscle mass, strength and functional performance in recreational
athletes following ACL reconstruction.
Summary
Isotonic and isokinetic exercise significantly improved strength outcomes. However,
the group with a mixed isokinetic–isotonic programme achieved better strength
outcomes and reduced atrophy. [D]
Isokinetic eccentric quadriceps training improved isometric and eccentric strength
at 3 months but not concentric strength. [C]
There was no difference between isotonic and isokinetic training for atrophy [C],
subjective knee function and functional activities [D].

## Low intensity versus high intensity resistance training
One study investigated the effects of high-intensity versus low-intensity resistance
training from week 8–20 after ACLR on leg extensor power and recovery of knee
function. 

Summary
There is insufficient evidence supporting the use of either high-intensity or
low-intensity resistance training after ACL surgery due to the lack of significant
differences in strength, PROMs, functional activities and joint laxity. [D]

## Motor control training versus usual care
Seven studies evaluated the effect of the addition of a motor control/proprioception
training programme in the traditional rehabilitation. The heterogeneity of
dose, duration and intensity of the exercises in the studies preclude describing an
optimal training protocol.
Summary
The addition of a motor control training programme (comprising training on an
unstable surface (balance pad or foam roller), backward walking on an inclined
treadmill and single-leg dynamic balance exercises) resulted in significant
improvement in knee joint proprioception in early and intermediate phase and
moderate effect at 2 years after ACLR. [D]
There was no additional benefit of the above-mentioned balance/proprioception
exercises regarding strength, subjective function, single leg hop for distance,
muscle atrophy, range of motion and pain. [D]
Using the Nintendo Wii Fit showed no additional benefit on knee strength, balance,
proprioception, coordination and response time at 8th and 12th weeks, compared with
a traditional programme. [D]
The SpeedCourt system showed a significant improvement of the jump height, reaction
time and calf muscle atrophy. [D]

## Motor control versus strength training
Two studies compared balance and proprioception exercises to a strength training
programme. 

Summary
Both training modules (motor control and strengthening) significantly improved
quadriceps and HS strength. [D]
Balance and proprioception training had no difference in subjective function or
functional outcomes compared with strength training. [D]

## Plyometric and agility training versus usual care
Four studies compared a neuromuscular training programme that included plyometrics,
agility and sports-specific exercises to the usual rehabilitation protocol (that
included strength training). One study additionally compared the combination of plyometric
and eccentric training to a usual rehabilitation protocol. One study compared the effect of an 8-week programme of
low-intensity and high-intensity plyometric exercises consisting of running, jumping and
agility activities on knee function, articular cartilage metabolism and other clinically
relevant measures. 

Summary
Plyometric and agility training had an additional benefit at the advanced
rehabilitation phase on subjective function and functional outcomes compared with
the usual rehabilitation protocol. [D]
Plyometric and agility training had no difference in strength, balance,
proprioception, pain and laxity compared with the usual rehabilitation protocol.
[C]
The combination of plyometric and eccentric training showed significant improvement
in balance, subjective function and functional activities compared with the usual
rehabilitation protocol. [D]
Regardless of intensity, 8 weeks of plyometric exercise implemented during
rehabilitation after ACLR had positive effects on knee function, knee impairments
and psychosocial status. [D]

## Cross-education
Seven studies investigated the effect of contralateral limb strength training
on the injured limb outcomes after ACL surgery.
Summary
There is conflicting evidence for an effect of cross-training on quadriceps
strength at the early and intermediate phase. There is no effect at the advanced
phase of rehabilitation. [D]
Cross-training has no effect on HS strength, single-leg hop for distance, balance
and proprioception. [D]
Cross training might have a positive effect in the early phase of rehabilitation
for the subjective knee function, but no difference in the following phases. [D]

## Core stability training
Two studies evaluated a core stability exercise programme addition in the usual
rehabilitation protocol. One study added a 4-week core stability exercise programme in
the usual rehabilitation protocol during the early phase of rehabilitation and another study added 6 months of
core-stability training. 

Summary
The addition of core stability exercises in the usual rehabilitation protocol might
improve gait, subjective knee function and range of motion but no benefit for pain.
[D]

## Aquatic therapy
Three studies 
investigated the role of aquatic therapy in the rehabilitation protocol after ACLR.
Summary
At 2 months after surgery, there was no difference in quadriceps strength between a
land-based programme and a water-based programme but there was a decrease in HS
strength and thigh circumference in the water-based group. [D]
No difference was reported for knee flexion and extension. [D]
Better subjective knee function was reported for the water-based training at the
early phase, and no difference between groups at the advanced phase. [D]
No difference between groups was reported for balance [C], laxity, proprioception
and swelling [D].
Box 4

## Strength and motor control training recommendations
A combination of closed and open kinetic chain exercise may lead to
significantly better quadriceps strength and earlier return to sports, without any
increase in laxity, compared with closed chain alone. Monitor for anterior knee pain
during open kinetic chain exercises and adjust loading accordingly.
Modal agreement: ‘strongly agree’ (mean: 91.3%,
86%–97%)
We suggest using eccentric training in combination with concentric
training to elicit improved strength and functional outcomes after anterior cruciate
ligament (ACL) surgery.
Modal agreement: ‘strongly agree’ (mean: 91.8%,
88%–96%)
The exclusive use of isokinetic training for muscle strengthening after
ACL surgery is not suggested. The combination of isotonic and isokinetic training
appears to improve muscle strength more than these interventions in isolation.
Modal agreement: ‘strongly agree’ (mean: 90.5%,
85%–96%)

Motor control and strength training are both integral parts of the
rehabilitation and should be combined in the rehabilitation protocol to improve
outcomes.
Modal agreement: ‘strongly agree’ (mean: 98.5%,
97%–100%)

Plyometric and agility training may further improve subjective function
and functional activities compared with usual care, without any increase in laxity or
pain.
Modal agreement: ‘agree’ (mean: 80%,
71%–89%)
There are conflicting results on the effect of cross-education training
programme on quadriceps strength. However, we do not suggest the implementation of an
exaggerated cross-education training programme for strength gains in the injured leg.
The uninvolved limb’s strength should be monitored and restored to
baseline/optimal levels as indicated.
Modal agreement: ‘strongly agree’ (mean: 83.7%,
77%–91%)

Core stability exercises might improve functional outcomes and subjective
knee function and can be used as an addition to the rehabilitation protocol.
Modal agreement: ‘strongly agree’ (mean: 92.6%,
89%–96%)

Aquatic therapy may be used in addition to the usual care during the
early phase of rehabilitation to improve subjective knee function. We recommend that
is it initiated 3–4 weeks postoperative, once the wound has completely
healed.
Modal agreement: ‘strongly agree’ (mean: 96.1%,
93%–99%)

## Return to activities

## Driving
According to one systematic review, brake
response time returns to normal values at approximately 4–6 weeks after
right-sided ACLR and approximately 2–3 weeks after left-sided ACLR.

## Running
Return to running is an important milestone in ACL rehabilitation. A recent scoping
review investigated the criteria used to
determine when to initiate running, and recommended a combination of: time-based,
clinical and functional criteria. Most of the studies included, proposed a minimum
timeframe of 12 weeks, but there were also studies suggesting 8 weeks or 16 weeks.
There are no conclusive results whether return to running at or before 12 weeks is
safe; prospective studies investigating if the return to running at 12 weeks is
associated with new knee injury or exacerbation of current status are missing.

## Prognostic value of return to sport criteria
Until the early 90s, time was the only criterion used to clear athletes to RTS. While a minimum time postoperatively is required
to allow biological recovery of the graft, there has been a progressive shift towards a
criterion-based approach. In addition to time, literature reports the use of strength
tests, clinical examination, performance criteria, hop tests and patients reports as RTS
criteria. 

Four reviews examined the association between passing return to sport criteria and risk
of second ACL injury: three meta-analyses and one systematic review. 

The meta-analysis of Webster and Hewett 
concluded that passing the current return-to-sport criteria reduced the risk of graft
rupture. Losciale et al
 did not find a statistically significant
association between passing RTS criteria with risk of a second ACL injury and Ashigbi
et al
 concluded that passing a combination of
functional tests and self-reported function with predetermined cut-off points used as
RTS criteria is associated with reduced knee reinjury rates. More recently, Hurley
et al
 concluded that passing RTS testing results
in a lower rate of ACL graft rupture, but not contralateral ACL injury.
However, imprecision of pooled estimates and substantial levels of heterogeneity were
seen which could be explained by the low number of studies meeting selection criteria
and differences in populations (age and competition levels). Importantly, included
studies in these reviews fail to inform about the mechanism of the second ACL injury
(contact or non-contact); a direct contact injury likely cannot be predicted by any
battery of tests.
Currently, it is not clear if passing a battery of tests is associated with lower risk
of second ACL injury. Relatively rare events (such as ACL reinjury) are statistically
difficult, if not impossible, to predict with absolute confidence. Despite this caveat,
we maintain that our clinical goals should be to restore all impairments and return the
athlete back to the previous status, if not better.
We propose minimum criteria required for a professional athlete to be cleared from the
clinic/hospital setting and start training with their club, whereupon they should then
gradually return to full participation. These criteria can be adjusted and
individualised according to their previous activity level. Our proposed discharge
criteria are based on our clinical experience, research findings and our normative
data.
Box 5

## Return to activities recommendations

Return to driving

We recommend
that a patient does not attempt to drive before they can safely activate the brake in
a simulated emergency. Typically, this will be at approximately 4–6 weeks after
right-sided ACLR and approximately 2–3 weeks after left-sided ACLR.
Modal agreement: ‘strongly agree’ (mean: 92.1%,
87%–97%)

Return to running

Despite an
absence of research findings, we feel it is warranted to suggest criteria for return
to running (where running has a volume and intensity to achieve cardiovascular
adaptation):
95% knee flexion range of motion (ROM).
Full extension ROM.
No effusion/trace of effusion.
Limb symmetry index (LSI)>80% for quadriceps strength.
LSI>80% eccentric impulse during countermovement jump.
Pain-free aqua jogging and Alter-G running.
Pain-free repeated single-leg hopping (‘pogos’).
Modal agreement: ‘agree’ (mean: 87.8%,
83%–93%)

Return to sport

Return to
sport/completion of rehabilitation
We propose the below minimum criteria required for a professional athlete to be
cleared from the clinic/hospital setting and start training with their club, whereupon
they should then gradually return to full participation.
No pain or swelling.
Knee full ROM.
Stable knee (pivot shift, Lachman, instrumented laxity evaluation).
Normalised subjective knee function and psychological readiness using
patient-reported outcomes (most commonly the International Knee Documentation
Commitee subjective knee form (IKDC), the ACL-Return to Sport after Injury scale
(ACL-RSI) and Tampa Scale of Kinesiophobia).
Isokinetic quadriceps and hamstring peak torque at 60°/s should display
100% symmetry for return to high demand pivoting sports. Restore (as a
minimum) preoperative absolute values (if available) and normative values
according to the sport and level of activity.
Countermovement jump and drop jump>90% symmetry of jump height and
concentric and eccentric impulse. Reactive strength index (height/time)>1.3
for double leg and 0.5 for single leg for field sport athletes (higher for track
and field).
Jumping biomechanics—normalise absolute and symmetry values for moments,
angles and work in vertical and horizontal jumps especially in sagittal and
frontal plane at hip, knee and ankle.
Running mechanics—restoration of>90% symmetry of vertical
ground reaction forces and knee biomechanics during stance during high-speed
running and change of direction.
Complete a sports-specific training programme.
Modal agreement: ‘agree’ (mean: 88.8%,
84%–94%)

## Discussion
Exercise interventions should be considered the foundation of ACLR rehabilitation. Yet,
there is little information on the dose–response relationship between volume and/or
intensity of exercise and outcomes and what constitutes the optimal rehabilitation strategy.
Rehabilitation has changed over time. Early accelerated rehabilitation characterised by
joint mobilisation and weight-bearing within 3 days after surgery should be the
mainstream approach in isolated ACL surgeries. When concomitant injuries (ie, meniscal,
cartilage) are present, the early rehabilitation phase should be adapted according to the
surgeon’s instructions. Physical therapy modalities can be beneficial as an adjunct
in the early phase of rehabilitation when pain and other postoperative issues are present.
However, the evidence for some modalities is conflicting, and the adverse effects, as well
as the cost and time required, probably outweigh any benefits.
A summary of the recommendations can be viewed in .
 Most of the findings are based on very-low certainty of evidence, and there are concerns in
risk of bias for most of the included studies for nearly all intervention comparisons and
outcomes. Despite the low certainty of evidence expert clinicians who reviewed the
recommendations were largely in agreement with them. All recommendations reached an average
agreement of at least 75.7% (‘agree’) with one exception: dry needling
(mode: strongly agree, mean: 67.6% (52%–83%)). A possible reason
might be the impression that the recommendation was misinterpreted by the respondents as an
intervention for the entire duration of rehabilitation while some clinicians expressed grave
reservations for the use of dry needling before any wounds had healed. The GDG after
discussion agreed not to make any changes in the recommendation and clearly state the risk
of haemorrhage with vastus medialis dry needling at the very early phase of
rehabilitation.
The term ‘neuromuscular training’ is often reported in the literature to
describe subcomponents of balance, proprioception, agility and plyometric training. However,
since every type of training (except visualisation) involves nerve and muscle action, we
chose to use the term ‘motor control’ to better distinguish from
strength/resistance training. Strength and motor control training should be combined in the
rehabilitation protocol and one cannot replace the other.
Running and return to training are key milestones for rehabilitation after ACLR. However,
the entire rehabilitation protocol should be based on progression criteria with time since
surgery considered necessary but not sufficient for progression unless coupled with
objective physical and psychological criteria. This approach better ensures knee and graft
protection, although we note that these criteria are yet to be fully validated.
Psychological factors, particularly fear of reinjury, are the most significant contributors
to not returning to sport. A contributing factor
might be that patients are not exposed enough to a sports-specific training programme.
Completion of the rehabilitation protocol and clearance to return to sport is not the same
as return to competition. Before clearance for return to unrestricted competition, there
should be a transition phase from sports participation to sports performance with
progressive and controlled exposure to athlete’s sport. 

## Barriers
The cost or access to a rehabilitation clinic might be challenging. However, less
intensive supervised rehabilitation might be a viable solution for patients after ACLR who
cannot afford supervised rehabilitation, have poor access to physiotherapy or have high
motivation to perform their rehabilitation independently. 

One of the greatest challenges during the rehabilitation after ACLR is patient
compliance. Athlete expectations should be discussed, and the long rehabilitation journey
should be explained, ideally before surgery. Setting realistic goals and achieving
well-defined milestones along the way will keep the athlete motivated to continue and
complete the rehabilitation protocol. 
Periodic assessments during rehabilitation can also help achieve this goal.
Completing a sports-specific programme might be challenging to some clinicians due to
space limitations in their clinics; however, adaptations are proposed instead of excluding
this important part of rehabilitation. Some of the recommendations require expensive
equipment, not easily found in the average physiotherapy clinic (eg, swimming pool,
Alter-G and end-stage evaluation using advanced technology such as force plates and motion
capture systems). In some cases, for example, hop testing, less expensive options such as
smart phone-based analyses are available; however, other aspects, for example, kinetics
during direction change, remain out of reach for most practitioners.

## Dissemination and implementation tools
In addition to publishing this guideline in the British Journal of Sports
Medicine, this guideline will be posted on the Aspetar website (www.aspetar.com). The
implementation tools are planned to be made available for patients, clinicians, educators,
payers, policy-makers and researchers. We plan to produce videos and infographics
summarising the recommendations and guide ‘how to’ implement evidence into
practice for healthcare professionals and patients. We also plan to translate the
recommendations to other languages. We will embrace social media platforms to widely
disseminate new and existing knowledge. We will share the recommendations in conferences,
workshops and educational webinars for healthcare practitioners.
While this guideline is current at the time of writing, to keep in line with ongoing
scientific evidence, the guideline should be updated within 3 years based on newly
published literature. Importantly, assessment of clinical practice should be included in
this process, especially in light of previous research showing relatively low compliance
with, and even knowledge of, clinical practice guidelines. 

Moving forward, further research should evaluate the implementation of the current
recommendations and the impact on patient’s progress, return to performance and
future injuries. Clinicians would benefit from clear objective progression criteria as
well as a better understanding of the dose–response nature of exercise
interventions.

## Limitations
The development and validation of this guideline has strengths and weaknesses. The main
strength relies on the strong methodological design, with consensus of different
healthcare experts in our institution. The weakness of this guideline could be the
inclusion of only RCTs. Although, RCTs are recommended to evaluate the effectiveness of
interventions, in future updates we should include also prospective and cross-sectional
studies and adapt the level of evidence accordingly. GRADE recommendations suggest
downgrading evidence where there is evidence of publication bias however, to formally
assess this a minimum of 10 publications (per item) is suggested. This was never the case in the current review, and we have
arbitrarily not adhered to this recommendation. We did not downgrade the certainty of
evidence when reporting findings from a single study but downgraded due to imprecision
when the sample size was below 800 participants. The panel members are from the same
organisation/institution. Probably, there is no bias in the synthesis of the results
(systematic, defined approach); however, there might be bias in the recommendations. We
did not include patient opinion via focus groups and structured interviews in the
formulation of the recommendations; however, a patient after ACLR (also physiotherapist)
was part of the guideline’s development group. We included patient’s opinion
as reported in the literature (barriers).

## Conclusion
The recommendations for the components of rehabilitation after ACL surgery are described
based on the available evidence. Overall, there is a low level of certainty for most
components of rehabilitation; however, expert clinicians were largely in agreement with the
recommendations. These data may be used as the basis in developing care pathways for
rehabilitation after ACLR. The guideline also highlights several new elements of care
management in addition to existing guidelines.

## Acknowledgments
The authors thank the 29 clinicians for their comments on the recommendations. We also
thank Mr. Riadh Miladi, Director of the Rehabilitation Department at Aspetar Hospital, and
Dr. Paul Dijkstra, Director of Medical Education at Aspetar Hospital, for their valuable
advice and support.

## Footnotes
Twitter: @RoulaKotsifaki, @KorakakisV, @JMLuomajoki, @RodWhiteley
Contributors: RK, VK and RW participated in the design and conception of the study. OB, DM, MP, AB, JL
and JW performed the paper screening, data extraction and risk-of-bias assessment. RK, VK,
RW and EK drafted the proposed recommendations. RK drafted the manuscript and all the
authors revised it critically and gave their approval of the final version.
Funding: The authors have not declared a specific grant for this research from any funding agency
in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.
Competing interests: None declared.
Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Supplemental material: This content has been supplied by the author(s). It has not been vetted by BMJ Publishing
Group Limited (BMJ) and may not have been peer-reviewed. Any opinions or recommendations
discussed are solely those of the author(s) and are not endorsed by BMJ. BMJ disclaims all
liability and responsibility arising from any reliance placed on the content. Where the
content includes any translated material, BMJ does not warrant the accuracy and
reliability of the translations (including but not limited to local regulations, clinical
guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages), and is not responsible for any
error and/or omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.

## Ethics statements

## Patient consent for publication
Not applicable.

## Ethics approval
Not applicable.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
Supplementary data
bjsports-2022-106158supp001.pdf