pmcHeliyonHeliyon2992heliyon101672560Heliyon2405-8440ElsevierPMC11693877PMC11693877.111693877116938773974898910.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e40006S2405-8440(24)16037-9e400061Research ArticleReflections on 20 years of the international tennis federation and olympic solidarity high-performance coach education scholarship programme: Implications for sports coach development
CrespoMiguel Martinez-GallegoRafaelrafael.martinez-gallego@uv.es NashChristine aDevelopment Department, International Tennis Federation, Bank Lane, Roehampton, London, SW15 5XZ, UKbDepartment of Physical Education and Sport, University of Valencia, Valencia, SpaincApplied Coaching Research Group, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK⁎Corresponding author. rafael.martinez-gallego@uv.es30112024311020241022475609e4000622420242910202430102024311020240201202531032026© 2024 Published by Elsevier Ltd.2024https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).This paper reflects on the impact of the International Tennis Federation and Olympic Solidarity High-Performance Coach Education Scholarship Programme over the last 20 years. Coach education and development has been identified as key to the advancement of sport performance. This programme has been investigated using an online survey and followed up with semi-structured interviews, with participants and coach developers. Results from the survey suggested that the programme was well received by the tennis coaches and integral to their ongoing development plus the growth of tennis performance in their countries. Follow-up interviews revealed the three key themes of supportive environment, lifechanging experience and level of challenge contributed to the effectiveness of this programme and the subsequent development of tennis performance. This concludes with some recommendations for coach development programmes.

## Keywords
SupportChallengeFacilitationCertificationTheory-to-practiceRacquet sportspmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-NDCoach education and development has been identified as a key pillar of athlete, sport, and club or federation development. This study is part of a larger project, examining different aspects of coach development, such as lifelong learning and establishing a high-performing culture, answering different research questions to interrogate the coach development process in an international federation more closely [ ]. Similarly, in a series of studies that analysed the factors related to the success of tennis in a country, experts identified coaching and coach education as two of the critical aspects [ , , ] Indeed, the relevance of providing education, and professional development to coaches has attracted considerable attention from the researchers. Some studies have reviewed the evidence of the impact of coach education [ ], while others have focused on coaching effectiveness [ ], immediate outcomes [ ], crucial roles of coach developers [ , ], notion of apprenticeship [ ], as well as gender perspectives in coaching [ ]. Further studies have examined the perceptions of coaches on their coach education programmes [ , , ], the reflections of the coaches [ ] in local and national level programmes, and coaches’ experiences in formal education [ ]. Research has also focused on the institutional deliverers of coach education programmes, being universities [ ], higher education institutions [ ], the national Olympic committee [ ], or the national sport governing body [ ]. As evidenced, coach education and development has been highlighted as a key area for investigation, however, at this stage, there is no blueprint for impactful, effective coach learning.
As an explanation for this anomaly, many coaching programs do not consider the need for evaluation during the program design phase, where it would have the most impact, and be more easily integrated into the process. Many domains, for example, medicine and law, have addressed this to move their professions forward [ , , ]. Instead, in sports, as highlighted above, research and indeed evaluations tend to focus on specific aspects rather than the program as a whole. Being able to highlight and report on successful outcomes will affect the effectiveness of coach development programs, demonstrating to the funder that the program is achieving its aims. This also allows for amendment after suitable evaluation and consideration of feedback, which in turn keeps the program relevant and engaging for the consumer.
Given these issues, sports bodies should have a clear mandate for the education of their coaches at different levels, included in their respective constitutions. In this study, the International Tennis Federation (ITF), the world governing body of tennis, includes the education of coaches as part of their development strategy. From 1975 to 2000 this initiative evolved into a worldwide programme available to the 210 member nations [ ]. The importance of sustainable tennis coach development has been emphasised as a key component of this coach education process developed by the ITF [ ]. The main objective of the ITF Coaches Education Programme is to assist national federations in developing their country's coaching programme, encouraging self-sufficiency, and improving the level of tennis delivery in the area [ ]. For some of the programmes, the ITF operates in partnership with Olympic Solidarity (OS) to deliver tennis education, particularly in countries with less developed structures and processes.
These programmes are delivered at various levels of coaching qualifications, following a hierarchical structure: Play Tennis (Coach of Beginners); Coach of Beginner and Intermediate Players (CBI); Coach of Advanced Players (CAP); and Coach of High- Performance Players (CHP). For clarity, the ITF operates with OS to deliver the CAP and CHP on a residential basis in Spain over a period of three months. There is a requirement for pre-residential online learning to ensure participants are aware of the expectations before the in-person phase of the programme. While coaches at this level are considered to learn best informally [ ], this pre-course, or priming stage, can be considered as scaffolding as advocated by Vygotsky [ ]. As this is a certificated programme there are a series of exams, after each element of study. There has been debate around the concept of coach assessment, as it has been considered challenging or not necessarily fit for the constantly evolving context of coaching [ , ].
The programme is structured around three building blocks of content. First, the theoretical block takes the candidates through the relevant applied sports science principles, relating to tennis, using evidence-informed research, unusual in many coach development initiatives [ ]. Second, the practical block consists of individual, and group on-court practice sessions conducted by the candidates working with players of the appropriate level of play for each programme, generally within high-performance academies of tennis. During this practical component, each coach must demonstrate their level of play to operate at this level. The theory sessions are related to the practical aspects, both in the lecture room and during the on-court sessions [ ]. The final block is experiential and consists of a series of visits to clubs, academies, and tournaments as well as involvement in workshops, seminars, and discussions with top coaches, professional players, and academy managers. This structure provides candidates with opportunities that, according to Griffiths and colleagues [ , p.283], are more effective if ‘interactive, collaborative and located in practice’, key elements in all three blocks. However, essential to coach development is the criticality of the coaches and their ability, according to Stoszkowski and Collins [[ ], p.249] to ‘identify and critique any assumptions that are being made, as well as challenge the values and beliefs that are being drawn upon.’ Encouraging coaches to develop these critical thinking skills is essential to the sustainability of coach development programmes and the development of sport, in this instance, tennis. The viability of such programmes must be evaluated carefully, especially given the support offered by external bodies, such as OS.
From a global multi-sport perspective, OS has a remit to assist all National Olympic Committees (NOCs) with a particular focus on those countries with the greatest need, to develop and sustain Olympic sports, by training coaches and sports administrators, as well as promoting the Olympic values [ ]. Despite the global reach of OS and the delivery of coaching programmes worldwide, very few studies have reflected on the impact of the coaches when they return to their environments and the perceptions of these coaches on their effectiveness. For example, Rui and colleagues [ ] examined volleyball coach education courses in five countries, concluding that although there were some similarities between programmes the differences were defined by the approach each country adopted to develop their national coaches. Many studies have looked at specific aspects of coach development courses and programmes such as those identified above, however overall, impact evaluations are very difficult to implement due to the number of variables involved.
Meaningful feedback or evaluation is a complex and dynamic process that requires the use of a variety of data collection methods and analysis techniques to assess the performance of a programme, policy, or individual. Vangrunderbeek and McCarthy [ ] highlight there are different methods of evaluating coaching programmes but note there is no best approach, but pragmatically those that account for the resources, time, and availability of the stakeholder are advocated. As mentioned earlier, coaching is a complex endeavour, and given the difficulties demonstrating cause and effect, acceptable methods may include perceptions, self-report, and interviews [ , ]. In turn, these evaluations can be used to improve the effectiveness of programmes allowing organisations the opportunity to use these findings to generate change.
However, there is a clear gap in the research related to the evaluation of coach education programmes conducted by international federations. Therefore, this paper aims to assess the relative value placed on the ITF/OS Tennis programme by participating tennis coaches plus the coach developers involved in the process.
The present study fits into the current trend of broader coaching literature which has studied crucial topics on the field such as the coaches' reflections, learning, and development [ ], the research evidence for the impact of coach education [ ], the impact of coach education programmes [ ], the specific role of coach developers as ‘facilitators of learning’ [ , ], or the notion of apprenticeship in coach education [ ]. By doing this, it is hoped that the rationale for this research is articulated in such a way that makes a strong and logical link to the existing gaps in research that can be drawn from this introduction.
To achieve this, the paper is presented in two progressive parts, reflecting the variety of methods alluded to earlier. Part 1 is a web-based survey to gather the perceptions of a significant sample of eligible participants regarding the value and effects of the ITF course on their coaching development and subsequent careers in tennis. Part 2 qualitatively explored what participants believed they experienced during their participation in the ITF/OS tennis programme, using semi-structured interviews. As this research is iterative, we have presented the methods and results in two parts, to reflect the overview represented by Part 1 and then the more in-depth analysis from Part 2.
1

## Methods part 1
1.1

## Participants
Participants were 122 tennis coaches (male = 108; female = 14), who had participated in the ITF/OS coaching programme, most completing (84 %) the highest level of certification, Coaching High-Performance (CHP). These participants came from 61 countries as well as representing all the ITF tennis regions. All were at least 18 years of age and attended the programme after selection by their National Associations, endorsement by the ITF, and approval from by their respective Olympic Committees and OS. The total number of participants in this programme was 140, so the response rate for this study was 87 %. Ethical approval was provided by the University of Edinburgh's ethics committee (CN17032021) before data collection and each participant provided written informed consent prior to completing the survey.

1.2

## Procedure
A draft survey was constructed based on key elements outlined by Nash and Sproule [ ], with the language being adapted to tennis rather than multiple sports. This survey consisted of six sections; Section collecting demographic data; Section examining learning outcomes; Section investigating on-court/practical experiences; Section covering theoretical topics; Section exploring learning in the tennis environment; Section compiling data on general course outcomes. Participants were asked to complete Likert Scale (1–5) responses for Sections , , , , , allowing for both positive and negative responses. Additionally, some questions left space for further information should participants choose. The survey, provided via the online tool, Online Surveys (www.onlinesurveys.ac.uk), was distributed by e-mail to 140 (87 % response rate) past participants of the ITF/OS. An explanation of the study's aims and purpose as well as an electronic link to the survey were provided in the e-mail. Access to the survey was dependent on consent being provided at the start of the survey, after reading the information sheet.

1.3

## Data analysis
The data, after thorough cleaning and organization, were analysed using RStudio version 2022.07.2. Descriptive statistics were utilized to summarize the survey responses. Percentages for each response category on the Likert scale were calculated and presented through grouped bar charts to visualize the distribution of responses for each variable of interest. This method allowed for an effective overview of the participants' perceptions and experiences related to the program.

2

## Part 1 results
Of the 122 coaches surveyed 120 were still involved in tennis with roles ranging from running private academies, National High-Performance Directors and Coaches, Davis Cup Captains, all very significant and influential within their countries. Many of these coaches had transitioned from a pure coaching role to more systems and organizational-focused work. shows the number of responses from each year of the programme, highlighting, the growth and sustainability of the programme over the 20+ years of delivery. 
 displays the perceptions of the participating tennis coaches on the overall aims of the ITF/OS coaching program. The data reveals that increasing their knowledge of tactical, technical, physical, and psychological skills was unanimously valued, with 100 % of coaches indicating that this aspect provided significant help. This suggests that comprehensive skill development is seen as a crucial component of the program. Also increasing knowledge of pedagogical methods was also highly regarded, with 87 % of participants rating it as significantly helpful. This underscores the importance of effective teaching methods in the context of high-performance coaching. Similarly, both 'Applying knowledge in training' and 'Appreciate the role of ITF in coach education' were perceived positively, each with 82 % of coaches indicating they were significantly helpful. These results highlight the value of practical application and the recognition of the ITF's role in shaping tennis coach education. In contrast, the understanding structures and systems of tennis development was perceived as less impactful, with 55 % of participants finding it significantly helpful and 37 % indicating moderate help. This may suggest that while structural knowledge is important, it may not be as immediately beneficial to coaches as other program elements. Overall, these results suggests that the ITF/OS program is well-aligned with the priorities of the coaches, particularly in terms of skill development and pedagogical knowledge. The strong emphasis on practical application and comprehensive skill sets appears to be well-received among the participants. 
 presents the perceptions of the participating tennis coaches regarding various elements of the ITF/OS coaching program. The figure indicates a strong consensus among coaches, with a majority finding significant value in most of the program components. Notably, on-court practical experiences were rated as providing significant help by 82 % of respondents, the highest percentage among all the elements. This suggests that practical, hands-on experiences are particularly valued by coaches in the context of their professional development. The organisation of a high-performance tennis programme also received high ratings, with 80 % of participants considering it to provide significant help, underscoring the importance of program management skills in coaching. Similarly, periodisation for high-performance tennis players was seen as significantly helpful by 74 % of coaches, highlighting the value of learning about structured training schedules. Psychological and technical sessions were also well regarded, with 72 % of coaches finding them to be of significant help. This reflects the importance of the mental and technical aspects of coaching in developing high-performance players. On the other hand, travelling with high-performance tennis players was the least valued topic, with 59 % of coaches rating it as significantly helpful and 29 % considering it to have little effect. This could indicate that while travel experience is beneficial, it may not be as critical to the coaching role as other elements. Overall, the data in show a clear trend towards the appreciation of practical and organizational elements in coach education, highlighting these areas as particularly impactful in the coaches' professional development. 
 depicts the perceptions of the participating tennis coaches on how the ITF/OS coaching program assisted them in their subsequent careers. The data shows overwhelmingly positive feedback, with most participants indicating that the program significantly helped in various aspects of their professional development. Motivating to keep learning and improving received the highest recognition, with 92 % of coaches stating that the program provided significant help in this area. This suggests that the program not only imparted knowledge but also inspired a commitment to continuous professional growth. Similarly, improving overall knowledge and improving as a coach on-court were both rated as significantly helpful by 92 % of participants. These findings indicate that the program was successful in enhancing the coaches' overall understanding and on-court coaching skills, which are crucial for their effectiveness in high-performance environments. Improving their professional career was also highly valued, with 88 % of coaches indicating significant help, showing that the program had a tangible impact on their career progression. Improving as a coach off-court was slightly less emphasised, though still perceived as significantly helpful by 83 % of participants. This indicates that while off-court skills are important, they may be seen as slightly less critical compared to on-court skills and overall knowledge. Overall, the data in highlights the ITF/OS coaching program's strong positive impact on participants' career development, particularly in motivating continued learning and enhancing both on-court and overall coaching abilities. 

3

## Key findings part 1
The survey aimed to capture the views of the participating coaches, who had all been selected carefully by their national tennis federations as individuals who could develop and promote tennis within their countries. This course was considered extremely impactful by the participants with very few negative thoughts or concerns expressed. The survey response rate (87 %) demonstrates the motivations of these coaches to feedback on their experiences on the ITF/OS programme.
Many of the concerns raised by previous coaching programmes evaluations highlighted organisational issues, financial difficulties, and assessment problems but these were not raised in this evaluation [ , ]. The overall perception by these coaches was that this ITF/OS coaching programme was of benefit to them, and highlighted the following points.-There were respondents from all ITF regions, Oceania, Africa, Asia, Europe, South America, the Caribbean and Central America, totalling 61 different countries.
-Most respondents were in high-level positions within tennis in their countries. They considered the ITF/OS programme to have assisted them in their careers and achieving success.
-The combination of theory and practice was appreciated, especially how this linked to the assessments. The assessment process was considered challenging, especially given the depth of the content.
-The task of working with high-performance players, on-court, was a new experience for many of these coaches.
-The more cultural elements of the programme, such as visits to tennis academies and interactions with high-performance players and coaches were appreciated.

The significantly positive feedback stressed in this survey encouraged further investigation, given the lack of previous research in this area.

4

## Part 2
The results of the survey in Part 1 demonstrated the ITF/OS programme was highly valued by tennis coaches at various stages of their careers. However, given the superficial nature of survey responses, we wanted to explore this perceived effectiveness further, to uncover more depth and detail. As a result, we initiated semi-structured interviews to provide a richer and more in-depth exploration of the impact of the programme.

5

## Method part 2
5.1

## Participants
Twelve participants (nfemales = 6, nmales=6; Mexperience = 23.58 years, SD = 8.37 years) were purposively recruited from twelve countries, due to their current position in tennis, their attendance on the course, and their qualifications. Their backgrounds in tennis, educational accomplishments, and socio-economic circumstances varied given the different countries and cultures they were from. However, each had been selected through a rigourous process and had similar experiences and knowledge of the coaching programme [ ]. Four key coach developers/instructors (all male) were also recruited for the interview process. (See ). 
Before data collection, ethical approval was gained by the University's Ethics Committee (CN17032021) and all participants provided signed informed consent.

5.2

## Procedure
Interviews were organised and conducted online using the Teams platform (Microsoft Teams, www.microsoft.com/microsoft-365), due to geographic limitations and COVID-19 restrictions. A semi-structured interview guide was created from the responses to Part 1 and used with all participants to ensure coherence and consistency between interviews [ ]. This interview guide consisted of six sections; aims and objectives of the programme; course organization; content and delivery; challenges and support; assessment; recommendations and future plans. Probes and prompts were used to help participants further clarify their answers. The interview guide was piloted with two participants from the tennis coaching domain and no adjustment was deemed necessary following their feedback. This information was not included in the final dataset. Reflecting the richness and depth of responses provided, interviews lasted between 45 and 60 min (Mduration = 51.96min, SD = 3.23).

5.3

## Data analysis
Interviews were transcribed verbatim and analysed through reflexive thematic analysis (RTA) [cf, [ ]]. According to Byrne [[ ], p.1392] RTA ‘is an easily accessible and theoretically flexible interpretative approach to qualitative data analysis that facilitates the identification and analysis of patterns or themes in a given data set’. RTA is commonly used in educational research, particularly by reporting findings based on experiences and feelings [ ]. Importantly, for this work RTA ‘is unique in that it does not come with a predetermined theoretical framework, leaving the researcher accountable to articulate methodological decisions made.’ [[ ], p.705].
Generally, the six stages to RTA start with familiarisation and immersion with the data. This was achieved through repeated readings of each transcript, enabling coding and subsequently, the creation of initial themes There was no software used in the analysis process as ‘coding is an organic and evolving process, capturing an interweaving of the knowledge, subjectivity and analytic skill of the researcher, engaging closely and systematically with the dataset’ ([ ], p.72). The themes were both refined and defined bearing in mind their relevance and applicability to the aims of the research. This refinement and consequent naming of the themes was not down to frequency but rather captures the essence of the participants responses and the organic approach utilized by the researchers [ ]. Using this method, the themes are understood to represent ‘summaries of what participants said in relation to a particular topic or data collection question’ [[ ], p. 5]. Braun and Clarke [48, p.4] maintain ‘(P)paradigmatic, epistemological and ontological assumptions inescapably inform analysis’, ultimately enabling the researchers to present their story, using the data.
The trustworthiness of the findings was established using three procedures: member reflection, critical friends, and the use of direct quotes. According to Smith and McGannon [ ] the sharing of findings with participants is not to verify conclusions but to gain more insight into the matter at hand. The researchers acted as critical friends discussing, challenging, and revising the themes until a consensus was reached. These themes are highlighted in the findings section by using direct, anonymised quotations, enabling sensemaking to happen within the context of the tennis environment.

6

## Part 2 findings
The analysis of the interviews revealed three main themes from the participant coaches and the coach developers. These were 1) a supportive environment; 2) a lifechanging experience and 3) a level of challenge.
6.1

## Supportive environment
A supportive environment is characterised by trust and respect between all involved, encouraging a positive attitude to their learning, and enabling participants to feel there was sufficient assistance to overcome substantial obstacles in attending this programme. All the participating coaches and coach developers highlighted the multiple support mechanisms in place, that they felt had contributed to their success and the sustainability of the programme.
Coach C4 thought ‘I was ready to learn and every day I went to the park in front and read the biomechanics book or tactics. I just went and read, read, read, you know because I came for that, and that environment was set up very nicely. I should say thank you also because [coach developers] created the environment for us to really, really learn. You know that was fantastic.’ The view was reinforced by Coach C8 who said ‘It is the same, always great collaborating with ITF. It seems to me that my growth and development have been focused on the structures and methodologies of the ITF. I have found it very supportive regarding the evolution that I have made when I did my CAP and CHP in Spain.’
ITF1 advised ‘It is true that CHP is hard and CAP as well. Then the place they come from, the country of origin, can have an influence, as can academic qualifications. It seems fundamental to me that without the help of the ITF and Olympic Solidarity, it would be impossible for these people to take the course. All come from far, far away places, and the cost of living, travel, and maintenance would be inaccessible for more than 90 % of coaches.’
Coach C5 drew attention to the informal discussion forums that happened within the course, saying ‘For me, the most valuable thing as a coach, whether on courses, working with other coaches, education programs and conferences for me is being there. We are getting lots of information in between the lectures. You know, in the corridors when we're sitting drinking tea, coffee, chatting in the evening, sharing information, meeting new friends, and sharing our experiences.’ This illustrated the informal support network, encouraged by the coach developers but established by the group of coaches to further their understanding and development.
Coach C7 drew attention to the support she had received when she made the transition from player to coach, saying ‘when I played my dream was always to be a coach. It wasn't from me retiring and having no idea what to do with my life. I think we former players have too big an ego and because we play professional level already, we think we know it all. You played great, but now Coach you are nobody! Starting from scratch in this new profession, I received such great support, and I needed it.’

6.2

## Lifechanging experience
There are certain life-changing experiences that have both a positive and negative contribution to an individual, however, all the participant coaches were clear that the course had a highly beneficial and influential effect on their coaching. Coach C3 said ‘It was one of the biggest highlights of my life. I mean, one of the biggest accelerators - it was a huge thing at that time in my life and in my career.’
Coach C2 said ‘I think for me the biggest thing was the group of players that we got to work with. Where I come from when we talk about high-performance tennis it is intermediate. So, I got exposed to high-performance coaching with high-performance players on the tour.’ Coach C2 and C3 recognised the benefits of being immersed in a high-performance environment, acknowledging, and appreciating the difference in level between their country and Spain.
Both Coach C12 and Coach C9 highlighted how the course changed their perspectives on tennis. Coach C12 thought ‘I found that it was very comprehensive. After the course, I saw tennis in a different light.’ Coach C9 considered ‘it widened my perspective, and it gave me ideas. It let me think out of the box and adapt. It motivated me and then I understood how it goes. And yeah, so it was a big eye-opener.’ ITF3 summed up, saying ‘regardless of whether they pass everything, in the end I always tell them that they have become very good coaches, and they leave being better coaches, regardless of passing or failing, so I think they leave with that positive transformative experience.’
There were also examples of high-performance in tennis and other sports as Coach C11 reminisced ‘We went to a match, for football, you know Valencia versus I forgot and then the visit before the ATP tournament.’ Coach C1 also explained the impact these visits made on him, saying ‘What an extraordinary memory of going to the different academies. Ferrero Barbaro! Sánchez Casal, tremendous Academy. You visit almost the best academies, more than high-performance, and that leaves a mark on you.’ Coach C4 said ‘Memories I know I'll never forget in my life because as a coach from [country] staying for such a long period of time was new for me. Number one - the hospitality in Spain. Number two - everything they did in Pancho's Academy. How well Pancho was treating us and trying to educate us, and he was very accommodating. You know, he said we can come and study anytime.’

6.3

## Level of challenge
Given the diverse backgrounds of these coaches, their time working in and playing tennis and the support for tennis in their countries, it is difficult to gauge the level of challenge appropriately. ITF3 summed up his initial thoughts, stating, ‘The federations encourage their best coaches to obtain these certificates so that they can be Davis Cup or Billie Jean King Cup captains. They have, of course, a lot of influence to motivate these people, so if the coaches want to continue to prosper at the national level and be a source of change, this type of certificate is fundamental and that is a motivation for the coaches. We have to use that motivation to encourage them through the harder elements of the programme - look at the end result.’ Coach C6 thought ‘It was fantastic and just being in the hot seat practically was great, you know, being in the Academy setting. You did the theory and then you're immediately thrown into a practical scenario to employ the tools that you gain in the classroom. So, I thought that was brilliant but very stressful.’
As Coach C6 and others exemplify, there was a considerable, but manageable, challenge, however, this was not the case with all coaches. Coach C12 said ‘I was already scared to death before I got there. I felt like I was entering the finals of a professional tournament, that's how I felt. I was a little bit scared and nervous because there were so many modules in a short time because there was a lot of information. Mentally, to endure everything it was tough.’
Coach C9 emphasised the difficulties he faced but also how he applied himself to overcome these, saying ‘because of the link between the Academy, the on-court practices, and the theory this allows you to gain confidence AND to move forward, but the expectation that the course is hard. You have to study - you have to be mentally present day by day so that you achieve it.’
Coach C7 highlighted his expectations that the course was going to be more applied and the challenges this raised, thinking ‘I was kind of hoping that we would be involved more in daily practicing, if it wasn't with the Academy but with something else. You know, as a coach you go there for three months, and the numbers of hours that we were spending on the court, they were much less than the hours we were spending in the theory.’ Although overall the coaches valued the theory, this view of the academic side was shared by several coaches. For example, Coach C11 said ‘Sometimes we got a little bit lost in in studying so much that you forget that the course is a lot bigger than just passing exams.’ Coach 10 reinforced this, explaining the challenges, saying, ‘On a Sunday you get your material for the week for the first time and then the pressure starts to go up on the Monday and Tuesday because you have to complete the book by Wednesday. Then you revise on Thursday to sit the exam on Friday, so your stress levels are through the roof. And then you completely turn off on Saturday because you need to mentally recover and then you open the next book for the next module on Sunday and the process repeats itself.’
ITF2 summed up the overall learning approach taken within the course ‘I think the course does introduce newer skills and drills to the coaches but maybe the most important element of the course is that it helps them to reflect on their own practise and it empowers them to find new solutions to the challenge of helping the players learn tennis or helping their players to achieve high-performance level. Our job is not to provide them with solutions but to provide challenges and problems and tools and opportunities to reflect in such a way that they will find their solutions by themselves.’

7

## Discussion
Generally, the evaluation of coaching programmes is a difficult challenge, as has been reported by other researchers [ , , ], especially given the disparity of geographical location and varied backgrounds of the participating coaches in this study. However, the reflections presented here have considered the views of the coaches by survey and in more depth through semi-structured interviews as well as the thoughts of the coach developers involved in the delivery. McCarthy [ ] poses the question ‘Why do coach education programmes work?’ This is a complex question and relates, essentially, to the aims of each coach's education provision. Perhaps the question here should be framed around the long-term success and sustainability of this ITF/OS programme. For example, many successful participants in this programme have remained in tennis (98.3 %) and hold responsible roles within tennis federations in their own countries (55.9 %). Many of these roles have moved individuals away from full-time coaching to more strategic roles within tennis development, such as National Development Manager and Head of Coach Development. As the aim of the ITF/OS programme is to promote long-term tennis coach development by assisting national federations to improve, the level of tennis delivery and develop a sustainable coaching programme for their country, the continued involvement and strategic development of these high-performance coaches within tennis is positive. This can be evidenced by the high correlation between the aims of the programme and the needs and wants of the participant coaches as shown in .
The ‘voice of the coach’ can be heard throughout the results section, highlighting some areas worthy of further discussion [[ ], p.283]. All the participating coaches have alluded to the effectiveness of the programme, referring to the structure, namely the extended length of time, the residential nature, and the integration of theory and practice, as contributing to their ability to learn. Effective coaching has also been described as evidence-informed by Cope and Cushion [ ], and positively, this programme uses research papers to inform the theory element and translate it into practice. The immersion in a high-performance environment for a period of three months is unusual within the coaching environment for a variety of reasons. However, these aspects may contribute to the perceived effectiveness of this programme. The ‘one-shot’ coach education programmes have been viewed as problematic especially when evaluating transferability back into the home coaching environment [ ]. The mixed method nature of this research moves beyond the ‘one-shot’ approach by integrating the substantial response rate to the survey with the semi-structured interviews, allowing breadth and depth of reply, from both coaches and coach developers. Learning is a long-term commitment, whether in the classroom, lecture theatre, or practical venues and the extended nature of engagement in this programme presents many opportunities to reflect on, adjust, and refine learning [ , ]. The direct integration of the theory to practice as reportedly happened here, and the comprehensive nature of the delivery may be a contributory factor in the confidence building described. However, this may not have occurred if the programme was not designed and operationalised as reported.
The support offered by the ITF and coach developers must be integral to the accomplishments of the coaches in this programme, although this should be balanced with the perception of the challenge identified by the coaches. Learning in the workplace, essentially what these coaches were participating in, can be characterised by engagement with new ideas and practices, peer learning, open communication, relationship building, and reflection [ ]. This type of approach does engender challenges, however, as ITF2 suggested the use of problem-solving and reflection to provide solutions to the problems of practice. The combination of a supportive environment where there is considered challenge would appear to result in the lifechanging experiences reported by these coaches. The ITF, and in particular, the coach developers should be acknowledged for providing a coaching environment that combines a critical edge with a more holistic understanding of the elements that support quality coaching practice [ ]. This aligns with recent research that highlighted the importance of developing coaches as critical thinkers. According to Collins and Eastabrook [ ], critical thinking has many benefits, enabling the coach to select the most appropriate sources of information to guide their practice, using the highest-quality evidence and knowledge, aligned with reflective practice.
Even though this research has been conducted following key methodological procedures for the field, some limitations can be mentioned. Firstly, it uses an extremely high-quality and specific sample composed of high-performance coaches and coach developers participating in the ITF/OS courses. These coaches receive an OS scholarship and are among the top teaching professionals in the world. Studies with coaches participating in beginner, intermediate, or advanced coaching courses would provide an interesting contrast in terms of views, reflections, and opinions. Secondly, the course is conducted in Spain which has been shown to have a considerable impact on the views of the participating coaches. It may be interesting to compare the findings obtained in this course with the views of coaches taking part in courses conducted in other venues and nations. Finally, these courses are fully subsidized by OS, and coaches receive full assistance to attend. In this context, it also would be convenient to study the scenario of courses in which coaches have to cover the full cost of the programme, and how this affects their reflections and views.

8

## Practical implications
The results drawn from both parts of this study have practical implications, not only for the development of tennis coaches but also for the education of sports coaches in general. The most relevant aspects are summarised below.
8.1

## Importance of place
Much of the reported effectiveness of this programme was attributed to the residential nature plus conducting the course in a particular location (i.e., Spain) that has significance for the candidates due to their performance record, characteristics, and tradition. The two elements of place, the residential element of the programme and the significance of the geographical location are seen as relevant to the success. There have been few studies that examined the effects of residential coach programmes as opposed to more traditional offerings. There are advantages to residential programmes, however, they do add to the overall cost of the experiences so organisations/individuals would need to consider the cost/benefit analysis.
While geographical location has been investigated in terms of birthplace and the implications for talent development and ‘hotspots’, communities either created or naturally occurring, the place referred to here includes both elements to some extent [ ]. However, we use place to signify how these coaches view tennis and the role of tennis in their lives. It revolves around their values, behaviour, and interpretation of the world, but especially reflects the cultural heritage and history of the sport, in this case, tennis. Organisations may want to consider the importance and significance of the venue to the potential participants. For example, consider the iconic appeal of St Andrews to golf or Madison Square Gardens in New York.

8.2

## The relationship between theory and practice
This programme demonstrated the value of the practical on-court experience with high-performance athletes (those in the training academies), which directly related to the theoretical aspects. This also helped contextualise the assessments and enabled the participants to easily integrate into their practice. There have been suggestions that coaches need to consider the learning environment more closely to get the best from athletes, especially in high-performance sports. Whatever the reasons, previous studies have suggested that coaches often face difficulties taking concepts and theories presented in classroom situations and relating them to their coaching environment. Much of this has been attributed to contextualisation as generic coach development cannot hope to address the myriads of different sports, levels and environments. This programme is different in that it is specifically aimed at tennis and high-performance, therefore limiting the variables. Also, this programme effectively linked theory and practice, as highlighted by several participants in both interviews and survey responses ( , ). This indicates that participants found this contextualisation more effective.

8.3

## The role of challenge
If the course is structured so that participants are challenged throughout, this motivates the learning process. The level of challenge needs to be carefully incorporated so as not to appear overwhelming but manageable within a supportive learning environment. However, challenge emerged as a major theme with many coaches suggesting that certain aspects of the programme were extremely demanding, but acknowledging this fitted with their expectations when they applied. When designing programmes, organisations need to carefully balance the level of challenge to maintain motivation. This can be accomplished by using several examples from this programme, such as the pre-programme study, the availability of the coach developers, and the residential element, allowing participants to support one another. As coaching, especially at a high-performance level, can be difficult, challenge should not be omitted from programmes like these, but included, with the appropriate supports, or scaffolding integrated from the start.

8.4

## Emphasis on the atmosphere created on the programme
The nature of this programme was multi-cultural but stressed common goals, trajectory, and vision within the development of tennis performance and tennis coaching. Supportive learning environments have been linked to the development of critical thinking skills, problem-solving skills, social skills, and skills concerning creativity, surely all important for coaches [ ]. This emphasis on the type of environment was explained as a conscious decision by ITF2 and was recognised by the participants as a key recollection of their learning and development journey. Sporting organisations must acknowledge that creating an appropriate setting for learning is as important as content creation.

8.5

## Integration of examples of high-performance in action
This is closely aligned with the practice-theory link, however, we opted to discuss separately, to emphasise the differences. Engaging with high-performance sports through a multitude of mediums was a feature mentioned by participants in Part 1 ( ) and Part 2. This was achieved by combining visits to academies, training centres, and tennis competitions with more formal sessions (on- and off-court) to experience the high-performance domain. As many participants alluded to the challenges associated with coaching high-performance players, the time spent observing, discussing, and integrating these experiences, appeared to be appreciated. Activities of this type can be difficult to manage but seem to have benefits when they can be actioned [ ].

8.6

## The holistic view
This is one of the harder elements to evaluate within any coach development programme, as it is also hard to define. We considered that the participants viewed the programme as much more than just a certification course, with the residential component and cultural interplays providing valuable learning. Viewing this programme in its entirety is necessary to understand the lifechanging experience that many participants referred to. Organisations and coach developers need to be aware of all these nuances plus the exchange and sharing of the views of candidates and deliverers makes each programme different.

9

## Conclusion
This paper aimed to assess the value placed on the ITF/OS Tennis programme by participating tennis coaches plus the coach developers involved in the process. This research fits the broader literature on coach education which has explored the impact of programmes and the reflections, learnings, and developments of those participating. The results obtained have suggested that the programme was well received by the tennis coaches and integral to their ongoing development plus the growth of tennis performance in their countries. Follow-up interviews revealed the three key themes of a supportive environment, a lifechanging experience and level of challenge contributed to the effectiveness of this programme and the subsequent development of tennis performance.
Given the depth of this analysis and the performance implications, we would suggest that these implications should be considered within other coach education and development programmes. The findings in our study can be applied to other sports and international organisations, and contexts ensuring that the necessary adaptation is provided. To do so, a thorough understanding of the nuances of each particular sport and sports organization is crucial to ensure that participating coaches are provided with the best learning and development opportunities. This will allow them to get the most out of the coach education experience to which they will be exposed.
We maintain that the sustainability and perceived long-term success of this coach development programme have been a combination of factors. First, the number of participants remaining in tennis and subsequent development in their countries and through their systems is important for continuity. Second, the transferability of theory to the practical environment has been appreciated. The opportunities to engage with tennis players, at the appropriate levels of ability, rather than peers acting as tennis players, were carefully organised and managed. Third, the combination of challenge and support was meticulously balanced to stretch the participants beyond their comfort zone but also provide structured assistance when necessary. Finally, the wider concept of tennis in Spain was included within the programme, by way of access to competitions, organisations, and individuals, allowing participants to experience the possibilities within an established system. Although funding was not a focus of this research or others associated with this wider coach development project, the support offered by OS must also be acknowledged as crucial.
The conclusions, limitations, and practical applications of this research also allow to propose future research lines which may include the possibility of comparing national and international programmes, the possible differences in coach education initiatives conducted in individual and team sports, the impact of cultural backgrounds of participating coaches in their views of the coach education programmes received, among other possible options. In this context, adapting and further developing the lessons learned in this programme to facilitate transfer to other coach education programmes in tennis, another sport is possible, and this method could be adopted to provide feedback to International Federations or non-sport organisations.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Miguel Crespo: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Methodology, Investigation, Conceptualization. Rafael Martinez-Gallego: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Christine Nash: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Validation, Methodology, Investigation, Conceptualization.

## Data and code availability
Data will be made available on request.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.