pmcPLoS Negl Trop DisPLoS Negl Trop Dis532plosntd101291488plosPLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases1935-27271935-2735PLOSPMC12742743PMC12742743.112742743127427434132546910.1371/journal.pntd.0013737PNTD-D-24-015631Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsParasitic DiseasesMalariaMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsTropical DiseasesMalariaMedicine and Health SciencesPharmaceuticsDrug TherapyDrug AdministrationMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsTropical DiseasesNeglected Tropical DiseasesMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsParasitic DiseasesHelminth InfectionsEchinococcosisMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsTropical DiseasesNeglected Tropical DiseasesEchinococcosisScience PolicyResearch IntegrityResearch EthicsMedicine and Health SciencesPharmaceuticsDrug TherapyResearch and Analysis MethodsDatabase and Informatics MethodsDatabase SearchingBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyPsychological AttitudesSocial SciencesPsychologyPsychological AttitudesCommunity engagement in mass drug administration participatory interventions: A scoping review
Community engagement in mass drug administration participatory interventionshttps://orcid.org/0009-0001-2750-3316ChouaïdAnoukConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing LouartSarahConceptualizationData curationValidationWriting – review & editing FayeAdamaFunding acquisitionProject administrationSupervisionWriting – review & editing BaEl HadjConceptualizationSupervisionWriting – review & editing LandierJordiConceptualizationFunding acquisitionProject administrationSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – review & editing RiddeValéryConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionMethodologyProject administrationSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – review & editing 1
Université Paris Cité and Université Sorbonne Paris Nord, IRD, Inserm, Ceped, Paris, France2
Univ. Lille, CNRS, UMR - CLERSE - Centre Lillois d’Etudes Et de Recherches Sociologiques Et Economiques, Lille, France3
Institute of Health and Development, Cheikh Anta Diop University, Fann-Dakar, Senegal4
Institut de Recherche pour le Développement, Dakar, Sénégal5
Aix Marseille Univ, Institut de Recherche pour le Développement, INSERM, SESSTIM, ISSPAM, Marseille, FranceHorstickOlafEditor , ]. The World Health Organization (WHO) has made the control, elimination, and eradication of these diseases a priority through its NTD Roadmap 2021–2030, and the Global Technical Strategy for Malaria 2016–2030 [ – ]. A range of public health strategies are used to fight these diseases, including screening and treatment, preventive chemotherapy, and mass drug administration (MDA) [ ].
MDA is defined as the administration of drugs to an entire population (or subpopulation) in a given area, regardless of individual disease status, to reduce or interrupt transmission [ ]. MDA is a well-established intervention in the field of NTDs, implemented at scale for decades to control or eliminate diseases such as lymphatic filariasis, onchocerciasis, and trachoma [ ]. These interventions are often nationally coordinated and rely on community-based distribution [ , ]. In contrast, MDA for malaria is less common and has mostly been implemented in research settings [ ]. This is partly because significant progress has been made in the fight against malaria through vector control, but also through diagnosis and treatment of symptomatic individuals, as well as through preventive strategies such as seasonal malaria chemoprevention (SMC) [ ]. However, in near-elimination contexts, advances in molecular diagnostics have revealed a large proportion of asymptomatic carriers harboring low-density Plasmodium infections. In the absence of highly sensitive point-of-care diagnostics, MDA remains the only feasible strategy for targeting these hidden reservoirs and accelerating progress toward malaria elimination [ , ]. In West Africa, and particularly in Senegal, interest in MDA has increased following the successful implementation of SMC in children under five [ ]. This seasonal intervention, based on the monthly administration of antimalarials during the transmission season, was introduced in the early 2010s and has since been scaled up in over 13 countries targeting 50 million children [ , ]. Building on these experiences, research studies are now exploring the efficacy of MDA as a complementary tool in the fight against malaria. In this context, learning from past experiences of MDA to inform future interventions is crucial for ensuring ethical and effective action. Community engagement has been less documented in malaria MDA compared to other diseases, which makes it a relatively new and emerging practice in this field; drawing lessons from previous MDA experiences is therefore essential.
One of the recurring lessons from past MDA interventions is the pivotal role of community engagement (CE) in achieving both high coverage and local acceptability while also ensuring ethically sound research practices.
High participation levels are necessary for MDA to achieve an impact at the population level [ ]. In these cases, community trust, understanding, and support become even more critical [ ]. Moreover, CE is increasingly recognized as a crucial element of health research due to its contribution to more ethical, relevant, and well-conducted research. Community-based participatory (CBP) intervention theory suggests that engaging community members as collaborators contributes to the relevance, acceptability, and effectiveness of health interventions [ , ]. More broadly, CE is defined as “a process of working collaboratively with groups of people linked by geography, interest or health issues to address social and health challenges affecting them” [ ]. In the context of MDA, CE refers to the involvement of communities at all stages of intervention - design, planning, implementation, and evaluation [ ].
CE strategies have been particularly emphasized in NTD programs, where they are often embedded in long-standing MDA campaigns. In recent years, a growing body of literature has also emerged describing CE in malaria MDA studies, particularly in the context of research or elimination settings. However, the goals, implementation, and evaluation of CE remain inconsistently described across studies. For example, the distinction between ethical and instrumental goals of engagement is often unclear, and the impact of CE on outcomes is rarely systematically assessed [ ].
A previous systematic review published in 2016 described community involvement in malaria MDA studies published up to 2013 and called for more structured evaluations of engagement practices [ ]. To our knowledge, no comprehensive review has been conducted since then. Moreover, the number of published MDA studies increased significantly over the past decade, particularly those describing participatory approaches in both NTD and malaria contexts. At the same time, the concepts and practices of CE have evolved, raising new questions about its goals, modalities, and impact.
In light of these developments, we conducted a scoping review to identify how community engagement is mobilized in participatory interventions implemented in the context of MDA. While we acknowledge the differences in implementation between malaria and NTDs, this review seeks to highlight common practices, contextual adaptations, and gaps in reporting and evaluation. By doing so, we aim to contribute to a better understanding of CE strategies and inform future MDA efforts across disease contexts.

## Methods
We conducted a scoping review on CE in MDA interventions following Arksey and O’Malley [ ] method and we followed each distinct stage of the framework of the WHO guide [ ]. We chose this type of review because it allowed us to: (i) have an overview of the available evidence in a given field, (ii) identify key characteristics or factors related to a concept and (iii) identify and analyze gaps in the knowledge base [ ]. The reporting was guided by the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (PRISMA) checklist [ ], as described in . We registered the protocol in a dedicated platform (protocols.io, DOI: dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.8epv5xq15g1b/v1 (Private link for reviewers: https://www.protocols.io/private/2391AFC090A411EFBAC80A58A9FEAC02 to be removed before publication.)). The protocol and the full search strategy are available in the supplementary materials ( , ).
 

## Research strategies
The following research question guided our review: “What is known about community engagement in participatory interventions for mass drug administrations?”. We listed 2 keywords related to the key concepts of our research question: mass drug administration (MDA) and community engagement (CE).
We defined MDA as the administration of a treatment, irrespective of the knowledge of symptoms or presence of infection, to an entire population in a given area [ ]. To ensure that the interventions were homogeneous and involved the general and asymptomatic population, we excluded interventions implying the administration of drugs only to infected people such as (i) interventions of mass screening and treatment (MSAT) and focal screening and treatment (FSAT), that require testing all people in a geographical area and treating only positive cases, (ii) interventions of focal MDA (also called focal drug administration or targeted MDA), which refers to reactive interventions triggered by a clinical case and propose treatment to asymptomatic persons around the infected one, and (iii) interventions targeting a specific population subgroup, such as seasonal malaria chemoprevention [ , ].
We screened all articles involving interventions described as participatory, community-based or involving CE. Then, abstracts and full texts were reviewed, and we (AC, VR) selected articles about initiatives of community engagement (see Appendix for definitions and full search strategy). Based on the assumption that there is a paucity of scientific literature on this [ ], we (AC, SL, VR) decided not to limit the review to references that evaluated the effectiveness of the interventions.
We identified relevant literature in January 2024 by searching for articles based on combinations of our keywords in six scientific databases (PubMed, Embase, Cochrane library, Global Index Medicus, Scopus, and Web of Science). We adapted the search strategy, including each database’s identified keywords and index terms. We collected and imported all identified citations into Covidence, where we removed duplicates.
We (AC and VR) conducted a first screening based on the titles and abstracts, followed by a full-text selection. We discussed all uncertainties collectively. To be included, the references had to meet the following criteria: (i) the article was a program or project report or study that implemented CE during a MDA intervention, (ii) the intervention was described by its authors as participatory or became so during the implementation process, (iii) the article was empirical and peer-reviewed, (iv) the text was written in French or English, (v) the full text was available.
Following the text selection from the databases, we searched for any additional articles in the reference list of included studies. Using Covidence, we extracted data on the characteristics of articles (authors, year of publication, etc.), the characteristics of MDA interventions, of the CE interventions, and, if present, the evaluation of the intervention (type of evaluation, method, results, etc.).
For data extraction and analysis, we (AC, VR) relied on two theoretical frameworks checklist: the MMAT (Mixed Methods Appraisal Tool) to describe the methodological characteristics of the studies, and the TIDieR (Template for intervention description and replication) to describe and report the key features of the interventions. Full details are available in the supplementary material ( , ).

## Patients and public involvement statement
Patients and/or the public were not involved in the design, or conduct, or reporting, or dissemination plans of this research.

## Results

## Literature search and study selection
Our search strategy yielded 729 citations overall. We excluded 375 duplicate records, leaving 354 articles. Based on their titles and abstracts, we selected 79 of these to undergo full-text screening. A final set of 32 articles met all inclusion criteria and were selected for analysis ( ). The main reason for excluding articles was that they did not report any CE.
The included articles were published between 1986 and 2023, with half published after 2017 ( and ). They reported 24 CE interventions in 20 countries: American Samoa, Benin, Cambodia, Cameroon, Fiji, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Kenya, Laos, Mali, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Tanzania, Uganda, Vanuatu, Vietnam, Zambia. The geographic distribution of the studies included is shown in . Most took place in Asia (14/32, 44%) or Africa (12/32, 37%). The intervention occurred in a low-income country (LIC) for 13 out of 20 countries (65%), LMIC for 5/20 (25%) and UMIC for 2/20 (10%) -defined by the World Bank for the current 2022 fiscal year. Several articles were published on the same intervention.
 

## MDA interventions
Of the 24 interventions, 16 focused on initiatives to tackle neglected tropical diseases (NTDs): 9 targeted lymphatic filariasis [ – ], 3 onchocerciasis [ – ] and 4 multiple infections including lymphatic filariasis, onchocerciasis, soil-transmitted helminths (STH), schistosomiasis, and trachoma [ – ]. The other 8 initiatives targeted malaria [ – ]. Among those 8 interventions, 4 belonged to the same research project, the targeted malaria elimination (TME), a pilot program that included MDA interventions across the Greater Mekong sub-Region, in Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, and Vietnam. These 4 interventions were at the source of 11 articles: 3 on the intervention in Cambodia [ , , ], 3 in Laos [ – ], 3 in Myanmar [ – ], 1 in Vietnam [ ]. One article compared implementation in the 4 countries [ ].
Six interventions were conducted at a national level, 14 at a level of one or more districts, 4 interventions involved less than 5 villages. They took place between 1981 and 2020, with half of them after 2013. The interventions were implemented in rural (n = 15), urban (n = 2) and both rural and urban (n = 7) settings. Most interventions excluded pregnant women, sick people, and small children under the age of two, but the rest of the population was targeted. Interventions for onchocerciasis consisted in the administration of ivermectin, those for lymphatic filariasis of diethylcarbamazine alone (n = 1), or diethylcarbamazine combined with albendazole (n = 3) or ivermectin (n = 3). Interventions involving multiple NTDs involved the administration of praziquantel, albendazole, ivermectin, and azithromycin (n = 1). Among mass administrations of antimalarial drugs, two studies were older. The first reported on a 1981 intervention involving the administration of chloroquine + primaquine for 3 days in Nicaragua [ ]; the second was carried out in Vanuatu in 1991, with the weekly administration of primaquine, chloroquine, pyrimethamine and sulfadoxine for 9 weeks [ ]. Other malaria interventions were more recent and involved the administration of dihydroartemisinin/piperaquine [ ], with the addition of primaquine in interventions carried out in the Mekong [ – , – , ]. At all TME sites, MDA followed a similar design: intervention villages received MDA of dihydroartemisinin piperaquine for three days and a single low dose primaquine every month for three months. A Haitian study did not specify the drugs, as the MDA intervention was cancelled due to several cases of severe side effects after MDA in a neighboring commune as well as the COVID-19 pandemic [ ].
Governments funded most mass administration interventions (n = 10), followed by NGOs or US or UK government agencies (n = 8), or by joint government/NGO funding (n = 3). The United Nations financed one intervention, and two studies did not specify the source of funds for the intervention.

## Notion of community engagement
Of the 32 articles, 18 explicitly mentioned “community engagement”. Other terms used were “community participation” (n = 7), “community-directed interventions” (n = 3), “social mobilization” (n = 2), “community mobilization” (n = 2), “community involvement” (n = 1), “community empowerment” (n = 1), “active social participation” (n = 1), “stakeholder engagement” (n = 1). All articles mentioning the term “community engagement” were published between 2017 and 2023, and 13 out of 18 addressed antimalarial MDAs (including 11 articles on the TME in Mekong).
Only a few authors (n = 6) defined CE, and they all reported on the TME projects. The definitions emphasized the involvement of local stakeholders. Bardosh et al. defined CE as “the process of engaging those who are affected by a particular problem in the process of solving and mitigating that problem” [ ]; Adhikari et al. as the “process of working collaboratively with relevant partners who share common goals and interests” [ ]. In contrast, some authors offered a more concrete description, as Pell et al., who defined CE as « a range of activities, such as employing local people, including community health workers and other field workers, seeking support from village leaders and offering health education » [ ]. Adhikari et al., proposed to refer to a theoretical framework, where CE is divided in five key elements: “1) stakeholder and authority engagement; 2) enlisting local human resources; 3) utilizing formative research prior to conducting MDA trials; 4) responsiveness and adapting to local challenges as they arise; and 5) sharing control and leadership with the community in deciding and organizing activities” [ ].
The most common justification stated for CE interventions was the improvement of population coverage (in 24 out of the 26 studies in which a rationale was provided). Intermediate objectives aiming to increase participation were also cited: increasing “acceptability”, “compliance”, “gain community’s trust”. Other principles, such as “sustainability”, “equity” was also invoked. The notion of “empowerment” was mentioned in two studies, although not defined. Additionally, two other studies also addressed related concepts. In Moala-Silatolu et al., CE “provides the necessary information for participation to their households as a rational decision and not based merely on persuasion” [ ] and for Kisoka et al, it was used “to stimulate the endemic communities to own and sustain program interventions” [ ].
Some researchers highlighted the lack of consensus on this term, regarding both its definition and purpose. Regarding its definition, Kaneto et al. pointed out that the difficulty lies in the ambiguity of the term participation: “There is the difference between “participation” as used to denote the community simply accepting action that has been decided for them elsewhere, and the concept of participation as a process of community involvement in the planning, organization, operation, and control of health care as called for in the Declaration of Alma-Ata” [ ]. Concerning purpose, different motivations drove researchers; Sahan et al. stated that “some researchers prioritize community engagement to promote the success of projects, in terms of study objectives or health outcomes, whereas others focus on its value in promoting ethical research practice” [ ]. The same idea was formulated by Pell et al.: “some researchers, as in TME, prioritize its instrumental contribution to the success of studies, in terms of achieving specific research objectives or health outcomes; others focus on its intrinsic value for ethical research practice” [ ].
It is noteworthy that seven studies did not explicitly delineate a clear objective in relation to the proposed CE intervention.

## Content of the CE interventions
Following the TIDieR checklist analysis [ ], the level of detail in describing CE interventions varied between articles and interventions. No guidelines or checklists were used in articles to report on the development of interventions. Authors generally described the procedures and materials used in the intervention, locations, and providers. Conversely, articles rarely reported whether the intervention was modified during its course (describing, in that case, the changes implemented) or whether any strategies were used to improve compliance with the intervention or implementation fidelity.

## Content of the CE intervention.
In most cases (N = 23/24 interventions), content included information and education campaigns (IEC) to inform local authorities and target populations about the MDA intervention that is about to take place. IEC activities were organized at different scales: village-wide meetings, smaller group meetings, one-to-one meetings with village officials, informal discussions with individuals or with all household members, and village assemblies;... They were carried out in public places identified as important by the communities: health centers, schools, places of worship and markets.
Meetings with the administrative and health authorities (at different levels) were organized in most CE interventions (N = 19/24). They aimed to obtain their agreement and, less often, to involve them in the community engagement process. Other informal authority figures or local opinion formers were also targeted (N = 12/24): school administrators, police, teachers, shopkeepers, private sector health care providers, traditional healers and military staff. In most settings, religious leaders were approached. The research team included staff from the community in some cases.
Communications
media (local radio, television spots, town criers), ads, posters, pamphlets, and flyers were frequently used to disseminate disease-related education (N = 17/24). In some cases, an event was organized in the village to raise awareness, such as music festivals and theatre in Cambodia or singing competition.

## Population targeted.
IEC initiatives usually target the whole village. More rarely, specific groups in the community were targeted: women, children at school to reach parents. Two studies reported outreach activities to target hard-to-reach population groups: mothers with young children, forest goers and migrants.

## Co-construction initiatives.
Some of the events did not aim solely at informing and educating but also left room for
co-construction initiatives (N = 6/24). Some studies collaborated with populations at one or more stages of the intervention. They worked with community members to create materials for education and information activities [ , ]. Others relied on community members’ decisions on how to conduct community involvement activities or how to organize drug distribution to individuals: the venue for distribution (at home or in a single location in the village) and the time of the day.
To do so, some interventions involved setting up a steering
committee (N = 6/24). In Means et al., they presented results of formative research to key stakeholders during a 2-day meeting, who then created a group in charge of “defining implementation strategies and collaboratively describe each individual strategy’s actor, action, action targets, dose, and temporality”. In all the TME interventions, on each study site, a committee was formed of village leaders, village malaria workers, and community volunteers [ – , – , ]. They assisted the study team in designing and implementing community engagement. In Duamor et al., a Community Self-Monitoring (CSM) [ ] selected drug distributors and decided how to motivate them, planned the drug distribution (when and how), and reported to the health service.

## Community health workers.
The use of community health workers was particularly common (N = 19/24): recruited from the community, sometimes by members of the community, they were then trained and asked to help with drug distribution. They were either recruited specifically for the study or were already involved in the health system (to provide diagnosis and treatment of malaria for example). When they were already involved in local health care, they also assumed the role of an interface between the community and external parties, acting as an intermediary to guarantee the benefits of the intervention for the community. A few interventions required their help for awareness-raising campaigns: in the Cambodian setting of the TME, they were used to alert study team and leaders to rumors or perceived adverse reactions of MDA and help sensitize participants.
In terms of remuneration, there was a distinction between those who were paid or compensated and those who were not.

## Formative research.
Some of the projects emphasized the importance of a detailed understanding of the local political and social structures in which the activities were to be carried out and used
formative research to guide their implementation (N = 10/24). Researchers used qualitative methods: rapid ethnography and PAR activities (social mapping, transect walks and observations, key informant interviews, case interviews, informal focus group discussions, short surveys), meetings with local health authorities, villages leaders, community workers. Some authors of interventions of the TME project described an immersion of the research team in the community before and during MDA: “Study staff’s participation in local social activities, such as funerals and local festivals, their presence in the villages and commensality– sitting round the same table and sharing traditional food–helped to build trust” [ ].

## Timing.
Regarding timing, most activities took place in the weeks preceding MDA (with little detail on the exact duration). A few initiatives continued their activities during the drug administration: Kings et al., continued distribution of pamphlets during MDA [ ]. In the Cambodian TME intervention, the study team stayed in villages 7 days after each round of MDA to respond to complaints and concerns in small gatherings or house-to-house visits [ , , ].

## Incentives.
Financial
incentives were sometimes given to take part in activities or administering medication (N = 4/24). Some studies reported non-monetary incentives (N = 6/24), such as household gift packs and snacks. Finally, some teams adapted the incentives to the specific needs of the community: in the TME interventions, auxiliary care was provided for the duration of the study through a free clinic during each survey and round of MDA, and a piping system was set up to distribute drinking water from a nearby spring to village houses [ , , ].

## Planned and unplanned variations.
Some interventions were responsive (N = 5/24) and allowed adaptation according to events and feedback. Some research teams were particularly alert to concerns and rumors, especially about adverse effects, and focused their efforts on reactive information on potential side effects. Most frequently asked questions were identified so that educational messages could be adapted: with the study team answering listener call-in questions on radio shows, through door-to-door visits… Several interventions were also adapted according to the lessons learned after a year of intervention. Lessons learned were evaluated through a Knowledge, Attitudes, and Practices (KAP) questionnaire and distributors’ interviews, through qualitative studies. Examples of adaptation included changes in the allocation of spending and efforts to reach hard-to-reach population. The Cambodian team of TME adapted the CE activities between two rounds of MDA seeing a decline in participation linked to trust issues: prior to round 3, the staff took less prominent roles in meetings and local health staff from the government-run facilities led the events [ , , ].

## Malaria vs NTDs MDA interventions.
A comparative analysis of CE strategies revealed differences between malaria and NTDs MDA interventions. Malaria-focused interventions with MDA were generally more recent, with 6 out of 8 published after 2013, compared to 4 out of 16 for NTDs. Co-construction initiatives were reported in 37% of malaria interventions versus 19% for NTDs. Hard-to-reach populations were specifically targeted in 25% of malaria interventions but none of the NTDs. The use of formative research was also more common in malaria-related interventions (50% vs. 37%), as were both financial (25% vs. 12%) and non-financial incentives (37% vs. 19%). Responsiveness to community feedback was noted in 37% of malaria interventions, compared to 19% of those focused on NTDs.

## Methods used
According to the categories in the Mixed Methods Appraisal Tool [ ], the evaluation methods used were descriptive quantitative (n = 8), mixed methods (n = 6), quantitative without randomization (n = 1) and qualitative (n = 17).

## Evaluation
Of the 24 CE interventions reported by the 32 studies, 6 were not evaluated.

## Design.
Few studies distinguished the role of CE from the overall assessment of all activities related to drug administration. Several authors pointed out that the evaluation was complicated by respondents’ difficulties in disentangling community engagement from other study-related activities.
The findings most frequently evaluated were uptake rates, factors associated with uptake/affecting participation, lessons learnt and infection-related knowledge, attitudes, and practices. The factors studied for their influence on participation were the state of knowledge about the infection, the intervention, and the reasons for non-participation. Quantitative studies (N = 9) identified awareness of the drug distribution, participation in CE activities, knowledge about the infection, access to the drug and the perception that MDA was worthwhile as positively associated with drug intake. The findings from the population coverage surveys (treatment received) and compliance surveys (treatment ingested) yielded a wide range of results. Qualitative studies (N = 17) used semi-structured or in-depth interviews with leaders, community members or research team members. A study focused on a post-intervention evaluation of acceptability and adaptability, and another aimed to create a conceptual framework to acquire a deeper understanding of the success of CE activities. Six studies used both quantitative and qualitative methods to assess factors associated with participation.

## Findings.
The factors evaluated in the KAP surveys conducted after the implementation of CE interventions included the proportion and level of detail in the understanding of the key concepts related to the targeted infection (transmission, prevention, treatment), awareness of the drug distribution, sources of information, and the reason for non-participation. Krentel et al. conducted a before-after KAP study, noting improved knowledge regarding the infection and shifts in attitude (the idea that the infection is a health concern, attitude when feeling sick) [ ].

## Qualitative data also reported factors associated with participation.
Factors often cited were the perception of the infection as a health concern, addressing concerns about adverse effects, managing them and rumors. Adapting to the local context and grasping concerns and attitudes through formative research (understanding history, past experiences, social dynamics and power relations) was crucial. Additionally, it appeared essential to spend sufficient time with community members, to facilitate the development of trust and the understanding of concerns. Furthermore, it was important to consider the importance of targeting various groups within the community, the necessity of adapting activities (season and work schedules, timing of distribution, and the importance of flexibility in implementation. Knowledge about the disease and awareness of the intervention was associated with taking the drug. Several studies emphasized the importance of relying on administrative and religious leaders and trusted members of the community and the fundamental role of community health workers. The role of financial incentives was often highlighted, yet their impact remained uncertain. In some studies, they were regarded as crucial, yet in Peto et al. their absence during two rounds of MDA did not result in a decline in participation [ ]. Non-financial compensation, in the form of complimentary ancillary care, also played a role in TME interventions [ – , – , ]. Non-financial incentives, such as access to free healthcare, can be understood as an acknowledgment that the intervention addresses broader health needs in the region. In an elimination context like the Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS), where malaria incidence is as low as 20 cases per 1,000 population per year, community health concerns increasingly extend beyond malaria itself.
Challenges or limitations in implementation frequently cited included reaching remote locations, top-down planned activities, lack of information, funding delays, human resource shortages, the difficulty to teach about concepts such as drug resistance, submicroscopic infections, asymptomatic disease and rumors.
Most of the evaluations focused on intermediate outcomes, such as the successful implementation of CE and the proportion of patients taking the medication. Only two studies assessed the intervention’s effectiveness in reducing the infection rate, which is ultimately the primary goal of an MDA intervention [ , ]. And these studies did not attempt to distinguish the role of activities promoting community involvement from the rest of the MDA.

## Discussion
The analysis of these studies offered valuable insights into the difficulties inherent in assessing CE interventions. There were many different terms and definitions used for CE. The authors did not always define the notion, although it referred to a wide range of interventions. In our review, it was most often used to refer to activities related to health information or education. The objective was usually to increase the drug intake for the MDA intervention. When community participation was sought, it was for the implementation phase of the CE intervention, not for its design, development, or evaluation.
The issues surrounding CE are elucidated in this review. It is a multifaceted concept that is intricate to navigate. Primarily, we emphasize the necessity of defining the term. As identified by Brunton et al., a CE intervention can be situated within two distinct narratives: an ‘utilitarian’ or a ‘social justice’ approach [ ].
The polysemy of the terms “participation” and “engagement” reflects their ambiguity. Participation can signify agreement to take the drug, but it can also signify participation in all the steps of the intervention (design, implementation, evaluation for example). In most studies, the term “community engagement” refers to participation in information and educational activities from a passive and instrumental perspective. The use of the term “community engagement” may warrant reflection when activities are limited to informing communities and obtaining their consent prior to an intervention. Some studies allowed participants flexibility in implementing the MDA intervention. Ultimately, when community involvement was genuinely present, the primary focus was on implementing the intervention. Notably, none of the studies referenced the community’s involvement in the design or evaluation of the intervention. The authors did not perceive CE as a means of empowering communities through social and structural change, by enabling them to participate, negotiate, influence and hold accountable the institutions that affect them.
Despite the centrality of community engagement in MDA strategies, few studies assessed its direct impact on infection outcomes. The challenges of attributing causal effects to community engagement interventions on infection outcomes are classic in public health, as demonstrated in our study on the fight against dengue fever in Burkina Faso [ ]. Like the analysis of the impact of empowerment interventions [ , ], community involvement interventions are necessarily complex [ ]. It is, therefore, difficult, or even impossible, to isolate one dimension of an intervention to assess its impact on an infection outcome. However, the challenge is not only methodological but also epistemological in the context of MDA strategies, which are inherently complex. It is, therefore, more challenging to assess their impact using experimental or quasi-experimental studies. This type of intervention requires more holistic and systemic approaches to evaluate (and understand) its impact [ , ]. It would be interesting if malaria research teams interested in these evaluations could look at theory-based evaluation approaches (methods that use program theories to explain how and why interventions work) or realist epistemology (to understand what works, for whom, and under what circumstances) [ , ]. A rapid realist review of community engagement has been published, but it only concerned OECD countries [ ]. There is undoubtedly an urgent need to apply this evaluation approach for LMICs, which still bear a heavy burden of malaria and yet have a long tradition of community engagement.
The differences observed between malaria and NTD interventions likely reflect a temporal shift. Most malaria studies have been conducted recently in research settings, where participatory and community engagement approaches are increasingly emphasised. Rather than a disease-specific contrast, this suggests an evolution in how CE is framed and implemented over time.
The lack of consensus on definitions of terms, the plurality of objectives and the complexity of the notion of CE render these studies complex to implement, evaluate and compare with the existing literature. It is possible to draw upon existing theories and conceptual frameworks to overcome these challenges. As an illustration, to distinguish between CE interventions and information or consent initiatives, we propose using Adhikari’s definition of CE: “1) stakeholder and authority engagement; 2) enlisting local human resources; 3) utilizing formative research before conducting MDA trials; 4) responsiveness and adapting to local challenges as they arise; and 5) sharing control and leadership with the community in deciding and organizing activities” [ ].
Secondly, mapping these activities onto a participation scale like Arnstein’s ladder could help clarify the extent of community engagement. This scale is designed to categorize various participation models according to their participation level. In this model, true participation is only initiated once power is delegated or developed; other forms of participation are regarded as mere ‘tokenism’ and ‘non-participation’ [ ].
A significant proportion of papers did not provide the information needed to complete the TIDieR checklist in terms of reporting the intervention, thereby limiting the possibility of assessing whether the results can be transferred from one setting to another. We propose to refer to validated criteria for describing complex interventions, such as the TIDieR adapted for Population Health and Policy interventions (TIDieR-PHP) [ ].
The findings presented here prompt further reflection on the role of community engagement in MDA.
Beyond its instrumental value, community engagement in MDA interventions also serves a crucial ethical function. It contributes to individual autonomy by enabling informed decision-making and voluntary consent — a particularly sensitive issue in MDA, where individuals are often asymptomatic and may not perceive immediate personal benefit. Furthermore, the ethical justification of MDA at the population level relies on achieving high coverage to ensure collective protection and maximize the intervention’s effectiveness. This is particularly important when administering drugs to largely uninfected individuals: the benefit/risk ratio becomes ethically acceptable only if sufficient population-level impact is achieved. As several authors have pointed out, including Parker & Allen (2013) and Singh et al. (2022), ethical acceptability of MDA hinges on transparency, community trust, and equitable participation. These considerations further support the need for meaningful, context-sensitive CE as a condition not only for operational success, but also for ethical legitimacy.
In the specific context of MDA to an asymptomatic population, CE could be the response to several challenges. The mass administration of drugs is marked by a colonial history [ ], and the shadow of the recent vertical health policies of the COVID pandemic is still close at hand [ – ]. Any intervention should be designed from an ethical standpoint of social justice if they are to empower individuals to become active participants in the eradication of communicable diseases [ ]. As sustainability is a key point to eradicating VBD, interventions should focus on community capacity building [ ].
The effectiveness of such interventions relies on establishing trust between stakeholders, a process that is closely tied to a thorough understanding of the sociocultural context in which the intervention takes place.
We emphasize the importance of combining biomedical and social science expertise for a formative research approach that provides information on the local context, including social, political, and cultural factors [ ]. Prior to the initiation and in situ research should be conducted to ascertain the social relationships within the community. A special effort needs to be made to identify the target groups, their health needs and the objectives of the intervention.
In the context of MDA interventions, where it is vital to reach all sections of the population, it is important to avoid the pitfall of considering a “community” as a homogeneous entity. This term often masks social fragmentation, and paying particular attention to hard-to-reach populations is essential. Some harm of CE can be social exclusion [ ].
When possible, community members should be involved in the design of an intervention, not only take part in its delivery. The degree of collective decision-making should be reported in each part of the study [ , ].
Furthermore, the intervention should be responsive to events and feedback during the study period.
Despite its importance, the question of available resources and stable funding is rarely addressed in the literature, even though it is a central determinant of sustained community engagement [ ].
The review identified the complexity of the issues and the scope for improvement in the implementation, evaluation, and reporting of such an intervention [ ]. The method was further strengthened by the utilization of validated tools, including the PRISMA scoping review checklist, the TiDIER checklist and the MMAT checklist [ , ].
The review process presented several challenges. The analysis was further complicated by the fact that 11 articles described four distinct interventions. Moreover, the concept of community involvement has numerous synonyms. While we strived for comprehensive coverage, some relevant articles may have been missed, particularly as our search was restricted to French- and English-language publications and excluded grey literature.

## Conclusion
This scoping review highlights inconsistencies in implementing community engagement (CE) in mass drug administration (MDA) studies, with most interventions focusing on (passive) information dissemination rather than genuine (active) community involvement. The persistence of a public health approach that exploits community approaches is confirmed in the MDA field. Despite its ethical and social advantages, active participation of target populations in MDA interventions remains limited. Addressing barriers such as resource constraints, limited training, and lack of early community engagement is essential to enhance participatory approaches and strengthen the effectiveness and acceptability of MDA programs. The lack of clear definitions and standardized approaches limits the ability to assess and compare CE interventions. Adopting participatory frameworks that promote shared decision-making and deeper community involvement is essential to improve outcomes and reduce inequalities. Understanding local sociocultural contexts and ensuring the inclusion of marginalized groups are critical for enhancing participation and equity in MDA programs. Future interventions should prioritize sustainable, capacity-building approaches to maximize the effectiveness of CE in MDA efforts.

## Supporting information
S1 Text

## Protocol.
(PDF)
S2 Text

## Search strategy.
(PDF)
S1 Data

## Data extraction table.
(XLSX)
S2 Data

## Excluded studies.
(XLSX)

 10.1371/journal.pntd.0013737.r001Decision Letter 0
HorstickOlafAcademic Editor© 2025 Olaf Horstick2025Olaf Horstickhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
12 May 2025

Community engagement in mass drug administration participatory interventions: a scoping review
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
Dear Dr. Chouaïd,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases's publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript within 60 days Jul 11 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosntds@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pntd/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
* A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'. This file does not need to include responses to any formatting updates and technical items listed in the 'Journal Requirements' section below.
* A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
* An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, competing interests statement, or data availability statement, please make these updates within the submission form at the time of resubmission. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Olaf Horstick, FFPH(UK)
Academic Editor
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
Justin Remais
Section Editor
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
Shaden Kamhawi
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
orcid.org/0000-0003-4304-636XX
Paul Brindley
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
orcid.org/0000-0003-1765-0002

Journal Requirements:

1) Please ensure that the CRediT author contributions listed for every co-author are completed accurately and in full.
At this stage, the following Authors/Authors require contributions: Anouk Chouaïd. Please ensure that the full contributions of each author are acknowledged in the "Add/Edit/Remove Authors" section of our submission form.
The list of CRediT author contributions may be found here: https://journals.plos.org/plosntds/s/authorship#loc-author-contributions
2) We do not publish any copyright or trademark symbols that usually accompany proprietary names, eg ©,  ®, or TM  (e.g. next to drug or reagent names). Therefore please remove all instances of trademark/copyright symbols throughout the text, including:
- ® on page: 8.
3) Please upload all main figures as separate Figure files in .tif or .eps format. For more information about how to convert and format your figure files please see our guidelines: 

https://journals.plos.org/plosntds/s/figures

4) Please ensure that all Figure files have corresponding citations and legends within the manuscript. Currently, Figure 4 in your submission file inventory does not have an in-text citation. If the figure is no longer to be included as part of the submission, please remove it from the file inventory.
5) We have noticed that you have uploaded Supporting Information files, but you have not included a list of legends. Please add a full list of legends for your Supporting Information files after the references list.
6) In the online submission form, you indicated that "The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author, AC, upon request." All PLOS journals now require all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript to be freely available to other researchers, either
1. In a public repository
2. Within the manuscript itself
3. Uploaded as supplementary information.
This policy applies to all data except where public deposition would breach compliance with the protocol approved by your research ethics board. If your data cannot be made publicly available for ethical or legal reasons (e.g., public availability would compromise patient privacy), please explain your reasons by return email and your exemption request will be escalated to the editor for approval. Your exemption request will be handled independently and will not hold up the peer review process, but will need to be resolved should your manuscript be accepted for publication. One of the Editorial team will then be in touch if there are any issues.

Comments to the Authors:

Please note that one of the reviews is uploaded as an attachment.

Reviewers' Comments:

Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Key Review Criteria Required for Acceptance?

As you describe the new analyses required for acceptance, please consider the following:

Methods

-Are the objectives of the study clearly articulated with a clear testable hypothesis stated?
-Is the study design appropriate to address the stated objectives?
-Is the population clearly described and appropriate for the hypothesis being tested?
-Is the sample size sufficient to ensure adequate power to address the hypothesis being tested?
-Were correct statistical analysis used to support conclusions?
-Are there concerns about ethical or regulatory requirements being met?
Reviewer #2: Authors reported their study according to PRISMA guidelines and clearly detailed the selection process and exclusion criteria (figure 1). Author contribution is explicitly acknowledged throughout most of the methods section. Study design is justified and seems appropriate to address stated objectives.
Significant aspects are missing from the methods section:
- Definitions of CE and MDA used for the review remain unclear, compromising the understanding of the search strategy, inclusion of publications and data analysis - e.g., "We adopted a broad definition of CE" => please provide the definition and synonyms used
- Please provide a representative search string or synonyms used in your search strategy, for both semantic clusters (CE and MDA): this is essential for reproducibility of the study and should be provided in the manuscript, not only in the pre-registration
- Methods for data analysis are not described sufficiently in the manuscript, and the reference to the supplementary material is missing - e.g., "For data extraction and analysis, items from TIDIeR and MMAT checklist theoretical framework were used" => please explain which elements and the rationale for the choice of these elements, how you proceeded with their evaluation, and who conducted this work
Reviewer #3: objectives and methods reasonably met (see below for additional comments on the scope).
**********

Results

-Does the analysis presented match the analysis plan?
-Are the results clearly and completely presented?
-Are the figures (Tables, Images) of sufficient quality for clarity?
Reviewer #2: Overall, the results are well structured and match the stated objectives of the study.
Points to improve include:
- Unfortunately, clear differences between MDA for NTDs and MDA for malaria are not acknowledged nor reflected in the results, which weakens the output of this publication.
- "Out of 24 interventions, 16 focused on NTDs" and among 8 malaria interventions, 4 belonged to the same research project: this is not reflected in the manuscript, which heavily focuses on malaria, including in the examples given in the results section.
- Meaning of reported numbers are unclear: do they refer to interventions or publications? E.g., "In most cases (N=30)". This is also valid for the following paragraphs and would be important to clarify.
- Refer to supplementary materials for details on data analysis in the main text
Reviewer #3: Yes, but with comments.
**********

Conclusions

-Are the conclusions supported by the data presented?
-Are the limitations of analysis clearly described?
-Do the authors discuss how these data can be helpful to advance our understanding of the topic under study?
-Is public health relevance addressed?
Reviewer #1: conclusions and discussion require changes.
the comment enclosed.
Reviewer #2: The discussion section is easy to read, clear and well-structured. Relevance of this study for public health is clearly stated and a list of recommendations to improve CE in MDA is provided and very helpful to improve further interventions (from "we emphasize the importance of combining" to "stability of funding, which is a key determinant of community participation"). You could emphasize further that this is a big output of your study. Limitations are stated, but should also include the focus on two languages only (French and English).
Suggestion of further discussion points to improve the manuscript:
- CE is framed as a way of reaching marginalised groups/all sections of the population - but specific groups were systematically excluded from the analysed interventions ("pregnant women, sick people, children under age of two"), this would benefit from being discussed
- In the results section, authors state that most studies do not evaluate the effect of CE on reduction of infection, which is the ultimate goal of MDA. The discussion would benefit from a greater analysis of this point: why is it so, what are the difficulties, what are the implications of not knowing the effect of CE?
- Ethical aspects of CE could be addressed more: including the importance of CE (and information campaigns mentioned) for autonomy and informed consent in MDA; the importance of large coverage to reach reduction of infection and importance of this to make intervention ethically sound, balancing out the benefit/risk ratio for the uninfected majority. Refer to literature on MDA ethics.
- Please discuss the framing of "free clinics" and "providing drinking water" as incentives to participation as these are basic human needs (and essential to the roll-out of the intervention)
Reviewer #3: Yes, but with caveats mentioned below.
**********

Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications?

Use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity. If the only modifications needed are minor and/or editorial, you may wish to recommend “Minor Revision” or “Accept”.
Reviewer #2: - Figure 1 lacks arrows to guide reader through the selection pathway (might be an issue of formatting), also consider including "title-abstract screening" and "full-text screening" to make distinction between steps explicit
- Figure 2 would be more readable and accurate as a bar chart
- Figure 4 is not referred to in the main text
- Figures 3 and 4 could be merged which would increase the strength of the figure
- Figure 5 needs reviewing, the given information is not understandable at first glace: this information can either be provided in the text, or the figure should be transformed into a histogram or similar with readable percentages
- A lot of abbreviations are introduced that are not used much and could be avoided to improve readability (e.g., DHA-PPQ, GMS etc.)
**********

Summary and General Comments

Use this section to provide overall comments, discuss strengths/weaknesses of the study, novelty, significance, general execution and scholarship. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. If requesting major revision, please articulate the new experiments that are needed.
Reviewer #2: This study is a scoping review about the use and contribution of community engagement in Mass Drug Administration (MDA) interventions. Authors focus on MDA conducted in the context of malaria and NTDs. Community engagement is a pivotal aspect to consider in MDA, both due to the ethical implications of delivering medication to people without prior diagnosis and due to the necessity of a large population coverage to reap the benefits of the measure. Moreover, the authors highlight a recent surge of publications on the topic of community engagement in MDA, which demands updated knowledge on these interventions. This research is highly needed to inform the design of MDA interventions. Authors present interesting results and a well-structured discussion that clearly articulates the relevance of results for Public Health and provides tangible recommendations.
However, in its current form, the study presents significant shortcomings. Firstly, the rationale for the scope of the study is unclear. The authors include MDA interventions for NTDs and malaria, without explaining the rationale for analysing them jointly. Goals of MDA and methods used differ according to the disease (please refer to the WHO NTD roadmap 2021-2030, which outlines NTDs amenable to MDA, including levels of targeted control - e.g., control/ eliminate/eradicate, drugs of choice and target populations). Moreover, for many NTDs, MDA is a well-established public health measure, that has been carried out for decades in at-risk communities, whereas MDA for malaria seems to be carried out more frequently in research studies, is less common and not the primary strategy used to tackle the disease in at-risk settings. This pivotal difference is not acknowledged nor discussed in the manuscript. Additionally, most examples used throughout the manuscript focus on MDA for malaria, with MDA for NTDs being seldom addressed (which is questionable, both scientifically and given the scope of this journal) Clarifying the scope and justification for the selection of diseases and interventions is essential to improve the quality and output of this study. Authors could consider the following options:
- Clarify why malaria and NTDs are grouped in the analysis, as MDA has different goals for these diseases and implementation contexts: why can these interventions be compared? Why are other MDAs excluded (e.g., Mass Drug Administration of Azithromycin to Children under Five Years of Age to Promote Child Survival)?
- Separate the analysis of malaria MDA and NTD MDA and compare the results
- Focus the analysis on malaria and discuss results against examples of NTD MDA
Other areas for general improvement include:
- Introduction structure and content: the introduction lacks a clear structure and flow, making it difficult to follow. Authors should reconsider and restructure the content of the introduction, to enable good understanding of the background and scope of this research. This links to the previous comment about the scoping of this review, which should be clearly explained in the introduction.
- Definitions: general definitions on which the research is based are missing. Both key concepts of the study, MDA and Community Engagement, are not clearly defined by the authors. Clarity on the definition used by the authors is essential to understand the study scope and methods (including the search strategy, making it reproducible) - this should be clarified early on in the introduction.
-A lot of sentences would benefit from being more specific, and key take-aways from the references should be made explicit - e.g., "Community-based participatory (CBP) intervention theory suggests that engaging community members as collaborators in the interventions to reduce health disparities is powerful on multiple levels" => please explain what levels
-Methods for data analysis should be detailed more, to enhance understanding and make the study reproducible
-Authors could consider discussing the ethical relevance of Community engagement in MDA in greater detail
Reviewer #3: Thank you for the opportunity to review the paper Community engagement in mass drug administration participatory interventions: a scoping review. The authors have evaluated how community engagement is done looking at this from the perspective of whether communities were “actively engaged”. MDA is an important tool for many diseases and coverage and equity are important factors, so this is an interesting topic and the last review was done nearly a decade ago.
Major comments
The first key finding mentioned is: “Adopting participatory frameworks that promote shared decision-making and deeper community involvement is essential to improve outcomes and reduce inequalities.” Where is the evidence from the scoping review to support this statement? Or, is this based on other sources or opinions, in which case it is not really a finding from the review itself.
Have the authors used an appropriate strategy for identifying the literature? They find list only 24 interventions across 20 countries, and most are recent. A quick search on PubMed using the terms “Mass drug administration” & participation, returns 695 results. Many of which do not appear in the scoping review but appear to be relevant. E.g. 10.1179/000349804X3135 10.1179/136485906X105598 . The term community engagement was not very common before the year 2000 https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22community+engagement%22&sort=date . Moreover, all the papers that were reviewed in detail are from the published literature. But mass drug administrations have been used for disease control and elimination for many decades. For example, Ivermectin has been used billions of times as part of MDA campaigns. There must be a huge grey literature on this?
The article concludes: “The findings emphasize the importance of context-specific approaches, especially in addressing local sociocultural dynamics and including marginalized populations. Future interventions should prioritize sustainable capacity-building and adopt participatory frameworks that promote shared decision-making. Addressing these challenges could enhance the effectiveness of MDA campaigns and improve health outcomes in affected communities.” This is an easy statement to agree with, and the authors aren’t the first people to have noticed this. But if tailored, participatory engagement is not widely done or reported, why might this be? Is it always practicable in trial contexts, is it cost-effective in national programmes? Has it been tried but it actually doesn’t make as much difference in practice as it does in theory? What are the key steps? Are MDAs being done by teams without cultural knowledge of local communities, or often by people with excellent knowledge and experience of working with the communities they are seeking to persuade to participate in the MDA. Are there examples of participatory CE where it hasn’t worked or is it an unalloyed good?
“Future interventions should prioritize sustainable, capacity-building approaches to maximize the effectiveness of CE in MDA efforts.” I agree, and expect most people who have been involved in conducting MDA would too. This scoping review appears to have been performed well and the findings are worth publishing, but the tone of the article is somewhat preachy and virtue-signalling, and this detracts from its impact. The point about participatory community engagement has been before, so I suggest the article would benefit from being toned down a bit.
The Author Summary begins “The persistence of a public health approach that exploits community approaches is confirmed in the MDA field.” Please rephrase this, it is very hard to follow. Actually, it would be worth having a native English speaker proof read the whole article, as many of the sentence constructions are odd.
Apologies if these comments seem overly peevish. Again, this is a worthwhile review, properly done, with findings that will be of interest to a wide audience.
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]

Figure resubmission:

While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step. If there are other versions of figure files still present in your submission file inventory at resubmission, please replace them with the PACE-processed versions.

Reproducibility:

?>
AttachmentSubmitted filename: ce.docx
10.1371/journal.pntd.0013737.r002Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version1
3 Jul 2025

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response Anouk 19062025.docx
10.1371/journal.pntd.0013737.r003Decision Letter 1
HorstickOlafAcademic Editor© 2025 Olaf Horstick2025Olaf Horstickhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
11 Aug 2025

Response to Reviewers
Revised Manuscript with Track Changes
Manuscript

Shaden Kamhawi
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
orcid.org/0000-0003-4304-636XX
Paul Brindley
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
orcid.org/0000-0003-1765-0002

Journal Requirements:

1) We have noticed that you have uploaded Supporting Information files, but you have not included a list of legends. Please add a full list of legends for your Supporting Information files after the references list.
2) We note that your Data Availability Statement is currently as follows: "All data underlying the findings described in the manuscript is available either within the manuscript itself or in the documents provided as supplementary information.". Please confirm at this time whether or not your submission contains all raw data required to replicate the results of your study. Authors must share the “minimal data set” for their submission. PLOS defines the minimal data set to consist of the data required to replicate all study findings reported in the article, as well as related metadata and methods (https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-minimal-data-set-definition).
For example, authors should submit the following data: 
1) The values behind the means, standard deviations and other measures reported;
2) The values used to build graphs;
3) The points extracted from images for analysis..
Authors do not need to submit their entire data set if only a portion of the data was used in the reported study.
If your submission does not contain these data, please either upload them as Supporting Information files or deposit them to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. For a list of recommended repositories, please see https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/recommended-repositories. 
If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially sensitive information, data are owned by a third-party organization, etc.) and who has imposed them (e.g., an ethics committee). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent. If data are owned by a third party, please indicate how others may request data access.
3) As required by our policy on Data Availability, please ensure your manuscript or supplementary information includes the following:
- A numbered table of all studies identified in the literature search, including those that were excluded from the analyses.
- For every excluded study, the table should list the reason(s) for exclusion.
- If any of the included studies are unpublished, include a link (URL) to the primary source or detailed information about how the content can be accessed.
- A table of all data extracted from the primary research sources for the systematic review and/or meta-analysis. The table must include the following information for each study:
  - Name of data extractors and date of data extraction
  - Confirmation that the study was eligible to be included in the review.
  - All data extracted from each study for the reported systematic review and/or meta-analysis that would be needed to replicate your analyses.
  - If data or supporting information were obtained from another source (e.g. correspondence with the author of the original research article), please provide the source of data and dates on which the data/information were obtained by your research group.
  - If applicable for your analysis, a table showing the completed risk of bias and quality/certainty assessments for each study or outcome.  Please ensure this is provided for each domain or parameter assessed. For example, if you used the Cochrane risk-of-bias tool for randomized trials, provide answers to each of the signalling questions for each study. If you used GRADE to assess certainty of evidence, provide judgements about each of the quality of evidence factor. This should be provided for each outcome.
  - An explanation of how missing data were handled.
This information can be included in the main text, supplementary information, or relevant data repository. Please note that providing these underlying data is a requirement for publication in this journal, and if these data are not provided your manuscript might be rejected.
4) Kindly revise your competing statement to align with the journal's style guidelines: 'The authors declare that there are no competing interests.'

Reviewers' comments:

Key Review Criteria Required for Acceptance?

As you describe the new analyses required for acceptance, please consider the following:

Methods

-Are the objectives of the study clearly articulated with a clear testable hypothesis stated?
-Is the study design appropriate to address the stated objectives?
-Is the population clearly described and appropriate for the hypothesis being tested?
-Is the sample size sufficient to ensure adequate power to address the hypothesis being tested?
-Were correct statistical analysis used to support conclusions?
-Are there concerns about ethical or regulatory requirements being met?
Reviewer #1: The objectives are clear
The study design is appropriate
Sample size is adequate.
Statistical test is fine.
No ethical consideration
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********

Results

-Does the analysis presented match the analysis plan?
-Are the results clearly and completely presented?
-Are the figures (Tables, Images) of sufficient quality for clarity?
Reviewer #1: Analsis is appropriate.
Results are clear
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********

Conclusions

-Are the conclusions supported by the data presented?
-Are the limitations of analysis clearly described?
-Do the authors discuss how these data can be helpful to advance our understanding of the topic under study?
-Is public health relevance addressed?
Reviewer #1: Conclusions are supported by data.
Limitations are stated.
The public healthrelevance is addressed.
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********

Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications?

Use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity. If the only modifications needed are minor and/or editorial, you may wish to recommend “Minor Revision” or “Accept”.
Reviewer #1: Accept
Reviewer #2: - Figure 1: in the box "References removed", heading "other reason", the number is missing
- Results, under the section "Qualitative data also reported factors associated with participation", one bracket is missing and one sentence is double (same meaning twice): "Knowledge was often identified as a significant factor in determining whether an individual would take the drug. Knowledge about the disease and awareness of the intervention was associated with taking the drug."
**********

Summary and General Comments

Use this section to provide overall comments, discuss strengths/weaknesses of the study, novelty, significance, general execution and scholarship. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. If requesting major revision, please articulate the new experiments that are needed.
Reviewer #1: The question raised in intial review has been addressed
Reviewer #2: The manuscript has significantly improved, especially the introduction and the discussion. The authors have well addressed the reviewers' comments.
A few minor suggestions for the authors' consideration:
- The article has a clear focus on malaria MDAs, as most publications selected were from this field and the examples taken in the results section are mostly malaria MDAs. Authors hint that this could be due to CE being most described in recent publications. The authors could clearly state and explain this focus on malaria in the introduction for more transparency with the reader.
- It seems that CE is a relatively new practice or concept described in publications on MDA. Why is it the case? It would be interesting to see this discussed.
- The authors are strongly favorable to active participation of MDA target populations in intervention design and evaluation (rather than being passive information recipients). This seems to be ethically and socially sound, but seems to not have been done frequently. Why is it the case? What could be barriers to implementing active participation in MDA interventions and how could these be overcome?
- In the discussion, authors state that “It would be interesting if malaria research teams interested in these evaluations could look at theory-based evaluation approaches or realist epistemology”. Please briefly explain the terms "theory-based evaluation approaches" and "realist epistemology" as these are not widely known.
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #1: Yes:  Kaliaperimal Karthikeyan
Reviewer #2: No
Figure resubmission:Reproducibility:--> -->-->To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that authors of applicable studies deposit laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols-->?>
10.1371/journal.pntd.0013737.r004Author response to Decision Letter 2
Submission Version2
14 Sep 2025

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response R2 21082025.docx
10.1371/journal.pntd.0013737.r005Decision Letter 2
HorstickOlafAcademic Editor© 2025 Olaf Horstick2025Olaf Horstickhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
10 Nov 2025

Dear MD Chouaïd,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'Community engagement in mass drug administration participatory interventions: a scoping review' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us now if you or your institution is planning to press release the article. All press must be co-ordinated with PLOS.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases.
Best regards,
Olaf Horstick, FFPH(UK)
Academic Editor
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
Sitara Ajjampur
Section Editor
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
Shaden Kamhawi
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
orcid.org/0000-0003-4304-636XX
Paul Brindley
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
orcid.org/0000-0003-1765-0002
***********************************************************
p.p1 {margin: 0.0px 0.0px 0.0px 0.0px; line-height: 16.0px; font: 14.0px Arial; color: #323333; -webkit-text-stroke: #323333}span.s1 {font-kerning: none
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Key Review Criteria Required for Acceptance?

As you describe the new analyses required for acceptance, please consider the following:

Methods

-Are the objectives of the study clearly articulated with a clear testable hypothesis stated?
-Is the study design appropriate to address the stated objectives?
-Is the population clearly described and appropriate for the hypothesis being tested?
-Is the sample size sufficient to ensure adequate power to address the hypothesis being tested?
-Were correct statistical analysis used to support conclusions?
-Are there concerns about ethical or regulatory requirements being met?
Reviewer #2: Accept
**********

Results

-Does the analysis presented match the analysis plan?
-Are the results clearly and completely presented?
-Are the figures (Tables, Images) of sufficient quality for clarity?
Reviewer #2: Accept
**********

Conclusions

-Are the conclusions supported by the data presented?
-Are the limitations of analysis clearly described?
-Do the authors discuss how these data can be helpful to advance our understanding of the topic under study?
-Is public health relevance addressed?
Reviewer #2: Accept
**********

Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications?

Use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity. If the only modifications needed are minor and/or editorial, you may wish to recommend “Minor Revision” or “Accept”.
Reviewer #2: Regarding our previous comment: "The article has a clear focus on malaria MDAs, as most publications selected were from this field and the examples taken in the results section are mostly malaria MDAs. Authors hint that this could be due to CE being most described in recent publications. The authors could clearly state and explain this focus on malaria in the introduction for more transparency with the reader.", we think that the authors misunderstood the point. Malaria MDA is overrepresented in this study, as compared with NTD MDA (the latter being clearly more frequently described in the literature, as it has been conducted for a longer time already). This is fine, as long as the authors:
(i) clearly state that this is the case
(ii) explain why this is the case. Our hypothesis is that CE is more present in malaria MDA literature (as compared to NTD MDA literature) because both malaria MDA and CE for MDA are relatively newly described. Older publications on NTD MDA might not describe CE because it was not relevant at that time... and maybe implementation lags behind compared to newly designed interventions, as are malaria MDAs.
**********

Summary and General Comments

Use this section to provide overall comments, discuss strengths/weaknesses of the study, novelty, significance, general execution and scholarship. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. If requesting major revision, please articulate the new experiments that are needed.
Reviewer #2: Accept
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #2: No
10.1371/journal.pntd.0013737.r006Acceptance letter
HorstickOlafAcademic Editor© 2025 Olaf Horstick2025Olaf Horstickhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Dear MD Chouaïd,
We are delighted to inform you that your manuscript, "Community engagement in mass drug administration participatory interventions: a scoping review," has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases.
We have now passed your article onto the PLOS Production Department who will complete the rest of the publication process. All authors will receive a confirmation email upon publication.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any scientific or type-setting errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. Note: Proofs for Front Matter articles (Editorial, Viewpoint, Symposium, Review, etc...) are generated on a different schedule and may not be made available as quickly.
Soon after your final files are uploaded, the early version of your manuscript will be published online unless you opted out of this process. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
For Research Articles, you will receive an invoice from PLOS for your publication fee after your manuscript has reached the completed accept phase. If you receive an email requesting payment before acceptance or for any other service, this may be a phishing scheme. Learn how to identify phishing emails and protect your accounts at https://explore.plos.org/phishing.
Thank you again for supporting open-access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases.
Best regards,
Shaden Kamhawi
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
Paul Brindley
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases