3815pheelsevierJournal of Biomedical InformaticsJ Biomed InformPMC1016394110163941101639413715639310.1016/j.jbi.2023.104382Lessons learned to enable question answering on knowledge graphs extracted from scientific publications: A case study on the coronavirus literature
Badenes-OlmedoCarlos CorchoOscar aComputer Systems Department, Campus Sur, s/n., Madrid, 28031, Madrid, SpainbArtificial Intelligence Department, Campus de Montegancedo, s/n., Boadilla del Monte, 28660, Madrid, Spain⁎Corresponding author.
652023142104382104382852023© 2023 The Author(s)Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.

## Abstract
The article presents a workflow to create a question-answering system whose knowledge base combines knowledge graphs and scientific publications on coronaviruses. It is based on the experience gained in modeling evidence from research articles to provide answers to questions in natural language. The work contains best practices for acquiring scientific publications, tuning language models to identify and normalize relevant entities, creating representational models based on probabilistic topics, and formalizing an ontology that describes the associations between domain concepts supported by the scientific literature. All the resources generated in the domain of coronavirus are available openly as part of the Drugs4COVID initiative, and can be (re)-used independently or as a whole. They can be exploited by scientific communities conducting research related to SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 and also by therapeutic communities, laboratories, etc., wishing to find and understand relationships between symptoms, drugs, active ingredients and their documentary evidence.
Keywords: Question-answering, Knowledge graphs, Ontology, Evidences

## Graphical abstract
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Nov 15; Revised 2023 Apr 14; Accepted 2023 May 3; Issue date 2023 Jun.

1.

## Introduction
In March 2020, with the emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic, worldwide institutions (e.g. the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy) called for the launch of initiatives for the release of scientific documents on coronaviruses and for the scientific community to start exploiting them to provide solutions to some of the urgent problems generated by the pandemic . Examples of these resource providers were the EU COVID-19 Data Portal, 
the LitCovid database, the Humandata 
collection focused on COVID-19 cases around the world, or the COVID-19 Open Research Dataset (CORD-19) , created by the Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence with all publicly available research related to COVID-19 and coronavirus (e.g. SARS, MERS, etc.) published during the last 50 years, with a huge increase during the pandemic years. These resources have proven to be valuable resources in document retrieval , , information extraction , , and knowledge management , tasks.
In the context of our research group, and in collaboration with the Madrid Health Service (Servicio Madrileño de Salud 
- SERMAS), we bootstrapped our work to make the scientific literature around coronaviruses useful in some of the immediate needs of hospital pharmacies, namely the case of extreme drug shortages, to find out effects or interactions between chemical substances documented in the scientific literature so that they can be used for urgent and temporary drug repurposing. Once this need became less relevant, we initiated the more sustained-in-time Drugs4Covid 
initiative to provide an up-to-date knowledge base on coronaviruses extracted from scientific publications collected in the CORD-19 corpus and additional biomedical semantic resources that can be queried using natural language. Our main objective was to provide tools and open data (following the principles of Open Science) that facilitate the extraction and use of knowledge from scientific literature for those users who do not have the time or resources to spend browsing through that type of literature given their type of job.
Now, this work presents the challenges associated with the evolution of the initial Drugs4Covid knowledge graph, which has been formalized with an ontology that describes evidence extracted from scientific publications from other existing ontologies, and with the creation of a natural language-based question-answering system that combines its content with other collections of scientific publications. Several research questions have been addressed throughout this process. The first research question is: “How to systematize the processing of scientific corpora to build knowledge graphs?”. Document ingestion and processing must be automated to continuously update resources (i.e. models and data) following changes in the document corpus. Next, we need to enable the extraction of information from scientific papers. Since we focus on articles on coronaviruses, we have to take into account problems that are well-known when dealing with the literature in this domain, such as variations in the naming of clinical terms. For example, the way drugs are mentioned may vary according to their brand name (e.g. Tylenol, Calpol), or their active ingredient (e.g. Paracetamol), or the therapeutic group to which they belong (e.g. Nervous System). The second research question that needs to be addressed is: “How to identify and standardize drugs, diseases and genes/proteins mentioned in scientific texts?”. We consider as evidence the paragraph where at least two entities, either drugs, diseases, or genes, are mentioned. This association, based on a joint mention, requires the use of a formal model where these entities are mentioned, with the assumption that this may imply some type of association. This brings us to the third research question: “How to formally describe evidence based on the association of drugs, diseases, genes and proteins mentioned in the same paragraph of a scientific article?”. The discovery of relationships between these elements allows not only searching for relevant documents, but also browsing a collection of articles through related texts. The fourth research question is then posed: “How to relate drugs and diseases from the paragraphs where they are mentioned?”. The information described by the ontology is then published in a knowledge graph, accessible via a specific query language (e.g. SPARQL on RDF content, or Cypher on graph-oriented databases). However, many users, such as clinical experts interested in this information, are not necessarily proficient in these technologies, which brings us to the fifth and last research question: “How to provide access to a knowledge graph, together with the content of a collection of scientific publications, through natural language queries?”. This fifth research question completes the motivation of this work and guides the presentation of the results.
This article describes the work that we have done to answer the 5 research questions. It organizes in stages the main tasks and good practices in extracting knowledge and representing it in KGs from unstructured data using natural language processing techniques, machine learning algorithms and semantic technologies. The main contributions, described in this article, are as follows:

•A workflow to enable access based on natural language queries to a knowledge graph built from scientific publications.
•A knowledge graph about evidence on drugs, diseases, genes, and proteins related to coronavirus created from scientific publications collected in the CORD-19 corpus. It is accessible via an RDF dump, 
a SPARQL endpoint 
and contains dereferenceable individual resources.
•A natural language-based question-answering interface whose knowledge base combines the knowledge graph created from the CORD-19 corpus with general-purpose knowledge graphs such as Wikidata and DBpedia. It is available as an online service. 

2.

## Workflow for the generation and exploitation of knowledge graphs from scientific publications
Knowledge Graphs (KG) have proven to be a valuable resource for organizing data and knowledge that can be extracted from document collections, and allowing a more effective exploration of these document resources, using Information Extraction (IE) and Information Retrieval (IR) techniques , . A systematic review was carried out to know how knowledge graphs (KG) are currently being built from the scientific literature related to COVID-19 . In some cases, the resources were linked to external databases, but there was no consensus on the vocabulary used to represent medical concepts , , , , , , . The most commonly used vocabularies were Uniprot, Gene Ontology, STRINGDB, DrugBank, IntAct, Protein Ontology, GTex, iPTMnet, CoV-AbDab, PharmGKB, Therapeutic Target Database, ChEMBL, Cellmap and PathwayCommons. One of the main conclusions is that there is no common methodology for the construction of knowledge graphs from the biomedical literature, but rather a series of steps or stages that coincide among existing works , , . The details of the steps taken to analyze documents and extract the information to create the knowledge graph are scarce and, on occasions, incomplete in the existing literature. Some steps were not described in sufficient detail, and others coincided in different works . There are reviews that detail the most common tasks associated with the construction of clinical knowledge graphs , , , but they do not take into account critical aspects to facilitate the update of results based on changes in the sources of information. Our goal is to define a workflow that is also valid when information update cycles are short. Specifically, since our experience with the CORD-19 corpus is based on one-week update cycles, we propose restrictions when designing workflows that help reduce the time required to update the results. In this sense, we avoid the use of learning models based on internal data and propose the use of models based on external data (e.g. BioNER trained with clinical ontologies). In general, it is advisable to use systems that are capable of adjusting to new increments of data, rather than requiring complete retraining (e.g. reverse paragraph index instead of supervised models to classify documents). Regarding exploitation services (e.g. QA system), avoiding structural dependencies of the data (e.g. based on extractive techniques instead of question templates) and those based on on-the-fly data collection strategies are recommended since they make decisions based on the current data available at execution time (e.g. extract the response from the verbalization of the properties associated with a resource retrieved from the KG).
We harmonized tasks associated with the construction of KGs with both the steps described in the literature and the considerations that we have taken into account in our work, generalizing the steps into 6 stages (see ), each responsible for performing a specific transformation on the original resources , and a last additional step to facilitate the exploitation of the KG. With the definition of these steps, we address the first research question “How to systematize the processing of scientific corpora to build knowledge graphs?”.
 The first stage, Harvesting, is responsible for data (document) collection. In this step, information sources are reviewed to identify new data and record deleted data. In the next stage, Preprocessing, the text documents (usually in PDF format) are transformed into more manageable formats (e.g. JSON) and their content is organized into sections and paragraphs. Information is then extracted from each of these paragraphs, this is the third stage, Information Extraction. The aim is to structure the text by incorporating annotations: entity identification, categorization, relationship discovery, etc. As a result, the paragraph is extended with additional information. Once we have annotated the text we give meaning to the information it contains, this is the Semantification stage. In this step we create the ontology that formally describes the domain that captures all the information extracted from the publications. It is crucial in this step to review existing ontologies in order to reuse and combine them, minimizing the creation of new resources. The next step is the KG generation. We create RDF triples from the instances (i.e. examples) extracted from the documents that are described by the ontology. These triples are organized in a repository and made available by means of a knowledge graph. Finally, the last step is the KG exploitation. An interface is created to facilitate the use of the KG by end user. This interface abstracts the complexity of formal query languages to simplify the retrieval of information from the generated KG.
The following sections detail each of the steps in the context of the Drugs4COVID initiative: how have they been addressed, what challenges have arisen and what are our recommendations to build a knowledge graph from biomedical literature on coronavirus.

3.

## Harvesting research literature on coronavirus (step 1)
In this first stage, the initial objective is to identify the most appropriate sources of information and validate the availability of their data. Once they have been discovered, the data is downloaded and further downloads are planned, depending on the periodicity of the changes.
We performed a systematic literature review to identify the datasets used when creating coronavirus knowledge graphs . The digital repositories that were explored were Pubmed, BioRxiv, MedRxiv and Scopus. Preprint databases were also considered to explore works pending of publication. The searches were conducted by searching terms in title or abstract. Specifically, the inclusion criteria can be summarized as follows:

•IC1: Text in English or Spanish.
•IC2: The words “covid”/”coronavirus”/”SARS-Cov” (regardless of upper or lower case) appears in either title or abstract.
•IC3: Text published between 2019 and 2022.
•IC4: The words “Knowledge Graph” (regardless of upper or lower case, or abbreviations) appear in either title or abstract.
•IC5: Text in the biomedical/computational biology/computer science fields.

Metadata of the documents returned in the search, such as title, doi, authors, venue, etc, was downloaded as csv files from the repositories. A total of 218 documents were retrieved. Then, they were scanned for duplicates by looking at duplicates either in the title or in the DOI through an R script. 13 duplicated articles were removed so 205 documents were left for further studying. Manual filtering was then carried out by removing duplicates and by a manual reviewing of the titles and abstracts in order to discard articles out of the scope of this review. The availability of the datasets mentioned in the articles was also checked. By following these criteria, from the 205 documents, only 14 texts were selected and subject of a narrower reading. Although selected, the texts could still be out of the scope of this review due to low information provided about the dataset used.
The sources for input covid publication data were CORD-19 corpus (50%), Pubmed (14%), LitCovid (14%), Targeting2019-nCoV (by GHDDI) (7%), University of Luxembourg Covid corpus (7%) and EuropePMC (7%). Moreover, additional unstructured data sources that do not contain covid-19 publications were also considered, these include clinical trials 
(14%), patents from the LENS dataset (7%), encyclopedic articles from Baidu Encyclopedia (7%), covid-related concepts from the Interactive Terminology for Europe (IATE) (7%), chemical information from the Cas content collection (7%) and SemMed annotations from the SemMedDB (7%). In some articles, the data collected was linked to other existing databases, however there is not a consensus on what databases to link. The most linked to databases are Uniprot (14%), Gene Ontology (14%), STRINGDB (14%) and DrugBank (14%). Other linked to databases include IntAct (7%), Protein Ontology (7%), GTex (7%), iPTMnet (7%), CoV-AbDab (7%), PharmGKB (7%), Therapeutic Target Database (7%), ChEMBL (7%), Cellmap (7%) and PathwayCommons (7%). However 57% did not link the data to any other database or at least did not mention to do so in the texts.
Taking into account the results of the review, we considered the CORD-19 corpus 
as our main source of knowledge. Starting with the April 2020 edition, with 60,702 scientific articles and 2,103,891 paragraphs, and until the last edition available in June 2022, with 401,270 scientific articles and more than 7 million paragraphs, we have periodically downloaded new editions of the corpus to update our knowledge base. It should be noted that each edition does not contain only the new publications, but contains all scientific articles to date. This brings the challenge of identifying the incremental dataset to avoid downloading and pre-processing the entire dataset. Since each article in CORD-19 has a unique identifier backed by SemanticScholar, we also used that code to recognize new articles and create incremental datasets. For example, the identifier of the article “Prediction of long-term kinetics of vaccine-elicited neutralizing antibody and time-varying vaccine-specific efficacy against the SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant by clinical endpoint” is 0dc3c166fe725b4bf05f48653d7c9c76d15e68a9, which makes it available online. 
That code is also the unique identifier of that article in our knowledge base, 
so that with each new edition of the corpus we avoid processing the data associated with that article.

4.

## Pre-processing of scientific publications (step 2)
The aim at this stage is to store the content of scientific publications in document-oriented databases in a way that facilitates the retrieval and annotation of information. The articles in the CORD-19 corpus are available in PDF and JSON format, so the parsing step is not necessary in this dataset.
A document is the minimum text unit. Since we work with evidence based on the joint mention of two drugs, diseases, genes and/or proteins, it is not appropriate to consider the entire article as a document. Two drugs may be mentioned, for example, one at the beginning of the article reviewing the literature and one at the end of the article showing the results of the experiment, making it unlikely that they are related. In the same way, not every sentence of the article can be considered a document, since relevant resources may appear mentioned through references (i.e. pronouns). For that reason we consider the paragraph as the minimum unit of text. Our documents in the database correspond to paragraphs in scientific publications. Along with the text of the paragraph we store the article to which it belongs and the section where it appears. In addition, we also consider the scientific article itself a document, but only with respect to its meta-information (e.g. authors, title, publication date).
We have created two indexes by type of information (i.e. type of document): one with the meta-information of the articles, and the other with the paragraphs extracted from the scientific publications. 
Both datasets are used as our knowledge base. The source code of our pre-processing pipeline is available online. 

5.

## Biomedical information extraction (step 3)
The CORD-19 corpus is a continuously growing corpus that contains coronavirus-related research (e.g. SARS, MERS, etc.) published during the last fifty years. This dataset provides full-text research papers in PDF and JSON format, which can be used as a source of information to extract knowledge related to infection and disease. At the last edition (June 2022), it was composed of 401,270 scientific articles retrieved from PubMed Central, a corpus maintained by the World Health Organization (WHO), bioRxiv, and medRxiv preprints. This large amount of biomedical literature needs to be properly managed to facilitate and promote its use by health professionals. Natural Language Processing (NLP) facilitates document analysis by extracting key information from underlying texts and turning them into structured knowledge that humans can understand . One of the main NLP tasks is the recognition of relevant entities found in texts, commonly known as Named Entity Recognition (NER) . This task enables the exploration of texts guided by key terms and the discovery of relationships between them. The NER task identifies meaningful terms in a domain, called named entities, and classifies them into predefined entity classes .
In the biomedical domain, entities are medical concepts such as drugs, diseases, or gene mutations, and the recognition task is more specifically known as BioNER. Entities can also be classified according to existing taxonomies to avoid ambiguity, in a task commonly known as Entity Linking or Named Entity Normalization (NEN) and, when applied in the biomedical domain, Bio-NEN . It should be noted that the same drug may be mentioned under a different trade name. The methodologies applied in BioNER have evolved over the years to reach the current state of the art, which is mainly based on the use of language models (e.g. BERT) that are pre-trained in the biomedical domain to specify their underlying knowledge , , .
We have fine-tuned the BioBERT model, to identify and normalize named entities for each of the following biomedical classes: diseases, chemicals, and genetics . Separate models were implemented (see ) since the experts’ models were proven to behave better on each task for its fine-tuned task than combining several entity classes on the same task and obtaining only one model . The results of the different BERT-based models suggest that the more specific the model is, the better the results will be obtained for this specific task. Separate models capture better patterns within each of the entity classes, allowing one to maximize its tagging performance, resulting in a system with the better model possible for each of the entities. Therefore, one model has been fine-tuned for disease entities, another for chemical entities, and another for genes/proteins. The way the normalization process has been addressed is through an inverted index. Once we have recognized a medical term (e.g. Hydroxychloroquine), we search for a unique representation of the concept from a set of related terms composed using multiple information sources (e.g. D006886(MeSH) or P01BA02(ATC)). Each entity type has its own database (i.e index). With the creation of these models to identify and standardize the clinical entities mentioned in scientific articles, we address the second research question “How to identify and standardize drugs, diseases and genes/proteins mentioned in scientific texts?”.
 Multiple sources were taken into account in each of the classes of entities, mainly from BioPortal ontologies, but also from the Comparative Toxicogenomics Database 
and PubChem. 
Four different sources were merged in the same index to normalize the disease terms based on the mappings between their codes and the medical terms used to represent them: Medical Subject Headings 
(MeSH), a thesaurus with hierarchical and controlled vocabulary on diseases-related terms produced by the National Library of Medicine (NLM); CTD’s MEDIC disease vocabulary, 
a modified subset of the “Diseases” branch of the NLM’s MeSH, combined with genetic disorders from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database; The Human Disease Ontology (DOID) , a comprehensive knowledge base of inherited, developmental and acquired human diseases that integrates terms from a wide range of medical vocabularies such as MeSH, SNOMED, NCI and OMIM; and the International Classification of Diseases 
(ICD-10), a hierarchical classification listed by the World Health Organization (WHO) in which are encoded a wide range of signs, symptoms, abnormal findings, causes of damage, diseases, and/or other disease-related terms.
Five sources were considered to merge chemical terms into a shared index. The main objective was to capture the wide range of possible chemical mentions that this entity class can support: PubChem, 
the largest open chemistry database in the world maintained by the National Institute of Health (NIH); ChEBI, 
a chemical database focused on small chemical components of molecular entities that complements other types of terms considered in the rest of the sources; MeSH - Chemicals, since it also includes thousands of terms related to chemical terms; CTD - Chemicals, with terms from additional chemical sources; and the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) classification, 
where pharmacological substances are organized in therapeutic levels.
And finally, four sources were considered for genetic terms. This entity class is composed of a broad semantic type since it includes both gene-related terms and proteins. They are close semantic types, and even in some occasions the use of the same expressions is diffuse: The knowledge base underlying the Gene Ontology (GO) , the largest source for the functions of genes; the Ontology of Genes and Genomes (OGG) , which collects genes and genomes of certain organisms such as humans, viruses, and bacteria; the Protein Ontology (PR) , with a wide range of protein-related entities along with relations between them; and the CTD - Genes, which contains a vocabulary retrieved from multiple sources with a great variety of genes in multiple species.
The developed BioNER + BioNEN system was used to identify and normalize the drugs, diseases, and genetic terms mentioned in the CORD-19 corpus. Entity recognition and normalization was performed for each paragraph of the scientific article . A first group of labels was created to identify the medical terms as they appear in the text (i.e. diseases_ss, chemicals_ss, genetics_ss), and in a standardized way (i.e. disease_terms_ss, chemical_terms_ss, genetic_terms_ss). In the case of diseases and genes/proteins, a predefined category was also established during the normalization process (i.e. disea se_types_ss, genetic_types_ss). The following group of labels contains the codes for each of the classification systems described in the previous section (i.e. mesh_codes_ss, atc_codes_ss, cid_co des_ss, doid_codes_ss, cui_codes_ss, icd10_codes_ss, icd9_codes_ss, gard_codes_ss, snomed_codes_ss, nci_c odes_ss, ncbi_codes_ss, uniprot_codes_ss). shows an annotated paragraph with drugs and diseases.
 We evaluate the performance of the model to identify and normalize diseases, chemicals, and genetic information. The BC5CDR-Diseases dataset , with around 13,000 annotations, and the NCBI-Diseases dataset , with almost 7000, were the corpora used to recognize diseases. For chemical entities, the two selected datasets were BC4CHEMD and BC5CDR-Chemic als with around 80,000 and 15,000 entities respectively. The largest annotated corpus, BioSemantics , was not considered since it is based on patents which could slightly differ from biomedical articles that are the kind of texts in which our system is focused on. The gene and protein entities were jointly considered since they belong to similar semantic types. This consideration is widely adopted in most existing corpus, which considers them together . The pair of selected data sets was JNLPBA and BC2GM , which offer around 35,000 and 25,000 annotations respectively. shows the performance of our model compared to state-of-the-art models in the identification of biomedical entities, such as diseases, drugs, and proteins.
 The performance provided by our model is evaluated in terms of macro-average f-measure (F1), as the harmonic mean between precision (accuracy) and recall (coverage). Macro-avg metrics first calculate each metric separately for each entity class, and then average them, so that all entity classes are treated equally. It should be noted that the evaluation datasets do not assume overlap in the identification of entities. For example, in the following sentence: “p53 mutant pancreatic cancer cells and in all of the isogenic cancer cell lines” only two disease-type entities are noted: ’p53 mutant pancreatic cancer’ and ’isogenic cancer’. However, there is unidentified genetic information (p53 and isogenic). Our model is able to handle both situations, offering entities ‘composed’ of other entities, and each of the entities separately. However, the presence of discontinuous terms requiring co-reference resolution has not been taken into account. This is something that is not currently supported by the proposed system. The results show a slightly worse performance of our model compared to the rest of the models. At this stage, it is more advisable to create independent models specialized in a specific type of entities. We conclude that most of the errors were observed due to incorrect detection of the boundaries of the entity.

6.

## Semantification of associations between biomedical concepts (step 4)
The aim at this stage is to provide meaning to the information extracted in the previous stage. We have so far made annotations in the paragraphs of scientific publications. Once this step is completed, we will have an ontology that describes the associations between drugs, diseases, genes, and proteins that we have discovered from those annotations. This task is before publication in a knowledge graph, so we first have to identify the requirements to describe the biomedical concepts involved and what elements describe the associations between them expressed as evidence extracted from scientific publications.
Several efforts have been made to integrate biomedical knowledge into a single shared representation space , . One of the most recent works is DISNET, 
which provides researchers with a platform that allows the creation of complex multilayer graphs following the concepts of human disease networks (HDNs) . This system aims to provide a better understanding of disease and generate new drug repurposing hypotheses by bringing together heterogeneous information including large-scale biomedical data integrated from structured and unstructured sources into a knowledge base. Despite efforts to build a comprehensive and unified biomedical resource, these resources sometimes lack traceability. Users of these resources need to know where each piece of information comes from and what evidence supports it. Completing resources with these metadata can greatly improve decision making, which is particularly important in the biomedical domain and one of the goals we set ourselves at the Drugs4Covid project.
To address the third research question: “How to formally describe evidence based on the association of drugs, diseases, genes and proteins mentioned in the same paragraph of a scientific article?” we have created the EBOCA 
ontology where the Evidence for BiOmedical Concepts Association is modeled. The ontology describes (i) concepts in the biomedical domain and associations between them and (ii) the evidence supporting these associations. With this ontology, we define the conceptual model on which the Drugs4Covid knowledge graph 
is built, a complete semantic resource based on DISNET biomedical knowledge that contains associations automatically extracted from scientific articles and other sources enriched with metadata about the evidence that supports them.
The Evidences for BiOmedical Concepts Association Ontology (EBOCA) ontology is composed of two modules, one oriented toward describing biomedical concepts and associations, EBOCA SEM-DISNET, 
and the other focused on representing evidence of these associations with metadata and provenance information, EBOCA Evidences 
( ).
 The link between EVIDENCES and SEM-DISNET modules is established by means of the association class (sio:SIO_000897), which collects all types of associations between drugs, diseases, genes, and proteins. Note that an association is a relationship between two elements. These associations can have supporting evidence that can be computationally inferred (obo:ECO_0007672) or extracted from curated sources (obo:ECO_0006151). The evidence representation also supports the date of creation (pav:createdOn) and update (pav:lastUpdatedOn), the version (pav:version), and created with software (dc:software) or by an agent (foaf:Agent). The provenance could be paragraphs (doco:Paragraph), extracted from documents and from which evidence is derived (pav:derivedFrom). Paragraphs are composed of expressions (fabio:Expression) that can be uniquely identified and include further attributes to describe them (e.g. the section to which the paragraphs belong and the full text; title, abstract, and URL for documents). The scope of this module is limited to describing the provenance of evidence when extracted from curated texts and resources. As the EBOCA ontology grows and adds more different types of evidence extraction method, its representation model will also evolve.
The development of the Evidence for BiOmedical Concepts Association Ontology (EBOCA) ontology has followed the guidelines of the Linked Open Terms (LOT) methodology , which in turn is based on the NeOn methodology , to cover the four main stages in the development of ontologies and vocabularies: Requirements Specification, Implementation, Publication, and Maintenance. For the conceptualization of the ontology, the Chowlk visual notation was used and implemented in OWL 2 with Protégé. The evaluation has been performed using (i) SPARQL and Themis queries to validate the requirements, (ii) OOPS! to identify modeling errors and (iii) Pellet and HermiT reasoners to check for inconsistencies. The documentation has been created with Widoco , and is accessible through the W3ID URI (https://w3id.org/eboca/evidences and https://w3id.org/eboca/sem-disnet).
The evaluation of an ontology seeks to identify inconsistencies or formal errors that invalidate its definition. However, since this work is oriented to the creation of a knowledge graph from a collection of scientific articles, it is more interesting to focus on an evaluation that measures the coverage of the ontology to a set of competency questions. A list of 15 questions associated with the EBOCA SEM-DISNET module 
and 10 competency questions associated with the EBOCA Evidences module 
have been defined. To ensure that the ontology modules met those requirements, test data was transformed into RDF, building a small Knowledge Graph (KG), which was used to run the corresponding SPARQL queries related to the competency questions. For the EBOCA SEM-DISNET module, as the original relational database scales to large amounts of data, we decided to use a subset of the entirety of DISNET information to generate the KG. We included several concepts and some of their associations. These concepts were diseases, genes, drugs, and pathways. In terms of associations, data corresponding to disease–gene, disease–variant, disease–drug, gene–variant, gene–pathway, and drug–drug associations were transformed into RDF. For the EBOCA Evidences module, data from biomedical concepts extracted from 5000 paragraphs of the CORD-19 corpus were used to build the KG test. The Named Entity Recognition and Normalization system described in Step 3 (BioNER+BioNEN), was used to identify diseases, drugs, and genetic terms. Thus, the associations of the extracted terms were transformed and annotated with metadata about their evidence and provenance. The SPARQL queries created from the competency questions were run in a Blazegraph 
instance with success.

7.

## Knowledge graph generation (step 5)
This is the last step of the workflow. It aims to publish the knowledge graph. We have formally described the evidence as associations between biomedical concepts in the previous section. Now we have to identify, from the annotations made in the paragraphs, what associations exist to create instances, i.e. examples of those types of association that we have described in the ontology. We consider every paragraph where two biomedical concepts are mentioned, either drugs, diseases, genes or proteins, as evidence in the EBOCA ontology and an instance is created in the knowledge graph. In addition, we have explored the representation based on probabilistic topics to discover new relationships between these concepts.
Some text mining algorithms represent documents in a common feature space that is abstracted from the specific sequence of words used in each document. That is, they treat documents as bags of words. With appropriate representations, the analysis of relationships between documents is facilitated even when they are written with different vocabularies. We have created probabilistic topic models, widely used to discover the latent semantic structure of text corpora, to represent documents as a mixture of topics or topics that are, in turn, described by probability distributions over words . This facilitates the exploration of large document collections, such as CORD-19, since documents can be represented in a low-dimensional vector space, i.e. they are described by a small number of topics. Furthermore, the representation of scientific articles is abstracted from the words themselves, since they are described by topics that emerge as density distributions of the vocabulary used in the texts. We address the fourth research question, “How to relate drugs and diseases from the paragraphs where they are mentioned?”, with these vector-based representations since they enable the search for relationships between clinical entities by considering distances and similarities between their values.
The supervised LabeledLDA technique was used to force the definition of topics based on the clinical entities previously identified in the text. Specifically, the topic model created represents the drugs based on the paragraphs in which they are mentioned. But instead of sticking to a single term per drug, we took advantage of the standardization offered by the BioNER+NEN system for identifying the biomedical entities described in Section , to assign each topic a correspondence with the ATC code of the drug. In this way, the paragraphs where a drug is mentioned (in association with the ATC code, either active ingredient or brand name) are used to infer the most representative terms for each topic. We have made use of the librAIry framework to create and refine the probabilistic topic model, which is available through an online REST interface. 
 shows the most relevant terms for some of the active ingredients described as probabilistic topics.
 We have created an API that allows browsing the corpus using drugs or diseases as input, either to search for articles or paragraphs where it is mentioned, or to discover active substances or related diseases taking into account the topic-based representation. For example, the symptoms or diseases related to Chloroquine are available through <bio-api>/diseases?keywords=chloroquine, 
and medicines related to Lopinavir are available at <bio-api>/drugs?
keywords=lopinavir. 

Once we have the associations, i.e. evidence, between biomedical concepts through annotated paragraphs (Section ) or topic models (previous section), we are able to create instances according to the EBOCA ontology (Section ) to populate the knowledge graph. The mapping rules between the annotations and the ontology resources were created with Mapeathor and carried out by the Morph-kgc library . The articles were then described by the ontology in an RDF file. Finally, GraphDB was chosen to store the RDF content and provide the knowledge graph. Each RDF file generated on a given date is stored in a named network within the same Graph DB repository. The knowledge graph is available at https://drugs4covid.oeg.fi.upm.es/rdf and the SPARQL access point for queries at https://drugs4covid.oeg.fi.upm.es/sparql.

8.

## Knowledge graph exploitation (step 6)
We have considered an additional step to facilitate access to the resources created in this work, especially the knowledge graph. There are multiple ways to exploit a KG: predefined SPARQL queries, guided document searches, question-answering systems, etc. Our proposal is a question–answer (QA) system based on natural language. Such interfaces do not require the user to be an expert in a particular query language in order to explore an information base, but rather the questions and answers are formulated in natural language. We thus address the fifth and final research question “How to provide access to a knowledge graph, together with the content of a collection of scientific publications, through natural language queries?”.
Question–answer systems typically address three main tasks , : (1) question analysis, (2) information retrieval, and (3) answer extraction. First, they classify the question (e.g., factual, hypothetical, or cause–effect), the relevant entities within the question (e.g., a person or an organization), and the type of answer expected (e.g., Boolean, literal, numeric). Secondly, they review the information sources (e.g. databases or documents) against the previously identified entities. And finally, they provide the answer to the question based on the relevant texts found and the type of answer. With the emergence of knowledge graphs and their widespread adoption, many QA systems have also adapted to this graph-oriented context, giving rise to Knowledge Graph Question Answering Systems (KGQA). Information is now retrieved from graphs instead of documents or relational databases, and the methods commonly used in QA tasks are adapted to the particularities of graphs.
One of the main challenges in the design of the KGQA system is semantic analysis. In this step, the natural language query is translated into a specific query language (e.g. SPARQL for RDF-based KGs, or Cypher for graph-oriented databases). KGQA systems typically use templates with placeholders for the relationships and entities to be identified in the original query . Once the template is filled in, the query (in SPARQL, Cypher, etc.) is evaluated in the system that stores the KG (e.g. Triple store) and the results will provide the answers to the question. Thus, KGQA systems can be reduced to entity and relationship search processes that populate predefined query templates that are commonly identified using supervised machine learning techniques (e.g. supervised classifiers). This approach is heavily based on the data schema to explore relationships between entities and on the availability of training data to create supervised classification models. Mitigating the dependence of KGQA systems on the underlying data structure and eliminating the need for training sets is crucial to create cross-cutting solutions more efficiently and at lower cost.
We have developed a hybrid system that allows us to extract the answer by combining information from knowledge graphs and documents. It is a novel KGQA algorithm that works without prior training (i.e. no need to create a learning model from the content of the knowledge graph) and generates natural language answers without the need to translate the question into a formal query language. Our method combines Extractive Question Answering (EQA) and Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques with one or more knowledge graphs and even unstructured data sources to create natural language answers to natural language questions. The system supports single-fact questions (i.e. one subject entity, one relation, and one object entity), also known as single-hop questions, and can also handle multi-hop questions (i.e., more than one relation) through an iterative process after splitting the question into single-hop questions [25] [26]. Our method provides brief evidence (i.e. textual content and punctuation) to explain each of the answers obtained.
Our QA system is based on three steps, as shown in . Summary generation (summarization), to create a context from the question, or sub-questions in the case of decomposing a multi-hop question. Evidence extraction, to identify and sort evidence containing candidate answers. And finally, answer generation to create one or more final answers. The creation of summaries requires a prior step in identifying key terms in the question. Along with the recognition of named entities (drugs, diseases, genes and proteins), we use the identification of parts of speech (nouns, verbs, adjectives, etc.) to identify key terms. We retrieve resources, in case of using knowledge graphs and texts, when working with document-oriented databases, related to those key terms, either since they are mentioned (texts) or since they are related to the name (resources). Resources are transformed to text by verbalizing their properties and are joined to the rest of the texts retrieved from the document-oriented database. The texts are then broken down into smaller paragraphs to create a context for querying using a language model. This is known as Extractive Question Answering. The context is combined with the question, and the model extracts the answer from that context. Once the evidence (sentence or paragraph) with the highest confidence to answer the question has been identified, the final answer is constructed taking into account the type of question (numeral, literal, or logical). It should be noted that this system is especially sensitive to the words used in the search. Its internal logic is based on mentions of the key concepts identified in the question. For example, when asking for ’What medicine has been used to treat Long COVID?’, it considers ‘medicine’ and ’Long COVID’ to be keywords in the question, and performs a search in both the KG and the corpus filtering resources based on both terms. This behavior leads to obtaining as the most relevant resources those that mention both concepts. The results in this scenario are related to ’traditional medicine to treat Long Covid’, and therefore the answer obtained is ‘acupuncture’. However, if the question is rephrased as ’Which is the treatment of Long-COVID-19?’, the answers obtained are ’beta-blockers’ and ’intervention studies with HO1 agonists’. We are aware of the limitations of the current QA system and are working to improve it to provide higher quality answers and support more complex questions.
 The QA system has been evaluated against the SimpleQuestions dataset , the de facto benchmark for evaluating simple questions over knowledge graphs. It focuses on questions that can be answered via the lookup of a single fact (e.g. “Which is the treatment of long-COVID-19?”). This dataset has been mapped to Wikidata in the SimpleQuestionsWikidata 
dataset, and to DBpedia in the SimpleDBpediaQA 
dataset. We used both the SimpleDBpediaQA and SimpleQuestionsWikidata datasets in our evaluation, and created the natural language answers from the SPARQL queries that they propose . In order to evaluate the quality of the answers we have applied the most commonly used metric in QA over Knowledge Graphs based on precision, recall and f-Measure (F1). compares the performance of our method with other state-of-the-art approaches such as STaG-QA , SYGMA and Falcon 2.0 . While Falcon 2.0 is not a KGQA system itself, it allows generating the SPARQL query based on the entities and relations it identifies . Results show that our approach offers a performance close to the best system, STaG-QA, and better than other approaches specific to KGQA. However, one of the weak points is the recall, which means that our approach has to improve in response elaboration. The answer is perhaps too straightforward, and we should be concerned with constructing more complex responses.

 
9.

## Final results and conclusion
 summarizes the steps we have followed to build a knowledge graph from scientific publications on coronaviruses in the context of the Drugs4Covid initiative. It details the challenges we have had to overcome at each step, as well as the recommendations we suggest to overcome them. It is based on our experience, which we hope will be useful for building new knowledge graphs in similar settings.
 Not all steps are equally generalizable. We can distinguish three levels of generalization: high, medium, and low. A high generalization step does not require any adaptation if applied to a different domain. This is the case for the first step, Harvesting, and the fifth step, Knowledge Graph Generation. Both steps do not require additional or domain-specific tasks, but rather specific to an information source (in the case of Harvesting) or a specific mapping rule (in the case of KG generation). The medium generalization steps require a little adaptation to the domain. This is the case of the second step, pre-processing, which depending on the domain may require small formatting tasks, but without being domain-specific. And it is also the case for the last step KG Exploitation, since the language model used to extract the answers should be adjusted to cover the special characteristics of the language used in that domain. Finally, the steps with low generalization are those that require strong changes to adjust to a specific domain. We are talking about the third step, Information Extraction, which requires domain-specific models to identify entities and extract possible relationships between them. Furthermore, the fourth step, Semantification, is completely dependent on the domain and its development will require the knowledge of the ontologies that describe the interactions of the main concepts of that domain.
It is also important to highlight the limitations of our proposal. On the one hand, the performance of identifying and normalizing jointly the drugs, diseases, genes and proteins mentioned in the texts has been shown to be slightly lower, in terms of micro- and macro-average (see ), than that offered by other more specific identification tools. This behavior suggests the use of specialized named entity identification systems by entity type for each of the clinical resources to be supported in the knowledge graph. However, it should be noted that the joint information extraction approach is able to identify overlaps between entities, unlike the more specific approaches. For example, by identifying “p53” and “isogenic” as separate entities, along with “p53 mutant pancreatic cancer” and “isogenic cancer” in the phrase “p53 mutant pancreatic cancer cells and in all of the isogenic cancer cell lines”. Future work in this line seeks to decompose the entities identified independently in the texts into more concrete entities in order to enrich the information stored in the knowledge graph with different levels of detail.
On the other hand, the natural language support offered by our QA system is limited to the ability to transform the triplets stored in the knowledge graph into text. Our system is over-sensitive to the terms used in the query, since it relies on matching the keywords used in the query with the existing resources in the KG (see ). Thanks to recent advances in conversational systems (e.g. ChatGPT), and the modular approach of our workflow, future work in this line will address the incorporation of a conversational language model to verbalize the information contained in the KG and project the question and answer into a common semantic space. In this way, the relevance of the key terms used in the query could be relaxed, since the question will be used as a whole to identify the relevant KG resources for its answer.
The website that offers all the resources, tools, data and services created in the context of this work is available at https://drugs4covid.oeg.fi.upm.es. It offers a biomedical entity identification and standardization service, a drug search engine and a natural language question-answering system. It also publishes a SPARQL access point to access the knowledge graph, as well as the RDF dump of its content, and the dereference of its resources. The datasets and source code used and developed in the context of this work are also available.
However, in the specific case of Drugs4Covid, after initial contacts with clinical domain experts, the feeling is that the natural language-based interface is not sufficient for them to take advantage of the benefits offered by the combined use of natural language processing techniques, machine learning algorithms and semantic technologies to extract knowledge from large collections of scientific publications. We need to work on bringing the interfaces closer to their needs. In particular, our next goal is to offer the knowledge graph evidence in an assisted way guided by clinical texts, not only extracting answers to clinical questions, but also enriching technical texts with evidence from our knowledge graph.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Carlos Badenes-Olmedo: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Formal analysis, Investigation, Resources, Data curation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Visualization, Supervision, Project administration. Oscar Corcho: Validation, Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition.

## Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: Carlos Badenes-Olmedo reports financial support was provided by Fundación BBVA.

## Acknowledgment
This work is supported by the DRUGS4COVID++ project , funded by Ayudas Fundación BBVA a equipos de investigación científica SARS-CoV-2 COVID-19.

1https://www.covid19dataportal.org.
2https://data.humdata.org/event/covid-19.
3https://www.comunidad.madrid/servicios/salud.
4https://drugs4covid.oeg.fi.upm.es/.
8clinicaltrials.org.
9https://allenai.org/data/cord-19.
10https://api.semanticscholar.org/v1/paper/0dc3c166fe725b4bf05f48653d7c9c76d15e68a9.
11http://librairy.linkeddata.es/solr/cord19-papers/select?q=id:0dc3c166fe725b4bf05f48653d7c9c76d15e68a9.
12http://librairy.linkeddata.es/solr/#/cord19-papers/core-overview.
13http://librairy.linkeddata.es/solr/#/cord19-paragraphs/core-overview.
14https://github.com/drugs4covid/knowledge-acquisition.
15http://bioportal.bioontology.org.
16http://ctdbase.org.
17https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov.
18https://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh.
19https://ctdbase.org/.
20https://www.who.int/standards/classifications.
21https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/.
22https://www.ebi.ac.uk/chebi.
23https://www.whocc.no.
24https://disnet.ctb.upm.es.
25https://w3id.org/eboca/portal.
26https://drugs4covid.oeg.fi.upm.es/sparql.
27https://w3id.org/eboca/sem-disnet.
28https://w3id.org/eboca/evidences.
29https://drugs4covid.github.io/EBOCA-portal/requirements/requirements-semdisnet.html.
30https://drugs4covid.github.io/EBOCA-portal/requirements/requirements-evidences.html.
31https://blazegraph.com/.
32http://librairy.linkeddata.es/covid19-model.
33https://librairy.linkeddata.es/bio-api.
34https://librairy.linkeddata.es/bio-api/diseases?keywords=chloroquine.
35https://librairy.linkeddata.es/bio-api/drugs?keywords=lopinavir.
36https://github.com/askplatypus/wikidata-simplequestions.
37https://github.com/castorini/SimpleDBpediaQA.

5https://drugs4covid.oeg.fi.upm.es/rdf.
6https://drugs4covid.oeg.fi.upm.es/sparql.
7https://drugs4covid.oeg.fi.upm.es/services/bio-qa.

## References