pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC10420352PMC10420352.110420352104203523756659310.1371/journal.pone.0288920PONE-D-22-173211Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesViral DiseasesCovid 19Biology and Life SciencesPhysiologyImmune PhysiologyCytokinesBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyImmune SystemInnate Immune SystemCytokinesMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyImmune SystemInnate Immune SystemCytokinesBiology and Life SciencesDevelopmental BiologyMolecular DevelopmentCytokinesBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryGlycobiologyGlycosylaminesNucleosidesAdenosinePhysical SciencesChemistryChemical ElementsOxygenBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyBody FluidsBloodBlood PlasmaMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyBody FluidsBloodBlood PlasmaBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyBody FluidsBloodBlood PlasmaMedicine and Health SciencesPulmonologyMedical HypoxiaMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancer TreatmentCytokine TherapyBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCell PhysiologyCell ActivationRegadenoson for the treatment of COVID-19: A five case clinical series and mouse studies
Regadenoson for the treatment of COVID-19RabinJosephInvestigationSupervisionWriting – review & editing ZhaoYungeConceptualizationData curationInvestigationMethodologyVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing MostafaEzzatData curationWriting – review & editing Al-SuqiManalProject administration FleischmannEmilyData curation https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0459-2336ConawayMark R.Formal analysisSoftware MannBarbara J.InvestigationValidation https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2229-3479ChhabraPreetiFormal analysisMethodology BraymanKenneth L.Data curationMethodology KrupnickAlexanderData curationInvestigation LindenJoelConceptualizationFunding acquisitionSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9921-0598LauChristine L.ConceptualizationFunding acquisitionSupervisionWriting – review & editing 1
Department of Surgery, Division of Thoracic, University of Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America2
Department of Public Health Sciences, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, United States of America3
Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, United States of America4
Department of Surgery, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, United States of AmericaChenetteEmilyEditor files and the supplemental data files.OutbreaksCOVID-19

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the manuscript, its files and the supplemental data files.

## Introduction
Infection with Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Corona Virus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) caused Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Most infected people exhibited a rapid IFN-1 response that controlled viral replication [ ]. In some cases, persistence of the delta-variant that was common in the US at that time of this study in 2021 was associated with lung inflammation and injury [ ]. Hospitalization was required in 1–3% of infected unvaccinated individuals. Hospitalized patients usually exhibited hypoxia and other systemic responses including procoagulant state, cytokine storm and epithelial barrier dysfunction [ ]. About 20% of hospitalized patients progressed to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), which carried a 75% mortality rate [ ]. Anti-inflammatory treatment strategies have been targeted to COVID-19 patients who exhibit lung inflammation. These treatments include steroids [ ] and agents that selectively block IL-1 [ ], IL-6 [ ], or Janus-kinase (JAK) [ ]. Adenosine, which binds to A1, A2A, A2B and A3 adenosine receptors, principally activates A2A receptor to produce broad anti-inflammatory effects. Adenosine reduced mortality when administered as an aerosol to intubated Covid-19 patients [ ]. However, adenosine is rapidly metabolized in blood (half-life is < 1 second [ ]) and it activates the A1 adenosine receptor to reduce heart rate and conduction velocity [ ]. RA selectively activates the A2A adenosine receptor subtype, has a longer half-life than adenosine and does not cause heart block. RA marketed as Lexiscan™ or Rapidscan™ is a coronary vasodilator that is used for myocardial perfusion imaging. A2AR agonists such as RA also suppress proinflammatory cytokine release from most immune cells and consequently produce a broader array of anti-inflammatory effects than drugs that target a single cytokine [ ].
A key target of RA is the iNKT cell that, unlike conventional T effector cells, is rapidly activated by tissue hypoxia or ischemia to produce and release pro-inflammatory cytokines. iNKT cells comprise a small CD1d-restricted subset of T cells that express semi-invariant TCRs that can be activated by certain bacterial glycolipids and/or by endogenous glycolipids derived from injured tissues. IL-33 released from SARS-CoV-2-infected epithelial cells facilitates iNKT cell activation via Sp2 receptors [ ]. Depending on how they are activated, iNKT cells may secrete Th1, Th2 or Th17 cytokines such as IFN-γ, IL-14 and IL-17A, respectively [ , ]. IFN-γ derived from iNKT cells perpetuates inflammation by stimulating production of IFN-γ-inducible CXCR3 chemokines, CXCL9, CXCL10 and CXCL11 [ , ]. Expression of the activation marker CD69 on iNKT cells of COVID-19 patients at the time of hospital admission is predictive of clinical course and the severity of hypoxia [ ].
Stressed cells release adenine nucleotides, primarily ATP, into the extracellular space [ , ]. Extracellular ATP and ADP are metabolized to AMP and adenosine by ecto-enzymes including ectonucleoside triphosphate dihphosphohydrolases (ENTPDs; including CD39), and ecto-5’-nucleotidease (e5NT; CD73) [ ]. Induction of these enzymes in response to hypoxia accelerates the conversion of pro-inflammatory ecto-ATP to anti-inflammatory ecto-adenosine [ , ]. By binding to A2ARs, adenosine produces anti-inflammatory effects in iNKT cells as well as macrophages [ ], dendritic cells [ ], neutrophils [ ] and platelets [ ].
We hypothesized that A2AR activation would inhibit cytokine storm and reduce the pro-coagulation state in COVID-19 patients. Here we show in a pilot clinical safety study that infusion of RA into 5 hospitalized COVID-19 patients produced rapid subjective symptom improvement, increased SpO2, reduced D dimer, produced a downward trend in CRP, reduced iNKT cell activation (% CD69+), and a reduced 11 of 13 pro-inflammatory cytokines measured in plasma. Additionally, RA administered in Alzet pumps for 7 days increased survival of K18-hACE2 mice infected with SARS-CoV-2. Further investigation of RA and other A2AR agonists as treatments for COVID-19 and possibly other pulmonary insults that cause SARS is warranted.

## Methods
This phase 1b study evaluated the safety, tolerability, and efficacy of RA for the treatment of hospitalized adults with moderate to severe COVID-19. The trial was conducted at the University of Maryland Medical Center, Baltimore, MD.

## Eligibility

## Inclusion criteria
18 years of age or older
Laboratory-confirmed SARS-CoV-2+ by RT-PCR
Moderate to Severe COVID-19/WHO stage 4 or 5: Moderate illness is defined as individuals who have evidence of lower respiratory disease by clinical assessment or imaging and a saturation of oxygen (SpO2) >93% on room air at sea level. Severe Illness is defined as individuals who have respiratory frequency >30 breaths per minute, SpO2 ≤ 93% on room air at sea level, ratio of arterial partial pressure of oxygen to fraction of inspired oxygen (PaO2/FiO2) <300, or lung infiltrates >50%
Verbal or written informed consent from patient or legally authorized representative

## Exclusion criteria
Pregnant or breastfeeding
Signs or symptoms of acute myocardial ischemia or a cardiac intervention within the past 90 days.
Chronic cardiac conditions including non-vascularized coronary artery disease, heart failure, valvular disease, or cardiomyopathy.
Cardiac arrhythmia such as Sinoatrial (SA) or Atrioventricular (AV) Nodal Block/dysfunction, bradycardia, permanent pacemaker, internal defibrillator, or Atrial Fibrillation/Atrial Flutter requiring treatment or observation.
History of hypotension (sustained systolic blood pressure < 80 mmHg)
History of severe hypertension not adequately controlled with anti-hypertensive medications (Systolic blood pressure ≥ 200 mmHg and/or Diastolic blood pressure ≥ 110 mmHg)
Severe or moderate renal impairment or end stage renal disease (defined as GFR < 60 mL/min/1.73 m2)
History of clinically overt stroke within 3 years
History of seizure disorder
Pre-existing respiratory conditions, most notably asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or emphysema.
Respiratory failure for greater than 72 hours. Defined as the continuous use of mechanical ventilation, HFNC >20L/min, CPAP, and/or ECMO. (CPAP use due to obstructive sleep apnea is acceptable).
Treatment with chronic anti-coagulation or anti-platelet therapy (prophylactic aspirin is acceptable)
Treatment within 30 days of investigational agents as part of a research study.
Treatment with theophylline or aminophylline within 12 hours of study dosing
Treatment with Persantine and/or Aggrenox within 5 days
Clinical conditions that in the opinion of the investigator would make the subject unsuitable for the study.

## Recruitment
All COVID-19 clinical research studies at the UMB medical center are overseen by the institution’s COVID-19 task force committee that organized the screening of COVID-19 patients for enrollment in clinical trials. This group functioned beginning in the Spring of 2020. A daily research “huddle” facilitated this process and identified assigning study subjects to the most appropriate trials. A representative from our study team attended this meeting each day and did not encounter any barriers related to competing trials. Study staff screened the medical records of COVID 19 positive patients and the COVID Huddle call to determine if they were eligible for the RA study. Hospitalized COVID-19 patients were approached according to the unit policy (video chat etc). Incentives were not offered to study participants. A legally authorized representative (LAR) was identified in case patients became incapacitated.

## Patient treatment
Infusion of RA at a rate of 1.44 μg/kg/h for 12–48 hours is safe in patients with sickle cell anemia experiencing painful vaso-occlusive episodes [ ] and in lung-transplant recipients [ ]. In order to establish that RA is safe in Covid-19 patients, we were initially directed by our Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) to treat 5 patients hospitalized Covid-19 patients with drug. The current study reports the effects of RA in this cohort, as well as survival data in mice with Covid-19. Having found that RA is safe, we have initiated a second double-blind randomized cohort, not included here to better assess drug efficacy. RA was administered intravenously by a trained registered nurse using a pediatric infusion pump with a loading dose of 5 μg/kg/h for 30 min followed by 1.44 /kg/h for 6h. Compared to Lexiscan that is rapidly injected at a rate of 400 μg/ 10 seconds, the slow infusions used in the current study were found to eliminate unpleasant side effects including headache, dizziness, nausea, stomach discomfort, mild chest discomfort, shortness of breath, and flushing. Oxygen saturation (SpO2), blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate, CBC w/diff, CMP, sedimentation rate, creatine kinase, ABG, chest imaging, and EKG were monitored periodically throughout infusion.

## Blood collection and processing
Blood samples were drawn as a source of plasma and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). Blood samples were collected just prior to the start of RA infusion (0 hr), just prior to the end of the loading dose (30 min), 4 hours into the maintenance dose (4.5 hr), and the next day (≈ 24 hr after the start of infusion). After centrifugation at 366g for 10 minutes at room temperature (RT) plasma (1.5 ml) was collected and stored at -80°C for later analysis of cytokines, CRP, and D-dimer. PBMCs were isolated by the common Ficoll-Paque method with modifications. Plasma was replaced by 1.5 ml PBS and the blood was overlaid on 2.5ml Ficoll Paque Plus (GE Healthcare) in a sterile 15 ml conical tube and centrifuged at 693g for 25 minutes at RT without breaking. Cells at the interface were collected and transferred to 15mL conical tubes and washed twice with 12ml PBS and centrifuged at 366g for 7 minutes. Live cells were frozen overnight in freezing media (90%FBS+10%DMSO) at a concentration of 1X10^7 cells/ml using a Mr. Frosty container at -80°C and transferred to liquid nitrogen the following morning.

## Flow cytometry
Live cells were thawed in 15 mL conical tubes prefilled with 10 ml warm (37°C) wash media (20% FBS-RPMI-1640) mixed, centrifuged at 500g for 10 minutes at RT, washed in PBS and centrifuged again. Cells were resuspended at 1X10^7 cells/ml and transferred in 100 μl to 96 well plates for cell viability staining with Zombie NIR. Cells were then treated with human Fc block and stained with antibodies ( ) at 4°C for 20 minutes. Samples (including single positive controls, FMOs, and stained samples) were fixed with 2% paraformaldehyde and analyzed with a Cytek Aurora in the Flow Cytometry Core Laboratory (UMB, Baltimore, MD). Data were analyzed using FCS Express 7 Research Edition (De Novo Software, Pasadena, CA).
 

## Measurement of cytokines/chemokines
Plasma levels of cytokines/chemokines were measured as previously described [ ] using a Luminex assay kit (Millipore Sigma, Burlington, MA) in the Cytokine Core Laboratory UMB.

## Treatment with RA in a murine COVID-19 model
Mouse studies were approved by the University of Virginia Animal Care and Use Committee (Protocol Number 4309) and performed in the University’s certified animal Biosafety Level 3 laboratory. All surgery was performed under sodium pentobarbital anesthesia. Male 2-3-month-old 25–30 g B6.Cg-Tg(K18-ACE2) 2Prlmn/J mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratories [ ]. These mice express the SARS-CoV-2 receptor, human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (hACE2) in epithelia and develop a usually lethal infection after intranasal inoculation with a human strain of virus [ , ]. To treat COVID-19 in mice treated with RA, 7-day Alzet 1007D osmotic pumps with a pump rate of 0.5 μl/hr and containing saline or 80 μg/ml RA (≈ 1.44 μg/kg/h) were implanted subcutaneously just prior to being challenged with 1250 Pfu of Hong Kong VM20001061/2020 (NR-52282, BEI Resources) via the intranasal route under ketamine/xylazine anesthesia. Mice were evaluated twice daily for clinical symptoms, including weight loss, activity level, fur appearance, posture, and eye closure and were euthanized when weight loss was >20% of initial weight or a maximum score was observed in two symptom categories.

## Statistical analysis
We normalized human study data (NKT cell activation, cytokines, etc) to baseline levels sampled before the start of drug treatment. Changes in patient circulating cytokine levels over time were analyzed using a repeated measures model with a spatial power covariance structure. Data were analyzed using a log scale to facilitate interpretation as fold changes relative to baseline. Ninety-five % confidence intervals were used to estimate changes from baseline at 30 minutes, 4.5 hours and 24 hours. Blood pressures were analyzed using repeated measures applied to changes from baseline. The repeated measures analyses were carried out in SAS 9.4 PROC MIXED. Clinical data (SpO2, CRP and D-dimer) were reported as mean ± SEM; paired t-tests were used to compare the 24 hour levels to baseline. GraphPad Prism software version 9 was used for statistical analysis of flow cytometry data; paired t-tests were used to compare percentages of circulating CD69+CD3+6B11- conventional T cells and CD69+6B11+ iNKT cells at baseline and 30 minutes into RA infusion. Results were considered statistically significant if P<0.05. Differences between mouse survival curves are based on the Log rank Mantel Cox test.

## Ethics statement
Human subjects: This study was approved by the institutional review board of the University of Maryland, Baltimore (IRB number: HP-00091372) and registered at Clinicaltrials.gov (NCT04606069). RA treatment of moderate to severe COVID-19 patients was approved by FDA (IND # 149635).

## Results
Case Series: Subjects participating in this study were patients requiring hospital admission for COVID-19 diagnosed by PCR and provided informed written consent to receive intravenous RA. Based on prior studies, the steady-state plasma level of RA after infusion for 6 hours of 1.44 μg/kg/h is about 2 ng/ml and is devoid of side effects [ ]. By comparison, RA administered as Lexiscan, a 400 μg bolus over 10 seconds for myocardial perfusion imaging results in a peak plasma level of about 15 ng/ml, and is associated with unpleasant side effects [ , ].
The 5 subjects enrolled in this study were all unvaccinated and classified as WHO stages 4–5 [ ]. Based on their clinical need they were given supplemental oxygen by nasal canula (NC) including high flow NC, but none required intubation. All 5 patients recovered and were discharged on room air 3–9 days after admission. Upon diagnosis of COVID-19, all patients received 6 mg daily dexamethasone as standard of care. RA was administered within 3 hours of consent. Side effects were minimal; there was 1 case of transient self-limiting nausea, but no other toxicities or reportable side effects during infusion and 30 days of follow-up. None of the subjects who consented to the study dropped out. summarizes subject enrollment, allocation, follow-up, and analysis. summarizes patient demographics. Although RA at high doses can produce vasodilation mediated by A2ARs on vascular smooth muscle, at the dose used in this study blood pressure was minimally changed as illustrated in .
 Case 1: A 60-year-old obese male [body mass index (BMI), 43.7] with a history of hypertension and gastric reflux presented with 4-days of chest pain and shortness of breath. On admission, oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 90% and chest x-ray demonstrated patchy opacities/consolidation at the bases. The patient received standard of care treatments including Remdesivir and dexamethasone with 2 liters/min supplemental O2 (WHO stage 4). He was treated with RA one day after admission and reported rapid subjective symptomatic improvement. O2 support was reduced to 1 liter NC 2 days later and the patient was discharged on day 6.
Case 2: A 46-year-old obese female (BMI 36.3) with a history of hiatal hernia and diverticulitis, presented with a 10-day history of symptoms including shortness of breath with cough, and later with nausea and vomiting. Prior to admission the patient received steroids and non-standard treatment with Albuterol, Azithromycin, and Ivermectin. On admission, the patient was febrile (39.4°C) and hypoxic (SpO2 85%). She received standard treatments including dexamethasone and 2 liters/min of O2 by NC (WHO stage 4). The patient was treated with RA one day after admission and reported rapid subjective symptomatic improvement. O2 support was reduced to 1 liter within 2 days and the patient was discharged on day 6.
Case 3: A 37-year-old obese male (BMI 40.2) with no other medical history presented after 7 days of shortness of breath on exertion that limited his physical activity. On admission the patient was hypoxic with a SpO2 of 88% and his chest x-ray demonstrated right lower lobe opacities. He received standard treatments including Remdesivir and dexamethasone with 2 liters/min O2 by NC. The patient was treated with RA on the day of admission. After the RA infusion, his SpO2 increased to 97%, and his oxygen supplementation was weaned off with symptomatic improvement the following day. The patient was discharged on day 3.
Case 4: A 65-year-old male (BMI 29.2) with a remote smoking history presented with persistent symptoms of shortness of breath after outpatient treatment with monoclonal antibodies. On admission the patient was hypoxic with a SpO2 of 87%. His chest x-ray showed bilateral patchy opacities with mild to moderate pulmonary edema while a chest CT demonstrated peripheral ground glass opacities with destructive changes of the dependent parenchyma, consistent with COVID-19 pneumonia. He received treatment including a JAK inhibitor and dexamethasone while also requiring 40L/minute high flow HFNC with a FiO2 of 60% (WHO stage 5) and was admitted to the medical intensive care unit (MICU). The patient was treated with RA after admission with rapidly improved SpO2 by completion of the RA infusion. The patient was transferred out of MICU on day 3, weaned down to nasal cannula support by day 7 and discharged on day 9.
Case 5: A 58-year-old male (BMI 28.19) with a history of gastric reflux presented with persistent cough, shortness of breath, and acute hypoxia. His SpO2 was 88% on admission and he was placed on 6 liters/minute of O2 via nasal cannula (WHO stage 4). His chest x-ray was positive for multifocal patchy opacities with low lung volumes, while a chest CT demonstrated widespread peripheral ground glass opacities, consistent with COVID-19 pneumonia. He was out of the window for remdesivir but received dexamethasone and continued oxygen supplementation. The patient received RA infusion and his SpO2 improved during treatment. He reported a self-limiting episode of nausea that resolved after treatment was complete. The patient was discharged on day 9.

## Evidence that RA reduces lung inflammation
Oxygen saturation (SpO2) by pulse oximetry was measured in all 5 subjects before admission (without oxygen supplementation), after admission (after starting oxygen supplementation), and periodically after RA infusion. Compared to SpO2 measured prior to the start of RA infusion (baseline), SpO2 was significantly elevated at 24 hours post RA infusion (93.80 ± 0.58 vs 96.60 ± 1.08, P = 0.031) ( ). CRP levels were high (>3 mg/L) in 3 of 4 patients (measured only in 4 of 5 patients) and were reduced by >50% 24 hours after RA infusion (3.80 ± 1.40 vs 1.98 ± 0.74 mg/dL, P = 0.075) ( ). D dimer levels were high (>500 ng/ml) in 3 of 5 patients and were decreased at 24 hours post RA infusion (754 ± 168 vs 518 ± 98.3, P = 0.043) ( ). Our analysis did not account for the possibility that some of these changes may have occurred spontaneously over 24 h.
 

## Invariant NKT cells are influenced by COVID-19 and RA
Cytokine storm syndrome is characterized by elevated levels of proinflammatory cytokines, including IFN-γ, TNFα, and IL-17 [ , ]. Alarmins such as IL-33 are tissue-derived nuclear proteins constitutively expressed at high levels in epithelial and endothelial barrier tissues. IL-33 released from damaged epithelial cells may be important for initiating the inflammatory response that can lead to cytokine storm since it is elevated in COVID-19 patients and can activate iNKT cells [ ]. As shown in , we identify rare iNKT cells (comprising 1% of all CD3+ T cells in blood) by flow cytometry and we identified an activated subset based on expression of the early lymphocyte activation marker, CD69. We found that iNKT cells, but not conventional T cells from COVID-19 patients are mostly CD69+ ( ). Moreover, the data show for the first time that RA treatment rapidly reduces the fraction of circulating iNKT cells that are CD69+ by 50% within 30 minutes ( ). These findings suggest that cytokine storm in COVID-19 is initiated in part by IL-33, and possibly other alarmins released from infected epithelial cells, and trigger iNKT cell activation due to IL-33 binding to its SP2 receptor.
 A reduction in the activation of iNKT cells in response to RA infusion is expected to reduce the production of proinflammatory cytokines produced by iNKT cells and other cells. We compared the ratio over baseline of plasma cytokines at 30 minutes, 4.5 hours, and 24 hours after the start of RA infusion ( ). RA had little effect on the levels of 13 pro-inflammatory cytokines at 30 minutes ( ), but 11 of 13 were reduced at 4.5 hours ( ) and 24 hours, (17 h hours after the end of RA infusion, ). The data suggest that suppression of iNKT activation by RA precedes changes in plasma cytokines.
 

## Treatment with regadenoson increases survival of SARS-CoV-2-infected mice
The current study was not designed to determine if RA reduces mortality or length of stay in hospitalized COVID-19 patients. In order to investigate the effects of RA on survival we evaluated K18-hACE2 mice [ ]. Thirty mice infected with SARS-CoV-2 were treated by subcutaneous infusion with RA and 11 controls were infused with saline. As shown in , over 90% of control mice died by day 10, mostly on days 4–5 after infection. Only 50% of RA treated mice died, mostly on day 7, at the time when RA ran out. These findings show that RA infusion decreases mortality in COVID-19-infected mice and suggest that longer treatment may produce better protection.
 

## Discussion
For this case series we treated five COVID-19 patients with an intravenous infusion of RA. These patients were enrolled in an NHLBI sponsored Clinical Trial (NCT0460606) to evaluate safety and evidence of efficacy of RA for reducing cytokine storm. This is the first examination of an A2AR selective agonist in COVID-19 patients. We restricted this initial study to moderately ill patients as characterized by respiratory disease based on clinical assessment and radiographic imaging in addition to oxygen supplementation with either low flow (WHO stage 4) or high flow (WHO stage 5). No intubated or ECMO patients (WHO stages 6–7) were enrolled.
Adenosine is produced by hypoxic or ischemic tissues and has been found to have vasodilatory, anti-platelet and broadly anti-inflammatory effects that are mostly mediated by the A2AR. RA is a selective A2AR agonist that is clinically used as a coronary vasodilator for myocardial perfusion imaging. During myocardial perfusion imaging RA frequently produces unpleasant side effects. Adverse events begin soon after dosing and quickly resolve within an hour in most patients. In the current study we avoided the side effects associated with 400μg bolus injection by administering a slow loading dose of 5 μg/kg/h over 30 minutes followed by a maintenance does of 1.44 μg/kg/h for 6 h. We have previously reported that RA is safe and devoid of side effects during 12 and 48 hours of continuous infusions of 1.44 μg/kg/h in sickle cell patients undergoing painful vaso-occlusive crises [ ] and lung transplant recipients [ ].
Of the 5 COVID-19 patients treated with RA in this study, only one experienced a mild side effect, transient self-limiting nausea. We conclude that RA is safe to use in moderately ill COVID-19 patients. We show that similar dosing of RA to K18-hACE2 transgenic mice that are susceptible to COVID-19 causes a significant reduction in mortality.
This uncontrolled 5 patient case series was not powered to demonstrate that RA reduces mortality or length of stay in the hospital. We did observe promising effects within 24 hours of RA treatment including: subjective improvement in all subjects; increased SpO2; decreased D-dimer selectively in patients with high D-dimer levels (>500 ng/ml); a trend toward lower CRP selectively in patients with high CRP levels (> 3mg/L); rapidly reduced expression of CD69 on circulating iNKT cells; and a gradual reduction in circulating levels of 11 of 13 pro-inflammatory cytokines. A larger placebo-controlled clinical trial is needed to confirm beneficial effects of RA. The current study does suggest that RA will be effective for rapidly reducing iNKT cell activation and cytokine production in COVID-19 patients.
In previous animal studies the administration of A2AR agonists was found to reduce ischemia reperfusion-injury (IRI) in several tissues including liver [ ] and lung [ , ]. Although A2AR activation produces anti-inflammatory responses in neutrophils, macrophages, T cells and platelets, the cell that appears to be most important for adenosine to suppress inflammatory cascades is the iNKT cell [ , ]. The activation of iNKT cells is probably mediated in part by epithelial cell damage from SARS-CoV-2 infection to produce host lipid mediators that activate the invariant TCR, and/or by the release of IL-33 that is elevated in COVID-19 patients and activates iNKT cells via SP2 receptors [ ]. illustrates some of the processes that may be involved in activating iNKT cells in COVID-19 patients, and their inhibition by RA.
 The activation of A2ARs on platelets inhibits their adhesion and aggregation [ , ]. Blood levels of D-dimer have been shown to be highly correlated with unfavorable COVID-19 outcomes [ ], development of pulmonary emboli [ , ] and vascular thrombotic complications [ ]. RA infusion is associated with reduced D-dimer levels. This finding suggests that circulating RA may reduce the risk of pulmonary embolism and vascular thrombotic complications. Further study is necessary to prove this hypothesis.
Proinflammatory cytokine transcription is stimulated in iNKT cells in response to NF-κB activation [ ]. A2AR transcription is slowly enhanced in response to NF-κB activation and RA evokes an anti-inflammatory response [ ]. Over time after tissue injury, A2AR expression and signaling become more effective at suppressing the activation of iNKT cells and other leukocytes. The early activation marker CD69 is expressed at low levels in health individuals, but is elevated on iNKT cells of COVID-19 patients. The fraction of CD69+ iNKT cells at the time of admission correlates with patient hypoxia and poor outcome [ ]. Other treatments that might be expected to reduce the inflammatory response in COVID-19 patients are anti-iNKT or anti-CD1d antibodies [ , ] to deplete iNKT cells or block their activation, respectively.
As previously noted by Correale et al [ ] aerosolized adenosine appears be effective for treating COVID-19 subjects receiving supplemental oxygen. Iatrogenic hyperoxia therapy reduces endogenous extracellular adenosine production. Moreover hyperoxia may reduce the induction of A2ARs in iNKT cells [ ], T cells [ ], and macrophages [ ]. Other factors that may reduce adenosine production and signaling in the hyperoxic lung are reduced expression of the ecto-enzymes CD39 and CD73 [ , ] and inactivation of PANX1 channels that release ATP [ , ]. These observations suggest that hyperoxia will suppress adenosine production and signaling due to several factors that may be counteracted by RA infusion.
In the current study RA was administered by IV infusion and gained access to blood and peripheral tissues. In the study by Correale et al. [ ] hospitalized COVID-19 patients inhaled adenosine once or twice daily for 5 days. Despite its short half-life adenosine-treated patients exhibited a significant increase in PaO2/FiO2 and death rate was reduced by adenosine inhalation. Beneficial effects of inhaled adenosine were also reported in a subsequent two patient case study [ ]. Inhaled adenosine appears to be metabolized rapidly and does not accumulate in peripheral blood since cardiovascular effects noted with IV adenosine are absent [ ]. Unlike RA, adenosine activates A1 adenosine receptors in the cardiac SA and AV nodes, which can produce bradycardia or heart block. Compared to inhaled adenosine, which has a short half-life and does not accumulate in blood, RA has a terminal half-life of 2 hours, is distributed throughout the body and likely produces generalized anti-inflammatory and anti-coagulant effects.

## Limitations of the study
Since the effects of RA in COVID-19 patients were unknown, we applied strict exclusion criteria to ensure patient safety. We assessed 253 hospitalized COVID-19 patients, 221 did not meet inclusion criteria. We enrolled 5 COVID-19 patients to receive RA. This study did not include untreated patient controls or have sufficient power to determine if RA reduced mortality or length of stay in the hospital, but we did observe promising effects in all five subjects within 24 hours of RA treatment: subjective improvement; increased SpO2; a trend toward lower CRP levels; rapidly reduced expression of CD69 on circulating iNKT cells; and a gradual reduction in circulating levels of 11 of 13 pro-inflammatory cytokines. The results are not adjusted for multiple statistical tests and some of the observed reductions in cytokine levels might occur spontaneously over time. A larger placebo-controlled clinical trial is needed to confirm these findings, but they do suggest that RA will be effective for rapidly reducing iNKT cell activation and cytokine production in inflamed COVID-19 patients. The ability of RA to improve the survival of SARS-CoV-2-infected mice enhances out confidence in the results of the human studies.

## Conclusion
Oxygen supplementation in COVID-19 patients with poor lung function may cause an iatrogenic reduction in the release of adenine nucleotides into the extracellular space and a reduction in the rate of ATP conversion to adenosine by ecto-enzymes. These considerations provide a rationale for administering RA or other A2AR agonists during oxygen supplementation that suppresses ATP release from cells and metabolism to adenosine. In the current study we confirmed that iNKT cells are activated in COVID-19 patients and we show for the first time that their activation is rapidly reduced in response to RA infusion. The RA-induced reduction in iNKT cell activation precedes a decline in circulating levels of proinflammatory cytokines. Mouse studies demonstrate improved survival in COVID-19 infected animals treated with RA. These findings justify further evaluation of RA and other A2AR agonists for treatment of COVID-19 patients and other causes of lung inflammation.

## Supporting information
S1 Checklist

## TREND statement checklist.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Table

## Data of blood pressure from the 5 enrolled patients prior, during and post regadenoson infusion.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Table

## Data of oxygen saturation (SpO2), D-Dimer and CRP from the participant patients prior and post regadenoson infusion.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Table

## Changes of CD69+ T cells, CD69+iNKT Cells in the participated patients prior, during and post regadenoson infusion.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Table

## Plasma levels of cytokine/chemokines (pg/ml) in the participant patients prior, during and post regadenoson infusion.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 File(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.

We are grateful to Dr. Xiaoxuan Fan in the Flow Cytometry Core Laboratory (University of Maryland, Baltimore) for assistance with Flow Cytometry and Dr. Lisa Hester in the Cytokine Core Laboratory at UMB.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0288920.r001Decision Letter 0
ZalmMaria Elisabeth JohannaStaff Editor© 2023 Maria Elisabeth Johanna Zalm2023Maria Elisabeth Johanna Zalmhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0

## Transfer Alert
This paper was transferred from another journal. As a result, its full editorial history (including decision letters, peer reviews and author responses) may not be present.

14 Nov 2022

PONE-D-22-17321Regadenoson for the treatment of COVID-19: a five case clinical series and mouse studiesPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Lau,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process. Your manuscript has been assessed by two peer-reviewers and their reports are appended below.  The reviewers comment that the manuscript could be strengthened with additional detail and clarifications. One of the reviewers comments that the manuscript may present incorrect information regarding the delivery of adenosine by V infusion. The statistical referee has commented on the statistical analysis reported, and indicates that the statistical limitations of the study should be discussed further in the discussions section.  Could you please carefully revise the manuscript to address all comments raised?
Please submit your revised manuscript by Dec 28 2022 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Maria Elisabeth Johanna Zalm, Ph.D
Editorial Office
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. Thank you for stating the following in the Acknowledgments Section of your manuscript: 
"We are grateful to Dr. Xiaoxuan Fan in the Flow Cytometry Core Laboratory (University of Maryland, Baltimore) for assistance with Flow Cytometry and Dr. Lisa Hester in the Cytokine Core Laboratory at UMB. This study was supported by NIH R01HL128492-05S1, the Manning Fund for COVID-19 Research,  MC10, and Astellas Pharma US, Inc.,  ISR005923. Patent pending for this manuscript."
We note that you have provided funding information that is not currently declared in your Funding Statement. However, funding information should not appear in the Acknowledgments section or other areas of your manuscript. We will only publish funding information present in the Funding Statement section of the online submission form. 
Please remove any funding-related text from the manuscript and let us know how you would like to update your Funding Statement. Currently, your Funding Statement reads as follows: 
"This study was supported by NIH R01HL128492-05S1 (CLL), the Manning Fund for COVID-19 Research, MC10 (JL), and Astellas Pharma US, Inc., ISR005923 (CLL & JL). The sponsors or funders play NO role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript"
Please include your amended statements within your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Well written manuscript, however I feel the focus is much on outcomes of more interest in the larger trial as opposed to the safety focus that this manuscript should focus on.
Here are some comments:
Why are the primary and secondary endpoints of the randomized trial included as primary and secondary in this study of the five non-randomized patients treated with focus on the safety, tolerability and toxicity?
Regarding the statistical analyses of the continuous outcomes, they should in the larger trial account for the baseline value i.e. include the baseline value as a covariate. Change scores, normalization etc. does not appropriately adjust for baseline values as including it as a covariate does (much has been written about this in the literature). In merely 5 individuals there are not that many degrees of freedom to play with hence the results can be left as is. However, many of the results can simply be regression towards the mean e.g. if you have a high baseline value you will most likely have a lower value at the next measure and this should somehow be mentioned under limitations.
Please write under limitations that there is a risk of spurious results due to the number of statistical tests (it could somehow be combined with my previous comment)
The two way anova under figure 2 is not mentioned under methods
Reviewer #2: Overall this is an interesting paper describing the beneficial effects of a single infusion of Regadenoson, an A2A adenosine receptor agonist, on patients with COVID and murine data which further confirms the beneficial effects of this infusion. Moreover, the authors report that the principal antiinflammatory effects of regadenoson in this setting is mediated via inhibition of NKT cells. Overall, the clinical data remain quite preliminary and little can be said regarding efficacy of treatment in patients although the murine data is suggestive and prior clinical data using adenosine, a non-selective agonist, provides some evidence of efficacy in patients with COVID. There is one issue that should be corrected. The authors repeatedly note that adenosine cannot be given by IV infusion because of its effects on the heart (via A1 receptor stimulation). Adenosine is currently on the market for use as an infusion agent for pharmacologic stress testing so all of the references to A1 inhibitors and the contraindications to use of IV adenosine, etc should be eliminated.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes: Bruce N. Cronstein, MD
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0288920.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
10 Jan 2023

Editor Requirements:
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
• A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
• A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
• An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'. 
Response: We have included all three required items and named them as “ Response to Reviewers”, “Revised Manuscript with Track Changes”, and “Manuscript”.
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

Response: The revised files have been named to conform with journal requires. We have revised formatting of the main text , title and author affiliations. 
2. Thank you for stating the following in the Acknowledgments Section of your manuscript: 
"We are grateful to Dr. Xiaoxuan Fan in the Flow Cytometry Core Laboratory (University of Maryland, Baltimore) for assistance with Flow Cytometry and Dr. Lisa Hester in the Cytokine Core Laboratory at UMB. This study was supported by NIH R01HL128492-05S1, the Manning Fund for COVID-19 Research, MC10, and Astellas Pharma US, Inc., ISR005923. Patent pending for this manuscript."
We note that you have provided funding information that is not currently declared in your Funding Statement. However, funding information should not appear in the Acknowledgments section or other areas of your manuscript. We will only publish funding information present in the Funding Statement section of the online submission form. 
Please remove any funding-related text from the manuscript and let us know how you would like to update your Funding Statement. Currently, your Funding Statement reads as follows: 
"This study was supported by NIH R01HL128492-05S1 (CLL), the Manning Fund for COVID-19 Research, MC10 (JL), and Astellas Pharma US, Inc., ISR005923 (CLL & JL). The sponsors or funders play NO role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript"
Please include your amended statements within your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf
Response: We have removed the funding information from the Acknowledgments and corrected the funding statement. 
Reviewer #1: Well written manuscript, however I feel the focus is much on outcomes of more interest in the larger trial as opposed to the safety focus that this manuscript should focus on.
Here are some comments:
1. Why are the primary and secondary endpoints of the randomized trial included as primary and secondary in this study of the five non-randomized patients treated with focus on the safety, tolerability and toxicity?
Response: Thank you for pointing out that the original manuscript lacked clarity on this point. We state in the revision that only five non-randomized patients are included in this report. In the revised manuscript we note that this five case report and mouse study provide evidence of Regadenoson safety and anti-inflammatory efficacy, although a definitive trial has yet to be completed.
2. Regarding the statistical analyses of the continuous outcomes, they should in the larger trial account for the baseline value i.e. include the baseline value as a covariate. Change scores, normalization etc. does not appropriately adjust for baseline values as including it as a covariate does (much has been written about this in the literature). In merely 5 individuals there are not that many degrees of freedom to play with hence the results can be left as is. However, many of the results can simply be regression towards the mean e.g. if you have a high baseline value you will most likely have a lower value at the next measure and this should somehow be mentioned under limitations.
Response: Thank you for raising this important point. We have added a comment in the discussion section (Lines 537-548). This human study did not include untreated patient controls or have sufficient power to determine if RA reduced mortality or length of stay in the hospital, but we did observe promising effects within 24 hours of RA treatment: subjective improvement in all subjects; increased SpO2; a trend toward lower CRP levels; rapidly reduced expression of CD69 on circulating iNKT cells; and a gradual reduction in circulating levels of 11 of 13 pro-inflammatory cytokines. The results are not adjusted for multiple statistical tests and some of the observed reductions in cytokine levels might be explained by regression to the mean. A larger placebo-controlled clinical trial is needed to confirm these findings, but they do suggest that RA will be effective for rapidly reducing cytokine production in inflamed COVID-19 patients.
As an aside, we ran the repeated measures models using the baseline value as a covariate and estimated the mean changes from baseline at 30minutes, 4 hours and 24 hours at the average of the baseline values. The results from these analyses were nearly identical to those found from the change point models presented in the paper. 
 Change scores Baseline as covariate
 Change from baseline SE Change from baseline* SE
IL-6 30m 0.178 0.344 0.176 0.311
 4.5h 0.204 0.344 0.203 0.311
 24h 0.422 0.344 0.421 0.311
MCP-1 30m 0.087 0.077 0.087 0.081
 4.5h 0.099 0.077 0.099 0.081
 24h 0.278 0.077 0.278 0.081
IL-8 30m -0.126 0.211 -0.125 0.643
 4.5h -0.026 0.211 -0.025 0.643
 24h -0.022 0.211 -0.021 0.643
IL12p40 30m -0.074 0.123 0.176 0.311
 4.5h -0.214 0.123 0.203 0.311
 24h -0.279 0.123 0.421 0.311
IL-7 30m -0.034 0.248 -0.034 0.261
 4.5h -0.249 0.248 -0.249 0.261
 24h -0.222 0.248 -0.222 0.261
IP-10 30m 0.084 0.126 0.084 0.121
 4.5h -0.275 0.126 -0.275 0.121
 24h -0.268 0.126 -0.268 0.121
IFN-g 30m -0.070 0.183 -0.070 0.175
 4.5h -0.313 0.183 -0.313 0.175
 24h -0.102 0.183 -0.103 0.175
MIP-1A 30m -0.108 0.409 -0.108 0.447
 4.5h -0.356 0.409 -0.356 0.447
 24h -0.647 0.409 -0.647 0.447
IL12p70 30m -0.047 0.158 -0.047 0.163
 4.5h -0.358 0.158 -0.358 0.163
 24h -0.271 0.158 -0.271 0.163
IL-17 30m 0.285 0.401 0.285 0.369
 4.5h -0.511 0.401 -0.511 0.369
 24h -0.723 0.401 -0.723 0.369
IL-1B 30m 0.017 0.366 0.016 0.353
 4.5h -0.685 0.366 -0.686 0.353
 24h -0.708 0.366 -0.709 0.353
IL-2 30m 0.035 0.432 -0.028 0.345
 4.5h -0.750 0.386 -0.752 0.308
 24h -0.795 0.386 -0.796 0.308
TNF-a 30m 0.049 0.355 0.049 0.365
 4.5h -0.754 0.355 -0.753 0.365
 24h -0.790 0.355 -0.790 0.365
*computed at the average value for the baseline. 
3. Please write under limitations that there is a risk of spurious results due to the number of statistical tests 
Response: We have added discussion regarding the risk of spurious results in the limitation section (lines 543-546) of the revised manuscript.
4. The two way anova under figure 2 is not mentioned under methods.
Response: Thank you. The two way anova under figure 2 was added to the Methods section (lines 248).
Reviewer #2: Overall this is an interesting paper describing the beneficial effects of a single infusion of Regadenoson, an A2A adenosine receptor agonist, on patients with COVID and murine data which further confirms the beneficial effects of this infusion. Moreover, the authors report that the principal antiinflammatory effects of regadenoson in this setting is mediated via inhibition of NKT cells. Overall, the clinical data remain quite preliminary and little can be said regarding efficacy of treatment in patients although the murine data is suggestive and prior clinical data using adenosine, a non-selective agonist, provides some evidence of efficacy in patients with COVID. There is one issue that should be corrected. The authors repeatedly note that adenosine cannot be given by IV infusion because of its effects on the heart (via A1 receptor stimulation). Adenosine is currently on the market for use as an infusion agent for pharmacologic stress testing so all of the references to A1 inhibitors and the contraindications to use of IV adenosine, etc should be eliminated.
Response: The reviewer is absolutely correct. We should have remembered Paracelsus of Ferrara who is famously credited with coining the phrase “the dose makes the poison”. As Paracelsus would have predicted the cardiovascular effects of adenosine are dose-dependent. In the revised manuscript we have revised our comment about adenosine simply to state that absence of any cardiovascular response to inhaled adenosine suggests that little accumulates in blood after inhalation, which is consistent with rapid uptake and metabolism into blood cells and ECs. We have removed the contraindications to use of IV adenosine in the revised manuscript.
10.1371/journal.pone.0288920.r003Decision Letter 1
ChenetteEmilyStaff Editor© 2023 Emily Chenette2023Emily Chenettehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
10 May 2023

PONE-D-22-17321R1Regadenoson for the treatment of COVID-19: a five case clinical series and mouse studiesPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Lau,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. I sincerely apologise for the unusually delayed review timeframe. Your revised manuscript was reviewed by one of the original reviewers, whose comments are appended below. The reviewer commented that their previous concerns were addressed but raised one minor point of concern that must be clarified before we can proceed. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jun 24 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Emily Chenette
Editor in Chief
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: I Don't Know
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: No
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: All my comments have been adressed but regarding my question and your answer "The two way anova under figure 2 is not mentioned under methods. Response: Thank you. The two way anova under figure 2 was added to the Methods section (lines 248)."
A two way anova anlysis is not appropriate since it does not handle the repeated measures over time. Please double check which analysis that was performed or do a correct one. We can clearly see that there will be no effect on blood pressure but still the method for the statistical comparison should be correct.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0288920.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
15 Jun 2023

Editor Q1: Is the manuscript now acceptable for publication?
Reviewer: no response
Author response: Please see response to Comment 3.
Editor Q2: Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
Reviewer: yes
Author response: We appreciate that the reviewer found that the experiments had been conducted rigorously.
Editor Q3: Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?
Reviewer: I Don't Know.
Author response: We have elaborated on statistical methods used in the figure legends.
Editor Q4: Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
Reviewer: No
Author response: To comply with then PLOS ONE data policy that requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available, we have now added supplemental data tables including all of the data used for the figures.
Editor Q5: Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
Reviewer: yes
Reviewer Q6: All my comments have been addressed but regarding my question and your answer "The two-way ANOVA under figure 2 is not mentioned under methods. A two-way ANOVA analysis is not appropriate since it does not handle the repeated measures over time. Please double check which analysis that was performed or do a correct one. We can clearly see that there will be no effect on blood pressure but still the method for the statistical comparison should be correct.
Author response: Thank you very much. Our statistician has reviewed and changed to repeated measures applied to changes from baseline. We have updated the manuscript appropriately with statistical explanations.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: PLOS Response to Reviewers Lau June 2023.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0288920.r005Decision Letter 2
ChenetteEmilyStaff Editor© 2023 Emily Chenette2023Emily Chenettehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
7 Jul 2023

Regadenoson for the treatment of COVID-19: a five case clinical series and mouse studies
PONE-D-22-17321R2
Dear Dr. Lau,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Again, I apologise for the unusually delayed review timeframe for this manuscript. I sincerely appreciate that you and your co-authors chose PLOS ONE as the venue for this study.
Kind regards,
Emily Chenette
Editor in Chief
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
**********
10.1371/journal.pone.0288920.r006Acceptance letter
ChenetteEmilyStaff Editor© 2023 Emily Chenette2023Emily Chenettehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
4 Aug 2023

PONE-D-22-17321R2 
Regadenoson for the treatment of COVID-19: a five case clinical series and mouse studies 
Dear Dr. Lau:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr Emily Chenette 
Staff Editor
PLOS ONE