pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC11793750PMC11793750.111793750117937503990373610.1371/journal.pone.0316467PONE-D-23-156481Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesViral DiseasesCovid 19Medicine and Health SciencesHematologyPeople and placesGeographical locationsSouth AmericaBrazilMedicine and Health SciencesDiagnostic MedicineVirus TestingBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyBody FluidsBloodPlateletsMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyBody FluidsBloodPlateletsBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyBody FluidsBloodPlateletsBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsBlood CellsPlateletsBiology and life sciencesOrganismsVirusesRNA virusesCoronavirusesSARS coronavirusSARS CoV 2Biology and life sciencesMicrobiologyMedical microbiologyMicrobial pathogensViral pathogensCoronavirusesSARS coronavirusSARS CoV 2Medicine and health sciencesPathology and laboratory medicinePathogensMicrobial pathogensViral pathogensCoronavirusesSARS coronavirusSARS CoV 2Biology and life sciencesOrganismsVirusesViral pathogensCoronavirusesSARS coronavirusSARS CoV 2Biology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsBlood CellsWhite Blood CellsBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsImmune CellsWhite Blood CellsBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyImmune CellsWhite Blood CellsMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyImmune CellsWhite Blood CellsBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsBlood CellsWhite Blood CellsMonocytesBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsImmune CellsWhite Blood CellsMonocytesBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyImmune CellsWhite Blood CellsMonocytesMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyImmune CellsWhite Blood CellsMonocytesThe external validity of machine learning-based prediction scores from hematological parameters of COVID-19: A study using hospital records from Brazil, Italy, and Western Europe
The external validity of machine learning-based prediction scores from hematological parameters of COVID-19SafdariAliData curationFormal analysisSoftwareWriting – original draft KeshavChanda SaiData curationMethodologySoftware https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9483-3227ModyDeepanshuFormal analysisMethodologySoftwareValidation VermaKshitijData curationFormal analysis KaushalUtsavFormal analysisMethodologySoftwareValidationVisualization BurraVaadeendra KumarData curationFormal analysisMethodologySoftwareValidationVisualizationWriting – original draft RaySibnathConceptualizationFormal analysisInvestigation https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4131-907XBandyopadhyayDebashreeConceptualizationFunding acquisitionInvestigationProject administrationResourcesSoftwareSupervisionValidationWriting – review & editing 1
Department of Biological Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, Hyderabad Campus, Hyderabad, Telangana, India2
Gencrest Private Limited, 301-302, B-Wing, Corporate Center, Mumbai, IndiaBrandaFrancescoEditor files (S1_Table.docx), and in github repository (https://github.com/debashreebanerjee/CoviPred).OutbreaksCOVID-19

## Data Availability
All relevant data are shared within the manuscript, files (S1_Table.docx), and in github repository (https://github.com/debashreebanerjee/CoviPred).

## Introduction
The COVID-19 infection has posed the deadliest threat to the health of the human population in the 21st century. Likely, the danger is far from over concerning the emerging variants of COVID-19, such as alpha (B.1.1.7), beta (B.1.351), gamma (P.1), delta (B.1.617.2), lambda (C.37), and omicron (B.1.1.529) [ ], along with other frequently mutating respiratory diseases, like, influenza virus A (H1N1) [ ]. The most common clinical feature of COVID-19 is pneumonia with fever, cough, fatigue, headache, diarrhoea, hypoxia, and dyspnoea. The latest variant, omicron, has some common symptoms with the earlier SARS-COV-2 strains, although with lesser severity due to mild infection in the lower respiratory tract and reduced probability of hospitalization [ , ]. In the case of mild COVID-19 infection, either no (asymptotic) or only mild pneumonia is observed. In moderate infection, dyspnoea, hypoxia, and lung injury may occur. In severe infection, respiratory failure to multi-organ failure occurs. In brief, severe cases of COVID-19 can lead to a systemic infection affecting almost all of the major organ systems. Due to the nature of the disease, timely detection of COVID-19 is of utmost importance. Hence, detection techniques play a pivotal role in its diagnosis. There are two major types of COVID-19 tests: a) molecular tests (qRT-PCR tests) and b) rapid antigen tests. There is a less common antibody-based detection technique. Molecular qRT-PCR tests are considered as the gold standard for COVID-19 detection those detect the load of viral RNA in a patient. The sensitivity value (low false negative rate) for qRT-PCR ranges from 88–96% [ , ]. Although qRT-PCR tests are considered gold-standard, it has several limitations, like manual errors during sample (nasal and oral swab) collection, operational errors, etc. [ ]. Moreover, the time required for the experiment and availability of the detection kits at a mass level becomes difficult in a vast population with a large number of infections. The test is also costly for low-income groups. The rapid-antigen test (RAT) is an alternate to qRT-PCR that detects the load of viral protein in an individual, that is much faster to qRT-PCR (on average 15 minutes only). RAT results have high specificity range 98%-99% (low false positives), but low sensitivity value 70%-72%, [ – ] This is because, RATs are more sensitive in the symptomatic and transmissive stages of disease when the viral load is higher [ – ]. The advantage of RAT is it can be done at mass-scale [ ], and provide point-of-care by self-testing. Thus, in addition to their advantages, both qRT-PCR and RAT techniques have their own limitations. Development of a rapid, accurate and low-cost detection protocol can circumvent the short-coming of both the methods and supplement initial screening in large-scale and for low-income populations, particularly in a country like India, with the second-largest population in the world.
Literature reports indicate availability of several hematological bio-markers in COVID-19 patients, thus making those as potential candidates to develop alternate protocol. Patients of COVID-19 exhibit a wide range of hematologic abnormalities that changes with disease progression, severity, and mortality [ ]. For example, the white blood cells sense [ ]. and respond to microbial threats [ ]. Similarly, blood platelet expression and platelet counts are altered in COVID-19 patients [ – ]. Platelet hyperactivity was demonstrated as one of the unique features of COVID-19 infection [ ]. Abnormal levels of CRP, D-dimer, Procalcitonin, Troponin values were observed in the deceased. The most effective mortality biomarkers identified were ESR, INR, PT, CRP, D-dimer and Ferritin. Neutrophilia, leukocytosis and erythrocytopenia were identified as mortality risk predictors [ ]. As per the earlier reports, high d-CWL and d-CFL values largely confirmed the Covid-19 diagnosis. d-CIT, d-CT, d-PPT biomarkers were efficient in prognosis of COVID-19 disease [ ]. White blood cell counts (WBC), lymphocyte counts, C-reactive proteins (CRP), D-dimer were used in prognosis and diagnosis of COVID-19 [ ]. Hence, a complete blood count (CBC) could serve as a biomarker for COVID-19. Screening the COVID-19 infection in terms of CBC has been attempted by various research groups worldwide, [ – ].
Machine learning approaches were reported in literature for COVID-19 disease prediction, based on incident moments [ ], SEIR models [ ] etc. Some of the research groups used machine learning (ML) approaches to exploit the haematological parameters for prognosis, diagnosis and risk factor predictions [ – ]. From a specific population for disease prediction; the Area Under Curve (AUC) performance ranges from 84% to 87% in those models. So far, only handful of reports are available to test the applicability of the haematology-based ML models across different ethnicity and populations which has not been explored in previous studies [ ]. The combination of haematological parameters varies with ethnicity in non-COVID individuals, for example, mean corpuscular (fL) and white blood cell counts (109/L) differ among African-American and whites [ ]. A study conducted at a hospital of San Francisco between April 2017 and January 2018, showed that the reference intervals of neutrophil, lymphocyte and eosinophil counts; hemoglobin, mean corpuscular volume (MCV), mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) and mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) were significantly different (p<0.05) across four racial/ethnic groups, namely, Asian, Black, Hispanic and White [ ]. Various blood biomarkers (WBC, CRP, eosinophil, monocytes, platelets etc.) varied since inception of COVID-19 in 2020, world-wide, till date [ ]. A set of blood biomarkers vary across severe (ICU patients) and non-severe (non-ICU) COVID-19 patients [ , ]. A study conducted in China in January 2020, showed that patients admitted with COVID-19 were reported with lymphocytopenia (83.2% of the patients), thrombocytopenia (36.2%), and leukopenia (33.7%) [ ]. Similar study conducted in South Africa (March to June 2020) showed that decrease in median lymphocyte count and rise in d-dimer have no significant association with outcome [ ]. Another study conducted in India (August 2020 to January 2021) noted severe elevation of D-dimer level in some patients, along with haemoglobin, Red Blood Cells (RBC) count, haematocrit, neutrophil and lymphocyte [ ]. All these observations together suggested that race/ethnicity-specific variations occur in CBC parameters, both for reference intervals and COVID-19 patients. Furthermore, a recent study from Iran showed that hematological parameters, varied even within the same ethnicity, across different COVID-19 pandemic waves [ ]. The authors showed that MCV and RDW-CV have increased during first wave, whereas, lymphocyte count, MCHC, PLT count, and RDW-SD have highest increase during second wave and so on. However, alteration in some of the blood parameters leading to lymphocytopenia [ , ] leucopenia, and thrombocytopenia [ – ], are more or less common due to COVID-19.
Based on the above observations, we hypothesized that ML model developed on haematological parameters would yield the best (COVID-19) probabilistic predictions when trained and (externally) validated on the same populations. The hypothesis, to some extent, was supported by the literature report where the authors showed external validation of the ML model trained on CBC parameters from Italy (training dataset) and externally validated on three other Italian datasets produced high sensitivity values (ranging from 85% to 91%). In contrast, low sensitivity values were produced when the same model was externally validated on three Brazilian datasets (ranging from 29% to 37%) [ ]. In the current study, we aim to optimize the features in ML models those can be at least acceptable (in terms of meta-validation results) across the populations. eXtreme Gradient Boost (XGBoost) model was benchmarked as the best-performing model across the datasets compared to published literature. The state-of-the-art of the current work is development of a COVID-19 prediction tool that is reliable and parsimonious, based on sufficient sample size (n = 195554).

## Method

## Description of clinical datasets for training, validation, and prediction
There are three major datasets curated from publicly available hospital sources (https://www.kaggle.com/einsteindata4u/covid19; https://zenodo.org/record/4081318#.X4RWqdD7TIU; https://repositoriodatasharingfapesp.uspdigital.usp.br/).

## Dataset 1
Dataset-1 was generated based on anonymized patient data publicly available from Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, in São Paulo, Brazil https://www.kaggle.com/einsteindata4u/covid19. The data were recorded from February 26th, 2020, to March 23rd, 2020. The patients hospitalized under i) regular ward, ii) semi-intensive care unit and iii) intensive care unit were included in this study. The cases and controls for this dataset include the patients whose samples were collected to perform the SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR and additional laboratory tests during a visit to the hospital.
The initial data set consisted of 558 positive and 5086 negative cases of COVID-19. This dataset was processed to minimize the null-value columns and eliminate the negative instances with many null values. The value (xi) in each cell was pre-normalized (at the source) to a mean value (μ) of zero and a unit standard deviation (σ); this was termed as ‘normalized count’; xi’ = (xi-μ)/σ. The same normalization scheme has been used throughout the subsequent datasets. The columns with null values appearing more than 90% were dropped. The initial data size was already small hence, usage of lower cutoff values reduced the dataset beyond its usability for model training. The records (rows) showing positive results were retained by default, and the negative records were maintained only with more than 10% non-null entries.
Thus, the negative data size was dropped to 1446, enriching the relative size of the positive data; the negative to positive sample size ratio reduced to 2.59, four times less than that in the published model (11.51) [ ]. This newly processed dataset, enriched with positive results, was termed as dataset 1. In total, dataset 1 contains thirty-seven features and 2004 records, 558 positives and 1446 negatives ( ). Here ‘features’ refer to x-parameters used to train the model; the definition excludes the y-parameter, SARS-COV2 results (positive or negative). This definition is consistently used in the subsequent datasets. These thirty-seven features were categorized into four classes, namely, i) age, ii) severity of the infection, iii) hematological features, and iv) co-morbidities (S1 Table in ). The hematology analyser used therein was not known. We have further processed dataset 1 by dropping the co-morbidities. Thus, the total number of features were reduced to 18 and the number of records was 602, with 83 positives and 519 negatives.
 

## Dataset 2
This dataset was obtained from San Raffaele Hospital (OSR), Italy [ ]. Inclusion criteria was patients admitted to the emergency department of the hospital from February 19, 2020, to May 31, 2020. Patients were excluded those who have potentially confounding pathologies and other sources of bias, such as insufficient data availability and admitted between February and April, 2020. All patients admitted during May 2020, were included. In the original OSR dataset, there were 1736 entries with a total of 72 features, among those, 36 were haematological features. Fifty-two percent of the patients were COVID-19 positive, as determined by RT-PCR tests on nasopharyngeal swabs.
These 1736 entries were processed such that all rows (records) with more than 66% null values were dropped. The null values were dropped based on trial and error method, using other (higher or lower) values the dataset became either too small or too sparse. In case of dataset 1, the initial size was already small hence, usage of 66% cut off would make the dataset not fit for ML model training. The processed dataset contained 1388 records, 765 positives, and 623 negatives ( ). This dataset includes 31 features: age, sex, a feature for suspicion (representing subjective analysis of the patient by a physician), and 28 haematological parameters ( ). Haematology analyser used was Sysmex XE 2100. The ratio of negative to positive records was 0.81, indicating greater number of positives than negatives ( ).
 

## Dataset 3
Dataset 3 was obtained from the Covid Data Sharing initiative created by a consortium led by FAPESP (Sao Paulo Research Foundation) and USP (University of Sao Paulo, Brazil). The data originated from three prominent private hospitals in Sao Paulo, Brazil—Fleury Institute, Sírio-Libanês Hospital, and Albert Einstein Hospital, from November 1st, 2019, to July 1st, 2020 (https://repositoriodatasharingfapesp.uspdigital.usp.br/). The data was anonymized from patients tested for COVID-19 (serology or RT-PCR). The haematology analyser used therein was not known.
The raw data obtained from the data sharing initiative had multiple rows (records) corresponding to individual patients containing different clinical features ("long-form" of the dataset). The "long form" of the dataset was converted, using an in-house Python code, to the "wide form," where one row corresponds to all the clinical features of a patient. The "wide form" of the dataset has 189227 records and 454 features. These 454 features were common, as there were duplicates in the column headers (due to different reference ranges) for some features. After deduplication, the feature number was reduced to 104. The non-duplicated features were further filtered by excluding the following conditions, i) no qRT-PCR results available, ii) all the rows with more than 66% null values (similar to dataset 2). Twenty-seven hematological indices (features) were identified based on the above cutoff ( ). The final dataset size was 6488; 4533 negatives and 1955 positives.

## Description of the clinical dataset for blind prediction

## Western European dataset
This dataset was obtained from several Western European hospitals, as reported elsewhere [ ]. The dataset includes the patients from the first day of hospitalization to nearly five weeks [ ]. This published data was in the form of twenty separate tables that we merged into a single file comprising 2587 entries and thirty-seven features. According to the source authors [ ], there are two stages of the disease, a) early stage, from day zero through three (total of four days), and b) advanced stage, comprising all the subsequent days. This blind prediction dataset includes only four hematological parameters consistent with sub-dataset 2-four-features.

## Machine Learning (ML) approaches
The machine learning (ML) algorithms were implemented in Python (3.7.13) using the following libraries, Numpy (1.21.6), Pandas (1.3.5), XGBoost (0.90), Scikit-learn (1.0.2), Seaborn (0.11.2), Matplotlib (3.2.2) and Pickle 4.0 libraries.
Different algorithms:

## Extreme Gradient Boost (XGBoost)
The algorithm primarily employed was the Extreme Gradient Boost (XGBoost) classifier that implements gradient-boosted decision trees (with enhanced speed and performance) and trains a class-weighted (or cost-sensitive) version of imbalanced classification [ ]. XGBoost, a ternary classifier, considers null entries as one of the classes that handle the null-entry values.
Other classifiers tested on these datasets were logistic regression, Fischer linear discriminant Naïve Bayes, SVM, random forest, and K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN).

## Logistic regression
Logistic regression predicts the output of a categorical dependent variable by fitting an "S" shaped logistic function that indicates two maximum values, 0 or 1 [ ].

## Fischer linear discriminant
Fischer linear discriminant classifier maximizes the separation between the projected class means and minimizes the class overlap leading to well-separated classes [ ].

## Naive Bayes
Naive Bayes is a classification technique based on the Bayes theorem with an assumption of independent predictors; a particular feature is independent of another feature in a class [ ].

## Support Vector Machine (SVM)
The SVM algorithm aims to create the best line or decision boundary to segregate n-dimensional space into classes to accommodate a new data point. The best decision boundary, a hyperplane, is made based on the extreme points (vectors) [ ].

## Random forest
Random forest is a concept of ensemble learning–a combination of multiple classifiers to solve a complex problem and improve the model performance. As the name suggests, Random Forest contains several decision trees on various subsets of the given dataset and takes the average to improve the predictive accuracy of that dataset [ ].

## K Nearest Neighbour (KNN)
KNN algorithm stores all the available data and classifies a new data point based on the similarity by placing a new data point in the nearest category. Thus, new data belongs to an appropriate class [ ].

## Model training criteria
The proportion between training and testing sets is 90:10. 10-fold cross-validation with random split was performed on all the datasets.

## Hyper-parameter used in XGBoost classifier
To normalize the imbalance in the number of negative and positive data points in the XGBoost classifier, hyper-parameter–“scale_pos_weight” https://xgboost.readthedocs.io/en/stable/parameter.html#parameters-for-tree-booster, was introduced. The scale_pos_weight value was used to scale the gradient for the positive class. For example, the "scale_pos_weight” = 2 indicates twice the weight of the positive class compared to the negative class. It also overcorrects the misclassification of the positive class. The loss curve (optimized to get a better model) will be affected differently in case of positive and negative entry misclassification. However, large scale_pos_weight can help the model achieve better performance for the positive class prediction (overfitting the positive class) at the cost of worse performance on the negative or both classes. Hence, we have consistently considered the default scale-pos-weight (the ratio of numbers of negative to positive entries) throughout this report.

## Imputation for other ML models
Unlike XGBoost, most ML algorithms cannot handle null values, thus requiring data imputation. We imputed missing values through the IterativeImputer module in the ScKit-learn package (https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/impute.html#multivariate-feature-imputation), which imputes values for null data points for each feature iteratively. It does so by fitting a regressor to the other feature columns (X-parameter) for records with known values of the target feature (y-parameter) and then predicts missing values of the target feature. Chi-square test was performed between the imputed and non-imputed dataset which returns zero values, in almost all the cases (S2 Table in ). The null hypothesis tested in Chi-squared test was that two populations were significantly different (https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.stats.chi2_contingency.html). Chi-squared test returning zero values indicated that the null hypothesis was wrong; hence, both the populations behave similarly.

## Performance metrics
Internal Evaluation. Four metrics were used for internal evaluation of the models, namely, sensitivity, specificity, accuracy and AUC scores. The performance metrics were defined by true positives (TP), true negatives (TN), false positives (FP), and false negatives (FN) (Eqs – ). False negatives, in terms of diagnosis, are the cases where Covid-19 positive patients would be classified as negative and would be possibly allowed to go home. Thus, these would be more harmful than false positive cases–healthy individuals predicted as COVID-19 positive. In screening task, accuracy is defined as success in identifying patients and healthy individuals in total.

 Accuracy=(TruePositive+TrueNegative)(TruePositive+TrueNegtive+FalsePositive+FalseNegative)
(1)

 Sensitivity=TruePositiveTruePositive+FalseNegative
(2)

 Specificity=TrueNegativeTrueNegative+FalsePositive
(3)
For all the above-mentioned metrics, interval values were computed within 95% confidence limit using the formula ( ).

 interval=1.96*metrics*1-metricssample
(4)

the constant 1.96 stands for the number of standard deviations (1.96 for 95% confidence limit).
The fourth metric was the Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC). The AUC was computed from prediction scores using the roc_auc_score (https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.metrics.roc_auc_score.html) module of the sklearn—metrics library. A ROC curve (Receiver Operating Characteristic curve) plots the performance (True Positive Rate (TPR) versus False Positive Rate (FPR)) of a classification model at all classification thresholds. In terms of diagnosis, AUC determines positive cases as actual positive.
TPR is synonymous with sensitivity, also known as recall. FPR is FP/(FP + TN). AUC measures the Area under ROC (as defined by TPR versus FPR) curve from (0,0) to (1,1) along the x-axis (FPR axis). AUC ranges from 0 to 1; 0 implies a 100% wrong model, and 1 indicates a 100% correct model.
External Evaluation. In addition to the above metrics, few more measures were considered for external evaluation, capable of handling both balanced and imbalanced dataset.
Validation of the sample size for the external datasets (dataset cardinality). Minimum Sample Size (MSS) was computed to validate the sample size of the external dataset following the method described in the literature [ , ].
Measuring data similarity between the training and the external validation datasets. The data similarities among the training and the external validation datasets were determined using Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS) test [ ]. KS test is non-parametric that determines whether given two sample datasets come from the same distribution.
Handling data imbalance between training and test datasets. In order to handle the potential imbalance in the target distribution, “Balanced Accuracy”, “F- beta scores” were computed, using sklearn module in python (https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.metrics.balanced_accuracy_score.html). “Balanced Accuracy” is defined as the average of sensitivity and specificity ( ). The best value is 1 and the worst value is 0 when adjusted = False. The F-beta score is robust scoring scheme for balanced and unbalanced datasets. F-Beta accounts “precision” and “recall” together and performs a weighted harmonic mean between these two (Eqs – ). A harmonic mean is the average computed by adding the reciprocal of individual values in a data set and normalizing it with the total number of datapoints. To note, “precision” computes the percentage of correct predictions for positive class and “recall” computes the percentage of correct predictions for positive class out of all possible positives. A smaller value of beta gives more weight to Recall, while a large value of beta gives lower weight to Recall. The value of the F-beta score lies between 0 to 1 (1 is the best value). In this study we used beta equals to two.

 balanced-accuracy=12TPTP+FN+TNTN+FP
(5)

 Recall=TPTP+FN
(6)

 Precision=TPTP+FN
(7)

 Fβ=1+β2*Precision*Recal/β2*Precision+Rcall
(8)
TP, TN, FP and FN represent True positive, true negative, false positive and false negative, respectively.
Model Calibration using Brier Score: Brier Score evaluates the accuracy of a probabilistic prediction. It is more like a cost function [ ]. In case of a binary prediction, the score is defined as in .

 BS=1n∑i=1npi−oi2
(9)

Where pi is the probability of occurrence of the event”i” and oi is the actual outcome (0 or 1) of the event.
Model utility using standardized net benefit: Standardized net benefit (sNBpt) was computed using the formula given by Riley et. al [ ], .

 sNBpt-sensitivity⤫φ-1-specificity⤫1-φ⤫pt/1-pt
(10)

Where φ represents observed outcome event proportion; for example, if there are 83 COVID-19 positive patients in total sample size of 602, φ will be 0.14. pt represents probability threshold, that is generally considered as 0.5, where fifty percent of the population is positive and remaining is negative. However, this is mostly not the real case. Earlier reports included pt = 0.08 for the highest risk group [ ].
Meta-validation of the external performances: Meta-validation procedure was adopted from the method described in the literature [ ]. Here, performances of the ML models were assessed in two dimensions, i) dataset similarity (between training dataset and external validation dataset), measured using KS test, described above and ii) dataset cardinality, measured in terms of minimum sample size (MSS), described above. The performance was evaluated in terms of discrimination (Balanced accuracy), utility (Standardized net benefit) and calibration (Brier score). Two sets of training-external validation datasets were used for meta-validation, in this study.

## Results and discussion

## Correlation between features and SARS-COV-2 results in different clinical datasets
Three independent clinical datasets (dataset 1, dataset 2, and dataset 3) were curated and processed from hospitals in Brazil and Italy. The point-biserial correlations (positive or negative) and p-values were computed between the features and the SARS-COV-2 results ( ).
 For dataset-1, following features were correlated (p-value <0.05) to SARS-COV-2 results, namely, age, regular ward admittance, IC admittance, hemoglobin, hematocrit, platelets, MPV, leukocytes, eosinophils and monocytes. Among the CBC parameters, monocytes, hemoglobin, hematocrit, RBC and MPV have shown significant increase in their values in SARS-COV-2 patients (positive point biserial correlation). The remaining parameters decreased during infection (negative point biserial correlation) ( ). Careful observation revealed that in the case of non-admitted patients, the increase in monocyte is maximum, suggesting that innate immunity is handling the infection. On the other hand, platelet volume (MPV) increased, and platelet counts decreased in the case of regular ward patients, clearly indicating the increase in platelet size. Thus, the immune system will be affected, and the number of immune cells will decrease, justifying the negative correlation of eosinophil, leukocytes, and platelet count with SARS-COV-2 disease. The low platelet counts were accounted for severe COVID-19 patients, those were even down in non-survivors compared to the survivors [ ]. The correlation coefficient values between SARS-COV-2 results and different features reported elsewhere were similar to these observations [ ]. For dataset 2, twenty-six features were correlated (p-value <0.05) to SARS-COV-2 results ( ). Following parameters showed positive point biserial correlations, namely, sex, aspartate amino transferase, alanine transferase, lactate dehydrogenase, hemoglobin, hematocrit and MCHC, i.e., these parameter values increased in COVID-19 patients. Negative point biserial correlations were observed in leukocytes, platelets, erythrocytes, eosinophils, basophils, neutrophils, lymphocytes, monocytes and basophils. For dataset 3, twenty-two features were correlated (p<0.05) to SARS-COV-2 results ( ). Seven parameters, namely, serum ferritin, serum magnesium, MPV, lactate dehydrogenase, GGT, aspartate amino transferase and alanine transferase have showed positive point biserial correlations with SARS-COV-2 results. Whereas basophil, eosinophil, erythrocytes, hematocrits, hemoglobin, leukocytes, lymphocytes, neutrophils, monocytes, platelets, MCHC, serum albumin, serum calcium and total bilirubin have showed negative point biserial correlations with SARS-COV-2 results.
While comparing datasets, 1 to 3, few features–those correlated with SARS-COV-2 results (p<0.05) were observed common across the datasets. Those features were, hemoglobin, hematocrit, platelets, leukocytes, eosinophils and monocytes. These features either decrease (negative point biserial correlation) or increase (positive correlation) in SARS-COV-2 patients, in different degrees according to the disease severity. Platelets, leukocytes, and eosinophils consistently showed negative correlations with SARS-COV-2 results, across all the datasets. Monocytes, also showed negative correlations with SARS-COV-2 results, except in dataset 1. Other parameters, like, basophils, neutrophils, lymphocytes, showed negative correlations with SARS-COV-2 results, in both datasets 2 and 3. Hemoglobin and hematocrit showed positive correlations in dataset 2, whereas, negative correlations in dataset 3. The observations indicated the dependencies of certain hematological parameters on demographic populations. In summary, features correlated (p<0.05) with SARS-COV-2 results across all three datasets were, hemoglobin, hematocrit, platelets, leukocytes, eosinophils and monocytes. The features common across datasets 2 and 3 were, hemoglobin, platelets, leukocytes, eosinophils, monocytes, hematocrit, erythrocytes, lymphocytes, basophils, neutrophils, LDH, serum calcium, MCHC and ALT. To generalize further, we compared these observations with hematological parameters obtained from Indian populations, those correlated with D-dimer values [ ]. Henceforth, this dataset will be mentioned as Indian dataset. The common features across datasets 1, 2, 3 and Indian dataset, were platelets, eosinophils, monocytes and leukocytes. These four features were used earlier by Banerjee et.al., (on Brazilian dataset) for hematology-based ML model development [ ]. Hence, the same set of features were used, here, for external validation of the models.

## Curation of working sub-datasets
We have curated three primary datasets from hospitals of Brazil and Italy. Based on the common hematological parameters across datasets, 1, 2, 3 and Indian dataset, a subset of four-features was developed from datasets 1 and 2 named as 1-four-features, and 2-four-features respectively. The 1-four-features sub-dataset contained 602 records, 83 positives, and 519 negatives. Thus, the negative-to-positive sample size ratio was 6.25. The 2-four-features sub-dataset contained 1736 records, 816 positives, and 920 negatives, with subsequent increase in the ratio of negative to positive records to 1.13 compared to 0.81 in dataset 2.
Apart from four-featured datasets, we have also considered standard full blood count [ , ]—hematocrit, haemoglobin, platelets, mean platelet volume (MPV), red blood cells (RBC), lymphocytes, mean corpuscular haemoglobin concentration (MCHC), leukocytes, basophils, neutrophils, mean corpuscular haemoglobin (MCH), eosinophils, mean corpuscular volume (MCV), monocytes and red blood cell distribution width (RBCDW). Most of these parameters were present across all the datasets; although, all might not have shown correlations (p<0.05) with SARS-COV-2 results. This is termed as fourteen-featured dataset, developed from datasets 1 and 3 and named as, 1-fourteen-features and 3-fourteen-features. The 1-fourteen-features sub-dataset contains 602 records, 83 positives, and 519 negatives; the negative-to-positive sample size ratio was 6.25. The 3-fourteen-features sub-dataset included total 12105 records. The negative to positive ratio in this dataset was 0.356, that is, the dataset is mildly skewed towards positive results. Hence, a scale_pos_weight of 0.356 was used to treat the data imbalance.
These four different sub-datasets curated, here, were trained on seven different machine learning models. The summary of all the raw and processed datasets along with the four sub-datasets were represented as a scheme ( ).
 

## Benchmarking of seven different ML models on working sub-datasets
The 10-fold cross validation studies on four sub-datasets showed that random splits for 10-fold validation did not affect the performance metrics (nominal changes observed in standard deviation values, ranging from 0.01 to 0.19) (S3 Table in ). The performances of different models on four sub-datasets were measured using the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves ( ). Receiver Operating Characteristic curve plots the performance (True Positive Rate (TPR) versus False Positive Rate (FPR)) of a classification model at all classification thresholds. In terms of diagnosis, AUC curves determine positive cases as actual positive. For all the four sub-datasets, ROC curve showed the optimal performance for XGBoost model. XGBoost model, being a ternary classifier, can handle the class imbalance and perform in a better way, compared to other ML models. To note, for other ML model data imputation was performed, yet the results were the best for XGBoost model. XGBoost outperformed other models for all the four sub-datasets, in terms of ROC curves. When all the performance metrics, namely, accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and AUC scores were considered together, XGBoost still performed the best (S4 Table in ) The elapsed computational time was comparable across different ML models except support vector machine which has taken slightly longer time (S5 Table in ). Based on the above standardization, XGBoost model was selected for subsequent studies.
 Sub-dataset, 1-four-feature, has shown optimal performance (AUC score 0.94) in all four metrics. The sensitivity value was observed as 1.0, indicating 100% correct prediction of True Positive (TP) values, presumably, due to overcorrection of the TP values in a small dataset (n = 602) with a low population of positives (n = 83), leading to large scale-pos-weight of 6.25. As mentioned in the method section, large scale-pos-weight improves the performance of the positive class prediction at the cost of the negative class prediction. Models other than XGBoost showed low-sensitivity values for 1-four-feature and 1-fourteen-feature datasets (S4 Table in ). The low sensitivity values presumably attributed to the smaller data size and even a shallower positive population. Most likely, the XGBoost, being a ternary classifier, can more effectively handle the class imbalance than the imputations performed in other ML methods. However, the low sensitivity problem was absent in sub-dataset 2-four-feature, where the number of positives and negatives were equivalent. The performance of XGBoost model on 3-fourteen-feature sub-dataset was reasonable ( ) whereas, performances of the other models on the same sub-dataset was too low (S4 Table in ). Overall assessment indicated the general acceptability of XGBoost models over others.
 

## Comparison of internal performances of the XGBoost model with published reports
Purpose of internal validation of the XGBoost model was to evaluate the ability of the model to generalize on any given dataset.
The internal performances of the XGBoost model were compared with reported methods from the published literature ( ). The XGBoost model developed on 1-four-feature and 1-fourteen-feature dataset showed AUC scores 0.92 and 0.94, respectively ( ). The sensitivity and specificity values obtained from XGBoost models on 1-fourteen-features sub-dataset were 0.75 and 0.89, respectively. Those from sub-dataset 1-four-features were 1.0 and 0.91 respectively ( ). These values were better than those reported by authors in [ ] (sensitivity, 0.43 and specificity 0.91). The model by Banerjee et.al. [ ] was developed on Kaggle dataset (same source, as described in this work, as dataset 1). Banerjee et. al. model was trained on a dataset with skewed numbers of positive (n = 39) and negative cases (n = 598); the negative to positive ratio was much improved in the current work. Moreover, this model has not provided the information regarding the analytical instruments, analytical principle and the units of measurements, thus limiting the model in terms of replicability and generalizability. Using the same dataset [ ], Avila et.al. [ ] developed a Bayesian model with improved sensitivity and specificity values (76.7%). There were more reports in literature those described CBC-based ML models. Some of these models were developed on a very small dataset (n = 171) and limited time frame (from March 7th 2020 to March 19th 2020) [ ]. Sensitivity and specificity reported from that work was 83% and 82%, respectively. Another research group [ ] has developed a logistic regression model, trained on only 380 CBC data and reported high sensitivity (93%) but low specificity (43%) values. Other ML models, namely, Gradient Boosting (n = 3,356) [ ] and K-nearest-neighbor and Random Forest (n = 1624) [ ] were trained on large number of haematological and biochemical parameters and reported reasonable AUC scores, 0.85 and 0.78 respectively. Considering the overall raw sample size of the dataset used in this work (n = 195554) and the robustness of the XGBoost ternary classifier (ability to handle the class imbalance of the datasets, as evident from the results compared with other ML methods) (Tables and S4 in ) this approach seems to be more effective in terms of reliability and generality.
 

## XGBoost models used for external evaluation across the populations
Purpose of the external evaluation was to test the sensitivity and specificity of the developed models on independent datasets and also to identify the potential suspect cases, by implementing XGBoost models.
As per the internal evaluation, the XGBoost model performed the best on the sub-dataset 1-four-feature. The performance of the XGBoost model on sub-dataset 1-fourteen-feature was comparable to that of sub-dataset 1-four-feature, with a slightly lower AUC Score (0.94 versus 0.92). Based on these scores, XGBoost models developed on sub-datasets 1-four-features and 1-fourteen-features tend to be attractive candidates for external evaluations. However, models developed on these datasets have some limitations, namely, overfitting problem due to small sample size. Moreover, the Kaggle dataset (the source of dataset 1) lacks the description of analytical instruments, analytical principles and measurement units; hence, models built on these training datasets have issues regarding reproducibility and generality [ ]. Therefore, we selected two other XGBoost models with four and fourteen parameters obtained from two sub-datasets, sub-dataset 2-four-features (Italy), and sub-dataset 3-fourteen-features (Brazil), albeit with a slightly lowered AUC score of 0.842 in both cases. These two were the final working models (training dataset) for external evaluation.

## External evaluation of XGBoost models with four hematological parameters across Italian and Brazilian populations
External evaluation for the four-parameter model was performed on the test dataset 1-four-features from Brazil. Note that the training dataset 2-four-features was from Italy. The sensitivity was 0.81 with a low specificity value of 0.45. The dataset cardinality was evaluated using two metrics, AUC score and balanced accuracy; the score values were 0.69 and 0.63, respectively ( ). The AUC score is sensitive to class imbalance, whereas balanced accuracy is better suited to handle imbalanced datasets and thus, is more reliable in this particular case. The data utility was computed in terms of standardized net benefit using the formulation reported earlier by Riley et al. [ ]. The value was -2.6, at the prediction threshold value of 0.5. Considering the large class imbalance (ratio of positive cases to total sample size was 0.14), we used a different probability threshold of 0.15 that yielded a standardized net benefit score of -0.084. Both the values were worse than the “treat none” scenario—that is, no clinical decision administered to any patient. However, if we use a “treat all” situation, that is, all patients were treated (irrespective of COVID-19 positive or negative), the net benefit was -0.012 and 0.72, for probability threshold values of 0.15 ad 0.5, respectively. To note, standardized net benefit was computed earlier at different probability threshold values depending on the degree of risk factor [ ].
 

## External evaluation of XGBoost models with fourteen hematological parameters within the Brazilian populations
The fourteen-parameter XGBoost model was trained on dataset 3-fourteen-features (n = 12105) and tested on dataset 1-fourteen-features (n = 602), both from Brazilian populations. However, the samples in these two datasets were from different time points; hence those can be considered independent data sources. The AUC score and balanced accuracy for this prediction were 0.86 and 0.73, respectively ( ). These results were better than the performance for the four-feature XGBoost model across the populations. There could be multiple reasons for the better performance of the fourteen-feature model over the four-feature model, a) the larger size of the training dataset, b) training and prediction data obtained from the same demographic location, that is, Brazil, and c) combination of a greater number of features with a larger dataset, presumably, yields to a better result. The computed standardized net benefit [ ], at the probability threshold of 0.5 was -0.07. Considering large imbalance in the COVID-19 positive cases in the external validation dataset (ratio of positive cases to total sample size was 0.14), the standardized net benefit was computed at a different probability threshold of 0.15 yielding the value of 0.33. Both the values at two different probability thresholds were fairly better than the “treat none” or “treat all” situations. Thus, the standardized net benefit indicated lesser risk and more benefit by implementing this model on the same group of population.

## Meta-validation of the ML models on external dataset performances
Meta-validation was performed on two sets of training / external validation datasets, namely, i) 2-four-features (Italian) / 1-four-features (Brazilian) and ii) 3-fourteen-feature (Brazilian) / 1-fourteen-feature (Brazilian). The performances of the ML models were assessed in two dimensions, i) dataset similarity (between training dataset and external validation dataset), and ii) minimum sample size (MSS); and evaluated in terms of Balanced accuracy, Standardized net benefit and Brier score. The meta-validation results were depicted using External Performance Diagram ( ). The results showed that the minimum sample size exceeded 110% for both the datasets, as apparent from the hue brightness ( ). The 3-fourteen feature/1-fourteen feature model (training and external validation set both from Brazil) performed well (“good” according to external performance diagram). As reported earlier [ ], an external validation can be considered successful when the model exhibits at-least good performance on some of the external datasets. The training and the external validation datasets from Brazil were “slight” in similarity and have adequate sample size ( ). “Slight” similarity (less than 40%) of the external validation dataset with respect to the training dataset implied a reliable test bunch in terms of conservative estimates of model performance [ ]. On the other hand, 2-four feature / 1-four feature model (training dataset from Italy and test dataset from Brazil) sample size was adequate according to the hue brightness. The data similarity between training and the test dataset was “low”, lower than 20%, hence reliable. However, the model utility was outside the “acceptable” region. According to the previous study [ ], there were several discrepancies across Italian and Brazilian datasets those lead to poor performance on their external validation; for example, i) lack of predictive features, such as “Suspect feature” in Brazilian dataset, ii) the instruments used for data collection in these two datasets were different (at least, instrument names were unknown in case of Brazilian datasets), etc.
 

## Comparison of meta-validation results with the literature reports
In recent past Cabitza et. al. from Italy has performed meta-validation studies for COVID-19 diagnosis based on hematological parameters [ ]. Their training dataset comprised of twenty-one hematological features curated from two different hospitals of Italy, along with eight external validation datasets—three from Italy, three from Brazil, one from Spain and one from Ethiopia. The total dataset size (including both training and external validation) was n = 7046, much lower than that presented in this study (n = 195554, raw data). The results from their analyses indicated that the model performance is good or excellent when the external datasets were from Italy. However, the external performances were poorer than acceptable values in case of Spain and Brazil datasets (Fig 8 of ref [ ]). The performances were quantified in terms of various metrics, for example, average F2-score for Italian datasets was 87%±3% and that of Brazilian datasets was 37%±4%. This clearly indicated that the model performed good or excellent when trained and tested on the same population (in this case, Italy). Authors have pointed out that the poor performance on external dataset from different population could be due to various reasons, such as, differences in testing equipment, reference ranges, ethnic variability, phenotypic variability, human immune response etc. In the present study, we have considered two external validation datasets, i) training and external dataset from the same population (Brazil) and ii) training (Italy) and external (Brazil) dataset from different populations. The intra-population F2-score was 80% and inter-population F2-score was 49%; the inter-population F2-score, in this study, was better than the published reported (stated above). Similarly, the Brier score reported, in this study ( ), was comparable to the published report ( of [ ]) for intra-population external validation. Whereas, the Brier score for inter-population, reported in this study was lower (0.3) than some of the external performances in the earlier study, indicating better accuracy of the probabilistic prediction. The lower performance of intra-population external validation in this study could be due to the anonymised data in Dataset 1 (obtained from the Kaggle data set) or the missing unit information for different haematological features, in the same dataset. While comparing the utility of the model, in terms of standardized net benefit, the current model performance was poor for the inter-population external validation, at two different probability threshold values ( ), compared to the earlier report [ ]. One of the possible reasons could be the anonymity of the data and the instrumentation for Dataset 1. The standardized net benefit value for intra-population validation was better at probability threshold value of 0.15, and close to the acceptable range reported earlier [ ]. However, the utility of this model was lower compared to the reported models [ ]. The limitation could be the unknown instrumentation, units, and normalization schemes used in the Brazilian dataset, that left a gap to compare and calibrate the results. The state-of-the-art (SOTA) of the current study lies in its robustness in the data size (n = 195554) in comparison to the above-mentioned report (n = 7046). Moreover, the current study can predict COVID-19 disease using a lesser number of haematological features (four or fourteen) compared to the previous study (twenty-one features) without compromising the external model performance. In addition, the F2-score and Brier score for the inter-population external validations in the current study were superior to some of those reported earlier. Thus, the current models seem to be more parsimonious and useful toward general applicability.

## Impact of Instantial Variation (IV) on the external validation datasets
Instantial Variation (IV) was defined as the within-subject possible variation that is not due to population differences or errors; rather, intrinsic to a given instance or the measurement process [ ]. The biological variations were estimated for different blood parameters, namely leukocytes [ ], platelet parameters [ ], red blood cell, reticulocyte parameters [ ], etc.; where the blood samples were collected from healthy individuals within intervals of weeks (medium-term variations) or intervals of days (short-term variations). The biological variations were marginally different between short-term and medium-term instances, in most of the cases. The impact of IV on the quality of ML models was tested, where the authors showed that ML model performances were poorer for the IV-perturbation data and the model performances improved when IV-perturbation data were augmented with synthetic data [ ].
As each instance is different from the other, we studied the effect of IV on the XGBoost model tested on the external validation datasets across a) the Italian and Brazilian populations and b) intra-Brazilian populations. The IV-perturbation and data augmentation were implemented in Python v. 3.10.4, using numpy v. 1.23.0, scikit-learn v. 1.1.1 and scikit-weak v.0.2.0, adapting the zenodo code provided in the literature [ ]. The IV-perturbation was performed by resampling each data point following a Gaussian distribution. The Gaussian distribution width was obtained from the variability scores reported for different hematological parameters [ – ]. One hundred synthetic data points were augmented using the Gaussian distribution for the IV-perturbation plus augmentation method. Three XGBoost performance metrics were reported ( ).
 The notable point in the performance metrics was very small standard deviation values from one hundred cycles of iterations; more than a logarithmic scale lower than the confidence interval reported elsewhere (Fig 2 of reference ). Although IV-perturbation has affected the model performance on the inter-population data (Italy versus Brazil), the intra-population data was least affected ( ). Thus, the XGBoost model was robust enough on the external validation dataset from the same population which indicated its potential applicability. There could be three possible reasons for less IV-perturbation of the XGBoost model (at least for one dataset) compared to the literature report [ ], i) the external validation data size was sufficiently large, ii) the data were internally normalized (as mentioned in the method section), and inherent robustness of the XGBoost model.

## Blind prediction of XGBoost models with four hematological parameters on West European populations
To further validate the efficacy of the working models, we have considered one more dataset from published literature with thirty-seven features, including the data points from different stages (time points) of COVID-19 [ ]. The dataset was obtained from the literature without pre-processing (no feature, record, or data point removed). The source authors have reported two distinct stages of COVID-19 patients, W.E.-early and W.E.-advanced. Distributions of four haematological parameters across the datasets, 1-four-features, 2-four-features, W.E.-early, and W.E.-advanced, were compared ( ). The distributions were almost the same across all the datasets for Leukocytes and platelets. For eosinophils and monocytes, the distributions for datasets 2-four-features and W.E.-early are similar, and for the distributions across datasets 1-four-features and W.E.-advanced. The external performance of the model on the W.E.-early dataset (0.65) was high compared to that on the W.E.-advanced dataset (0.52) ( ). To note, W.E.-early and W.E.-advanced datasets contain information only from COVID-19 patients and no negative controls. Hence, only the sensitivity metric was reported ( ).
 

## Deployment of prediction server
We deployed a web server where two sets of inputs are accepted for binary COVID-19 prediction, i) four hematological parameters (leukocyte, monocyte, eosinophil, and platelet count) and ii) fourteen-parameter models (CBC and WBC differentials). The server outputs the COVID-9 results, either positive or negative, with the COVID-19 probability reported in percentage. Link to the web server: https://covipred.bits-hyderabad.ac.in/home. Design of the webserver is given the supplementary information.

## Conclusion
Considering the need to develop an alternate protocol for rapid, near-accurate, and cheaper COVID-19 detection technique, we aimed to externally validate the haematology-based ML prediction by optimizing the features, which is yet to be fully understood. We have integrated published clinical records from Brazil, Italy, and West Europe hospitals. The data from Brazil and Italy were classified into four sub-datasets and trained on seven different ML methods. The XGBoost algorithm consistently performed superior to other ML methods. The internal performances of the XGBoost models were compared with the published reports available on the same datasets; the models reported here outperformed the published reports. The meta validation of the ML models on external datasets indicated the acceptability of the external performances; these results were either comparable or superior to the published reports. In this study, two sets of haematological parameters were selected for ML models, i) four features–leukocytes, monocytes, platelets and eosinophils (those were common across three different countries, namely, Brazil, Italy and India) and ii) fourteen features–CBC and WBC differentials. Both the set of parameters are represented by basic routine blood tests, usually, available in low-resource settings (CBC dataset). The ML methodology developed and externally validated here, was based on routine blood examination outcomes–available for inpatients and emergency-admitted patients. The current models, developed on a large sample cohort, can be used parsimoniously (as it used lesser number of haematological features compared to the previous study) for COVID-19 diagnosis. Moreover, the XGBoost model was marginally perturbed by Instantial Variations (IV), albeit noise, in the intra-population external validation dataset. To note, ML models have their own limitations, in terms of dataset dependencies, size of the datasets, ethnic variabilities, phenotypic variabilities, analytical instrumentations for clinical chemistry tests, etc. This shortcoming was, to some extent, reflected in the external validation; for four-feature models—specificity value was good but sensitivity value was poor ( ). As reviewed earlier, variation in analytical instrumentations may exhibit extreme heterogeneity, thus may cause concern for the further usage of the model [ ]. On the other hand, external validation for fourteen-feature model exhibited good sensitivity but poor specificity values ( ). One way to overcome this limitation would be using the blood test results from same analytical instrumentations. However, as suggested in the literature, CBC standardization was less problematic due to change in analytical instrumentations compared to other tests [ ]. Nevertheless, ML-based models are low cost and depends on rapid blood test exam, providing a good start for initial screening. Moreover, these results could be combined and compounded with qRT-PCR tests with an expectation of higher accuracy and sensitivity for the suspected cases. Thus, large scale identification of COVID-19 patients can be done in timely manner. Two XGBoost models, based on these two sets of features, were selected for external evaluations. The external performance of the fourteen-parameter XGBoost model trained and tested on the Brazilian dataset was comparable to that of the internal performance. However, the external performances of the four-parameter XGBoost model trained on the Italian dataset and tested on a) Brazilian and b) West European datasets were poorer than the internal evaluation. The results promise the utility of these models when trained and tested on the same populations. However, it also warns to use the model, with caution, trained on one population and tested on another. The outcome of this work has the potential for an initial screen of COVID-19 based on haematological parameters. In future work, we aim to train and test those on the Indian population to use at the healthcare centres of India.

## Supporting information
S1 Appendix

## 5 supporting tables and additional description on the webserver development.
(DOCX)

## Abbreviations
ALTAlanine transferase
AUCArea under curve
CBCComplete blood count
COVID-19Coronavirus Disease 2019
CRPC-Reactive Protein
d-CFLRatio of (C-reactive protein times Ferritin) divided by White blood cell count
d-CITProduct of C-reactive protein times International normalised ratio times Troponin
d-CTProduct of C-reactive protein times Troponin
d-CWLRatio of C-reactive protein divided by (White blood cell count times Lymphocyte count)
d-PPTProduct of Platelet count times Procalcitonin times Troponin
ESRErythrocyte sedimentation rate
FAPESPFundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo (São Paulo State Research Support Foundation)
FNFalse negatives
FPFalse positives
FPRFalse Positive Rate
GGTGamma-glutamyl transferase
ICUIntensive care unit
INRInternational normalised ratio
LDHLactate dehydrogenase
MCHMean corpuscular haemoglobin
MCHCMean corpuscular; hemoglobin concentration
MCVMean corpuscular volume
MLMachine Learning
MPVMean platelet volume
OSROspedale San Raffaele (San Raffaele Hospital)
PTProthrombin Time
qRT-PCRquantitative-Real-Time-Polymerase-Chain-Reaction
RATRapid-antigen test
RBCRed blood cells
RDWRed blood cell distribution width
ROCReceiver operator curve
SARS-CoV-2Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
TNTrue negatives
TPTrue positives
TPRTrue Positive Rate
W.E.Western Europe
WBCWhite blood cell count
XGBoostExtreme Gradient Boosting
 10.1371/journal.pone.0316467.r001Decision Letter 0
BrandaFrancescoAcademic Editor© 2025 Francesco Branda2025Francesco Brandahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
28 Jul 2023

PONE-D-23-15648The external validity of machine learning-based prediction scores from hematological parameters of COVID-19: A study using hospital records from Brazil, Italy, and Western EuropePLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Bandyopadhyay,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Sep 11 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:

A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Francesco Branda
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf  
2. We note that you have stated that you will provide repository information for your data at acceptance. Should your manuscript be accepted for publication, we will hold it until you provide the relevant accession numbers or DOIs necessary to access your data. If you wish to make changes to your Data Availability statement, please describe these changes in your cover letter and we will update your Data Availability statement to reflect the information you provide.
3. Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information. 
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: No
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: No
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: No
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: The following points should be considered in the manuscript:
1-The authors have focused on specific type of the haematological parameters without adding any explanations about the reasons of the using. So, the authors must explain this significant point in details.
2-The authors must explain in more and more details how they got the actual positive results of applying the model which they focused on in the manuscript on the biological tissues effects.
3-The authors must add more details and information about the limitations of the methodology which they have reached in the manuscript where there are multiple studies represent how the same methodology appears its limitations because this is a significant point.
4-In the figure 6, the authors must retype the actual units of the measurement.
5-The figure 2, 3 and 4 in addition to the related results of the manuscript need more comparisons in the light of the methodology itself.
6-The availability of the methodology which the authors have used in the manuscript must be expanded to other problems.
7-In the conclusion section of the manuscript, the authors must add more details about the future improvements of the suggested methodology in the light of the methodology of the manuscript and about its availability to other measuring problems.
8-There are some typographical or grammatical mistakes found in the text of the manuscript, so, the authors must recheck all of those mistakes over all parts of the manuscript.
9-There are some recent literature studies about the transmission of COVID-19 in Brazil using of the machine learning techniques which is doi:10.1515/em-2021-0029, and doi:10.1515/em-2020-0036, and doi:10.1515/em-2022-0108, and the authors must discuss those literature studies as examples of those studies.
10-The statistical analyses of the methodology for the rat is pure, it is preferable mention the positive and the negative point for each case.
11-There are some indicators of the used methodology are not included where there are multiple effects of those indicators.
12-In the table 1 of the manuscript, there is missing discussions of some significant details, and it must be taken into account.
13-the table 2 of the manuscript needs more discussion because this table is a key-role of the results of the manuscript.
14-The availability of the methodology procedures of the manuscript which the authors have employed must be expanded by adding more information and details.
15-There are some symbols or abbreviations used in the text of the manuscript without any definition, so the authors must define each symbol or abbreviation even if the symbol is very well known.
16-The authors must show the negative effects of the ML model.
17-The authors must retype all of the equations of the manuscript in a more effective way.
Reviewer #2: Introduction
Early detection of severely infected COVID-19 patients, ICU admission, and comprehensive information from previous studies on mortality estimation are important for understanding the importance of the subject. This information to be added will increase the validity and reliability of the study. In addition, this study draws attention to some biomarkers in the diagnosis and determination of the severity of COVID-19. Your reason for choosing these features will be better understood if you consider the explanations I have suggested below. Pay attention to these suggestions.
First of all, in the introduction of this study, a paragraph should be written about the importance of routine blood values, which are effective in the diagnosis, prognosis and mortality of COVID-19.
1) There is important information in the following articles that point to the role and importance of laboratory markers in the diagnosis, prognosis and mortality of COVID-19. I suggest citing the key findings of these articles.
-What Is the Impact and Efficacy of Routine Immunological, Biochemical and Hematological Biomarkers as Predictors of COVID-19 Mortality? Int. Immunopharmacol. 2022, 105, 108542. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intimp.2022.108542.
-The Effectiveness of Blood Routine Parameters and Some Biomarkers as a Potential Diagnostic Tool in the Diagnosis and Prognosis of Covid-19 Disease. Int. Immunopharmacol. 2021, 98, 107838. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intimp.2021.107838.
-Forecasting of Oxidant/Antioxidant levels of COVID-19 patients by using Expert models with biomarkers used in the Diagnosis/Prognosis of COVID-19. Int. Immunopharmacol., 2021; 100, 108127. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intimp.2021.108127.
2) There is important information in the following articles emphasizing the changes in routine blood values and some demographic characteristics in the deterioration of immune responses and the increase in the severity and mortality of the disease in COVID-19. I suggest citing the key findings of these articles.
-COVID-19 Is More Dangerous for Older People and Its Severity Is Increasing: A Case-Control Study. Med. Gas Res. 2022, 12, 51–54. https://doi.org/ 10.4103/2045-9912.325992.
-How Do Routine Laboratory Tests Change in Coronavirus Disease 2019? Scand. J. Clin. Lab. Investig. 2021, 81, 24–33. https://doi.org/10.1080/00365513.2020.1855470.
-Oxyhemoglobin Dissociation Curve in COVID-19 Patients. Meandros Med Dent J 2023;24(1):58-64. https://doi.org/10.4274/meandros.galenos.2023.87049.
-Prediction of Diagnosis and Prognosis of COVID-19 Disease by Blood Gas Parameters Using Decision Trees Machine Learning Model: A Retrospective Observational Study. Med. Gas Res. 2022, 12, 60–66. https://doi.org/10.4103/2045-9912.326002.
3) The following articles describe the efficacy of important biomarkers as a potential predictor of diagnosis, prognosis and mortality of COVID-19. I propose to refer to the main findings of these articles.
-Diagnosis and Prognosis of COVID-19 Disease Using Routine Blood Values and LogNNet Neural Network. Sensors 2022, 22, 4820. https://doi.org/10.3390/s22134820.
-Automatic Detection of Severely and Mildly Infected COVID-19 Patients with Supervised Machine Learning Models. IRBM 2022, 1, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.irbm.2022.05.006.
-Detection of Risk Predictors of COVID-19 Mortality with Classifier Machine Learning Models Operated with Routine Laboratory Biomarkers. Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 12180. https://doi.org/10.3390/app122312180.
-Machine Learning Sensors for Diagnosis of COVID-19 Disease Using Routine Blood Values for Internet of Things Application. Sensors 2022, 22, 7886. https://doi.org/10.3390/s22207886.
-Effect of ferritin, INR, and D-dimer immunological parameters levels as predictors of COVID-19 mortality: A strong prediction with the decision trees. Heliyon, e14015. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e14015.
4) Findings should not be mentioned in the introduction. The sentences that are suitable for the hypothesis and the purpose of the article are sufficient.
Material and Method
-Information about patient exclusion criteria and demographic characteristics should be given.
-Which features are taken should be stated in units of these features. This is important for clinicians.
-I suggest that the explanations of machine learning algorithms should be given as sub-headings. In addition, literature should be given for these explanations.
-Is the feature selection model used for machine learning models? should be specified.
- It should be stated what the performance metrics are used for (for example, for diagnostic performance).
Results
- 95% confidence limits of performance metrics should be given.
-There is a big difference between sensitivity and specificity results in model performance results. This indicates the imbalance of the data set. Explain what was done to balance and optimize the dataset.
- It will be more beautiful if the figures are colored (especially figure 4). In addition, the resolution of the figure should be increased.
Dıscussıon and Conclusion
- I could not see a comparison of the important findings in this study with the literature. Discussion on this should be added. You can also use the above-mentioned articles for this.
-Which features were most effective in the diagnosis of the disease? these should be specified.
- The prominent findings of the article should be reported in articles.
Reviewer #3: The external validity of machine learning-based prediction scores from hematological parameters of COVID-19: A study using hospital records from Brazil, Italy, and Western Europe
The manuscript proposes an interesting investigation on the performance of machine learning techniques to predict scores from hematological parameters of COVID-19. The study also compares prediction performance on data from different countries. The paper is well structured and discussed. Results are properly presented and explained. Here are some questions/recommendations to improve its quality.
• In line 219, authors state that an imputation process was required for ML models other than XGBoost. Was any statistical test conducted to ensure that the imputed information did not change the underlying structure of the data?
• What is the proportion between training and testing sets? How was that splitting performed? Could different proportion between training and testing affect the performance of the classifier?
• In line 254 it is mentioned that hematological features were selected based on the Pearson correlation coefficients between the features and the SARS-COV-2 results (positive or negative). Any concern on the correlation among the features themselves? Several classifiers tend to have their performance reduced when dealing with highly correlated features. Please comment on it. Also, were these retained features meaningful from a practical perspective?
• How were the cutting limits for the Pearson correlation defined?
• I would recommend a minor comment on the computational processing time required by each technique (if possible), since more complex techniques tend to be very time-consuming.
• Results on Table 3 a) are substantially smaller than previous ones. Please provide further explanation on such lower performance metrics.
Reviewer #4: The paper presents an application of Machine Learning methodologies to predict positivity to SARS-CoV-2 based on blood exams results.
I appreciated the attempt to include a diverse set of countries and contexts. Nonetheless, I believe this work has significant limitations.
Major comments
1) I find it puzzling why correlations are used a priori to select features. Models like XGBoost work well also with a large number of features and are capable of automatically selecting the most relevant ones or identifying meaningful combinations. Relying solely on linear pair-wise correlation coefficients to exclude features based on their relationship with the outcome might hinder the discovery of valuable interaction patterns. These interactions may involve features that lack significant predictive power individually but demonstrate strong predictive ability when considered in combination with other features
2) The Pearson correlation coefficient is not the most appropriate measure to compute the correlation between a binary variable and a continuous or categorical variable. Indeed, the Pearson correlation coefficient is specifically designed to measure the linear relationship between two continuous variables. More suitable approaches should be considered instead (point-biserial correlation or biserial correlation, other non parametric tests).
3) The motivation of the paper appears to be insufficiently convincing. While the paper emphasises the advantages of haematological analysis, it overlooks significant limitations. For instance, the paper fails to acknowledge that RT-PCR, despite being more expensive, allows for simpler sample collection through nasal or oral swabs, unlike haematological analysis, which requires a blood sample. Additionally, the paper neglects to address rapid tests, a relevant aspect that warrants discussion. Including a comprehensive analysis of different testing methods and their respective pros and cons would significantly enhance the paper's credibility and provide a more balanced perspective.
4) Regarding the last point, the current framing appears to have a significant issue. The majority of the findings in the presentation revolve around the model's performance, which raises concerns. While the model's performance may be highlighted, it fails to demonstrate the practical advantages of using such a model. There seem to be limited benefits to adopting this model when individuals could obtain similar, if not more accurate, results using a rapid test or PCR without the need for blood collection. Additionally, the paper indicates that the model's performance dramatically declines when trained on a different population. The information presented in table 3A and 3B suggests that the model behaves similarly to a random classifier in such cases. This is a critical limitation as it contradicts the emphasis on the model's performance. It becomes challenging to justify the practical application of this model when its effectiveness diminishes significantly when applied to different populations. See for example the last sentence of the abstract “Thus, current models can be applied at other demographic locations.” I find it very hard to support this statement looking at the results from Table 3.
Minor comments
1) The description of the Web application is not very useful and do not add much to the paper, therefore I believe it should be shortened significantly and moved eventually in the Supplementary Information
2) The dataset description is quite hard to follow, why so many variations of the same dataset are produced? I’d suggest presenting the results for selected datasets in the main, and move the rest to the supplementary information. Also, there are many arbitrary decisions in the dataset creation part that need justifications (examples are the threshold of null values used to drop entries which are not even consistent across dataset, in some cases it is 90%, in others 66%, why?)
3) References to ML models and packages used should be included
4) I could not find details on model training criteria (cross-validation, parameter selection, etc)
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
Reviewer #4: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0316467.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
18 Nov 2023

Reviewer #1: The following points should be considered in the manuscript:
1-The authors have focused on specific type of the haematological parameters without adding any explanations about the reasons of the using. So, the authors must explain this significant point in details.
Response: The explanation for choosing specific hematological parameters were added in “Results and Discussion” section, subheading – “Correlation between features and SARS-COV-2 results in different clinical datasets”, line number (version with all-markup):370-442 and 453-468.
2-The authors must explain in more and more details how they got the actual positive results of applying the model which they focused on in the manuscript on the biological tissues effects.
Response: To the best of our knowledge, biological tissue effects were not studied in this work. 
Here we suppose “actual positive results” indicate the “ground truth” used in this study for comparison with the predicted results. The “actual positive results” were obtained from molecular tests, RT-PCR results, from different hospitals. More explanations are added in line number (version with all markups) 150-156; 202-209; 232-233.
3-The authors must add more details and information about the limitations of the methodology which they have reached in the manuscript where there are multiple studies represent how the same methodology appears its limitations because this is a significant point.
Response: More detailed information added in line number (version with all markups) 569-578
4-In the figure 6, the authors must retype the actual units of the measurement.
Response: Actual units of measurements were added in Figure 2. In Figure 6, normalized counts were shown.
5-The figure 2, 3 and 4 in addition to the related results of the manuscript need more comparisons in the light of the methodology itself.
Response: More comparison added for -
Figure 2, line number (version with all markups) 372-385; 395-400; 410-417; 424-439.
Figure 3, line number (version with all markups) 445-468
Figure 4, line number (version with all markups) 487-497
6-The availability of the methodology which the authors have used in the manuscript must be expanded to other problems.
Response: The XGBoost models selected from internal evaluation were expanded to external evaluation, line number (version with all markups) 586-590; and blind predictions line number (601-610)
7-In the conclusion section of the manuscript, the authors must add more details about the future improvements of the suggested methodology in the light of the methodology of the manuscript and about its availability to other measuring problems.
Response: Suggestions incorporated. Line number (Version with all markups) 664-667
8-There are some typographical or grammatical mistakes found in the text of the manuscript, so, the authors must recheck all of those mistakes over all parts of the manuscript.
Response: The typographical or grammatical mistakes were rechecked manually and with Grammarly (https://app.grammarly.com/apps).
9-There are some recent literature studies about the transmission of COVID-19 in Brazil using of the machine learning techniques which is doi:10.1515/em-2021-0029, and doi:10.1515/em-2020-0036, and doi:10.1515/em-2022-0108, and the authors must discuss those literature studies as examples of those studies.
Response: References included, line number (version with all markups) 104-106, reference numbers; - 27 and 28. The third reference suggested was not aligned to the current work – not included.
10-The statistical analyses of the methodology for the rat is pure, it is preferable mention the positive and the negative point for each case.
Response: Suggestions included, line number (version with all markups) 58-79
11-There are some indicators of the used methodology are not included where there are multiple effects of those indicators.
Response: Authors assumed that the reviewer mentioned indicators as hematological parameters. Those discussions were incorporated in line number (version with all markups) 91-100; 117-121.
12-In the table 1 of the manuscript, there is missing discussions of some significant details, and it must be taken into account.
Response: Discussions added, line number (version with all markups) 166-170; 211-216
13-the table 2 of the manuscript needs more discussion because this table is a key-role of the results of the manuscript.
Response: Discussion added, line number (version with all markups) 528-555
14-The availability of the methodology procedures of the manuscript which the authors have employed must be expanded by adding more information and details.
Response: More information and references were added, reference numbers 42-48. 
15-There are some symbols or abbreviations used in the text of the manuscript without any definition, so the authors must define each symbol or abbreviation even if the symbol is very well known.
Response: Abbreviations added at the end, line number (version with all markups) 682:701
16-The authors must show the negative effects of the ML model.
Response: Suggestions incorporated. Line number (version with all markups) 659-664
17-The authors must retype all of the equations of the manuscript in a more effective way.
Response: Suggestions incorporated. Line number (version with all markups) 349-351, Eq 1-3.
Reviewer #2: Introduction
Early detection of severely infected COVID-19 patients, ICU admission, and comprehensive information from previous studies on mortality estimation are important for understanding the importance of the subject. This information to be added will increase the validity and reliability of the study. In addition, this study draws attention to some biomarkers in the diagnosis and determination of the severity of COVID-19. Your reason for choosing these features will be better understood if you consider the explanations I have suggested below. Pay attention to these suggestions.
First of all, in the introduction of this study, a paragraph should be written about the importance of routine blood values, which are effective in the diagnosis, prognosis and mortality of COVID-19.
Response: Suggestions incorporated line number (version with all markups) 83-100
1) There is important information in the following articles that point to the role and importance of laboratory markers in the diagnosis, prognosis and mortality of COVID-19. I suggest citing the key findings of these articles.
-What Is the Impact and Efficacy of Routine Immunological, Biochemical and Hematological Biomarkers as Predictors of COVID-19 Mortality? Int. Immunopharmacol. 2022, 105, 108542. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intimp.2022.108542.
Response: Reference incorporated, reference no., 13
-The Effectiveness of Blood Routine Parameters and Some Biomarkers as a Potential Diagnostic Tool in the Diagnosis and Prognosis of Covid-19 Disease. Int. Immunopharmacol. 2021, 98, 107838. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intimp.2021.107838.
Response: Reference incorporated, reference no., 19
-Forecasting of Oxidant/Antioxidant levels of COVID-19 patients by using Expert models with biomarkers used in the Diagnosis/Prognosis of COVID-19. Int. Immunopharmacol., 2021; 100, 108127. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intimp.2021.108127.
Response: Reference incorporated, reference no., 20
2) There is important information in the following articles emphasizing the changes in routine blood values and some demographic characteristics in the deterioration of immune responses and the increase in the severity and mortality of the disease in COVID-19. I suggest citing the key findings of these articles.
-COVID-19 Is More Dangerous for Older People and Its Severity Is Increasing: A Case-Control Study. Med. Gas Res. 2022, 12, 51–54. https://doi.org/ 10.4103/2045-9912.325992.
Response: Reference incorporated, reference no., 17
-How Do Routine Laboratory Tests Change in Coronavirus Disease 2019? Scand. J. Clin. Lab. Investig. 2021, 81, 24–33. https://doi.org/10.1080/00365513.2020.1855470.
Response: Reference incorporated, reference no., 40
-Oxyhemoglobin Dissociation Curve in COVID-19 Patients. Meandros Med Dent J 2023;24(1):58-64. https://doi.org/10.4274/meandros.galenos.2023.87049.
Response: Reference incorporated, reference no. 41
-Prediction of Diagnosis and Prognosis of COVID-19 Disease by Blood Gas Parameters Using Decision Trees Machine Learning Model: A Retrospective Observational Study. Med. Gas Res. 2022, 12, 60–66. https://doi.org/10.4103/2045-9912.326002.
Response: Reference incorporated, reference no., 29
3) The following articles describe the efficacy of important biomarkers as a potential predictor of diagnosis, prognosis and mortality of COVID-19. I propose to refer to the main findings of these articles.
-Diagnosis and Prognosis of COVID-19 Disease Using Routine Blood Values and LogNNet Neural Network. Sensors 2022, 22, 4820. https://doi.org/10.3390/s22134820.
Response: Reference incorporated, reference no., 30
-Automatic Detection of Severely and Mildly Infected COVID-19 Patients with Supervised Machine Learning Models. IRBM 2022, 1, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.irbm.2022.05.006.
Response: Reference incorporated, reference no., 31
-Detection of Risk Predictors of COVID-19 Mortality with Classifier Machine Learning Models Operated with Routine Laboratory Biomarkers. Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 12180. https://doi.org/10.3390/app122312180.
Response: Reference incorporated, reference no., 32
-Machine Learning Sensors for Diagnosis of COVID-19 Disease Using Routine Blood Values for Internet of Things Application. Sensors 2022, 22, 7886. https://doi.org/10.3390/s22207886.
Response: Reference incorporated, reference no., 33 
-Effect of ferritin, INR, and D-dimer immunological parameters levels as predictors of COVID-19 mortality: A strong prediction with the decision trees. Heliyon, e14015. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e14015.
Response: Reference incorporated, reference no., 34
4) Findings should not be mentioned in the introduction. The sentences that are suitable for the hypothesis and the purpose of the article are sufficient.
Response: Suggestions incorporated, line number (version with all markups) 107-111
Material and Method
-Information about patient exclusion criteria and demographic characteristics should be given.
Response: Suggestions incorporated, line number (version with all markups) 152-154; 202-209; 241-243
-Which features are taken should be stated in units of these features. This is important for clinicians.
Response: Unit were added in Figure 2
-I suggest that the explanations of machine learning algorithms should be given as sub-headings. In addition, literature should be given for these explanations.
Response: Sub-headings added for individual machine learning algorithms in method section
-Is the feature selection model used for machine learning models? should be specified.
Response: Feature selection was revisited. In the revised version feature selection was based on the common parameters across different countries, line number: 431-442
- It should be stated what the performance metrics are used for (for example, for diagnostic performance).
Response: Suggestion incorporated, line number 341-345; 360-361
Results
- 95% confidence limits of performance metrics should be given.
Response: Suggestion incorporated, line number 350-353 (Eq. 4), Table 2 and Table 3.
-There is a big difference between sensitivity and specificity results in model performance results. This indicates the imbalance of the data set. Explain what was done to balance and optimize the dataset.
Response: XGBoost, being a ternary classifier, can handle data imbalance on its own. For other models, data imputation was done. 
There is a possibility to improve poor sensitivity and specificity by using the training and test dataset from the same analytical instrumentation (line number:664-665). However, implementation of the same is beyond the scope of the study.
- It will be more beautiful if the figures are colored (especially figure 4). In addition, the resolution of the figure should be increased.
Response: All the figures are now in colour
Dıscussıon and Conclusion
- I could not see a comparison of the important findings in this study with the literature. Discussion on this should be added. You can also use the above-mentioned articles for this.
Response: Suggestions incorporated – “Results and Discussions” – subsection “Comparison of internal performances of the XGBoost model with published reports”, line number, 525-555
-Which features were most effective in the diagnosis of the disease? these should be specified.
Response: Suggestion incorporated – “Conclusions” – line number: 652-657
- The prominent findings of the article should be reported in articles.
Response: Suggestion incorporated – “Conclusions” – line number: 652-671
Reviewer #3: The external validity of machine learning-based prediction scores from hematological parameters of COVID-19: A study using hospital records from Brazil, Italy, and Western Europe
The manuscript proposes an interesting investigation on the performance of machine learning techniques to predict scores from hematological parameters of COVID-19. The study also compares prediction performance on data from different countries. The paper is well structured and discussed. Results are properly presented and explained. Here are some questions/recommendations to improve its quality.
• In line 219, authors state that an imputation process was required for ML models other than XGBoost. Was any statistical test conducted to ensure that the imputed information did not change the underlying structure of the data?
Response: Chi-squared test was performed – “Method” section, line number 330-336. 
• What is the proportion between training and testing sets? How was that splitting performed? Could different proportion between training and testing affect the performance of the classifier?
Response: Proportion of training and testing sets was 90:10 (line no. 308-309). A 10-fold cross-validation was performed, which showed little effect on the classifier's performance with different sets of training and testing data, line number 485-487 and Table S4.
• In line 254 it is mentioned that hematological features were selected based on the Pearson correlation coefficients between the features and the SARS-COV-2 results (positive or negative). Any concern on the correlation among the features themselves? Several classifiers tend to have their performance reduced when dealing with highly correlated features. Please comment on it. Also, were these retained features meaningful from a practical perspective?
Response: Pearson correlation coefficient was replaced by point biserial coefficients. In the revised version of the manuscript, the hematological features were not selected based on correlation coefficients only. Selection of the features were described in details in Results and Discussion” section – sub-heading – “Correlation between features and SARS-COV-2 results in different clinical datasets” – line number: 370-442
• How were the cutting limits for the Pearson correlation defined?
Response: Not relevant in this revised version.
• I would recommend a minor comment on the computational processing time required by each technique (if possible), since more complex techniques tend to be very time-consuming.
Response: Elapsed time for different models were reported in Table S6; line number: 500-502
• Results on Table 3 a) are substantially smaller than previous ones. Please provide further explanation on such lower performance metrics.
Response: Suggestion incorporated in “Conclusion” – line number 659-664
Reviewer #4: The paper presents an application of Machine Learning methodologies to predict positivity to SARS-CoV-2 based on blood exams results.
I appreciated the attempt to include a diverse set of countries and contexts. Nonetheless, I believe this work has significant limitations.
Major comments
1) I find it puzzling why correlations are used a priori to select features. Models like XGBoost work well also with a large number of features and are capable of automatically selecting the most relevant ones or identifying meaningful combinati
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response-to-the-reviewers.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0316467.r003Decision Letter 1
BrandaFrancescoAcademic Editor© 2025 Francesco Branda2025Francesco Brandahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
9 Jan 2024

PONE-D-23-15648R1The external validity of machine learning-based prediction scores from hematological parameters of COVID-19: A study using hospital records from Brazil, Italy, and Western EuropePLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Bandyopadhyay,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Feb 23 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Francesco Branda, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Comments from PLOS Editorial Office: We note that one or more reviewers has recommended that you cite specific previously published works. As always, we recommend that you please review and evaluate the requested works to determine whether they are relevant and should be cited. It is not a requirement to cite these works. We appreciate your attention to this request.

Additional Editor Comments:

In summary, the major revisions suggested include addressing the methodological and statistical aspects, improving the introduction and discussion by incorporating relevant literature, clarifying dataset descriptions, and addressing practical limitations and motivations for the study.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #5: (No Response)
Reviewer #6: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #5: (No Response)
Reviewer #6: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #5: (No Response)
Reviewer #6: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #5: (No Response)
Reviewer #6: No
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #5: (No Response)
Reviewer #6: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #5: The research is significant as it addresses the need for rapid, accurate, and cost-effective COVID-19 detection methods, especially in large-scale and low-income populations.
However, the manuscript, even in its revised version, still has numerous flaws that need to be addressed to allow for its publication.
1) The authors claim that used an innovative approach combining machine learning with hematological parameters for COVID-19 prediction, but they do not consider previous studies that have already been published on this matter as published in [1]. Again, authors claim that the novelty lies in the external validation of the ML models across different populations and countries, which has not been explored in previous studies. Unfortunately, they do not consider [2], a study published two years ago with different dataset collected across 3 different continents.
2) The diminished effectiveness of the model when trained with data from one population and applied to another raises concerns about its wider applicability. The authors mention that “the combination of CBC parameters varies with ethnicity” (line 98), yet they provide no further elaboration or references to support this assertion. It's crucial, in my view, for the authors to delve deeper into this premise, as it underpins the main argument against the reliability of tools utilizing laboratory data across diverse datasets. I highly recommend a thorough review of reference [3].
3) Another significant limitation of this paper is the complete absence of details about the methodologies employed for the laboratory tests. While it's acknowledged that hematological instruments tend to be more standardized compared to clinical chemistry measurements, it is essential to specify the instruments used for the Complete Blood Count (CBC). This is necessary to identify potential discrepancies in results (such as platelet counts) that may arise from different technologies. This factor is another key aspect affecting the reliability of tools developed using machine learning, as elucidated in [4].
4) Considering the three major flaws of the work, I prefer not to delve into the details of the manuscript. However, I would like to point out that there are also many small defects to be fixed, such as typographical and grammatical errors noted, indicating a need for careful proofreading. There are many acronyms that are not explained, or they are explained but not the first time they appear in the text. Figure 2 A does not include the units of measurement.
References
1. Campagner A, et al. External validation of Machine Learning models for COVID-19 detection based on Complete Blood Count. Health Inf Sci Syst. 2021 Oct 23;9(1):37. doi: 10.1007/s13755-021-00167-3.
2. Cabitza F, et al. The importance of being external. methodological insights for the external validation of machine learning models in medicine. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2021 Sep;208:106288. doi: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2021.106288.
3. Carobene A, et al. How is test laboratory data used and characterised by machine learning models? A systematic review of diagnostic and prognostic models developed for COVID-19 patients using only laboratory data. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2022 May 5;60(12):1887-1901. doi: 10.1515/cclm-2022-0182.
4. Campagner A, et al. Everything is varied: The surprising impact of instantial variation on ML reliability. Applied Soft Computing Volume 146 October 2023 Article number 110644 doi:10.1016/j.asoc.2023.110644
Reviewer #6: The study addresses the critical issue of COVID-19 diagnosis, leveraging machine learning (ML) techniques to analyze hematological parameters. Its novelty lies in assessing the external validity of these ML-based predictions across diverse populations from Brazil, Italy, and Western Europe, using a significant sample size of 195,554. However, as I will argue later, this is not an original idea and the authors missed to consider a relevant previous contribution t this matter.
But to begin, I want to point out a sentence that I found puzzling: the authors write that "For the first time, we showed that the models trained and tested on the same population produce significant accuracy." This statement is the most obvious thing that can be said in the context of validating machine learning models, and I think it is either a typo or a sentence that the authors should rephrase or delete (more importantly, what do they mean by "for the first time"?).
Second, I noticed that the authors did not consider perhaps the most important work conducting external validation of models that similarly try to diagnose covid-19 from routine blood chemistry data.
Cabitza, F., Campagner, A., Soares, F., de Guadiana-Romualdo, L. G., Challa, F., Sulejmani, A., ... & Carobene, A. (2021). The importance of being external. methodological insights for the external validation of machine learning models in medicine. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine, 208, 106288.
(https://doi-org.unimib.idm.oclc.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2021.106288)
The authors should therefore.
1) consider the degree to which their features overlap with the models presented in that work and, if there is any significant difference, justify that their model is more parsimonious or uses features that cost less to detect.
2) Consider whether their best model can outperform the one presented in that paper, which is already a few years old. If I am not mistaken, their model is also accessible with a free online application, accessible here: https://covid19bloodtests.pythonanywhere.com/.
3) In conducting step 3 they should plot their ROC curve and compare it with that of other authors. If their best model's curve intersects their best model's curve at some point, then they should not compare AUC scores to determine which is the best model. Instead, the comparison should be conducted by comparing the balanced accuracy, accuracy and F1 scores with the rspective confidence intervals.
4) I strongly recommend plotting even for their models (or at least their best model) an External Performance Diagram (accessible here: https://qualiml.pythonanywhere.com/?tool=pills-plt2). The similarity between (internal) and external training datasets can be calculated with this tool: https://psicorrespondence.pythonanywhere.com/. I am citing work that is all clearly stated in the work cited above.
I noticed that I was invited to review a second revision. I noticed that the reviewers involved in the first round raised three important issues, which I also share.
First, I also need a clarification on the handling of dataset imbalances and the rationale behind dataset variations. Second, I also believe that the manuscript needs a more robust justification for the practical applicability of their model. Utility, in terms of Standardized Net Benefit could be evaluated. Third, last but not the least, the previous reviewers noticed that the study did not provide a comprehensive comparison with existing literature. Since I also believe that the most important study to date on their same field has been neglected, I also believe that the authors should improve their work before this can be considered acceptable for publication for an important venue as Plos One. I would add that if the authors fail to demonstrate that their model is better than the one presented in Cabitza et al. for example, in balanced accuracy, F1 score, utility or robustness (as might be inferred from the External Performance diagram that I requested them to report in the manuscript) then their work should *not* be published, because it does not represent an innovation in the field compared to the available SOTA. In that cae, however, there might also be some value in testing the best SOTA with the datasets the authors have collected to check its practical robustness.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #5: No
Reviewer #6: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0316467.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
31 Mar 2024

Response to the reviewers
Reviewer #5: The research is significant as it addresses the need for rapid, accurate, and cost-effective COVID-19 detection methods, especially in large-scale and low-income populations.
However, the manuscript, even in its revised version, still has numerous flaws that need to be addressed to allow for its publication.
1) The authors claim that used an innovative approach combining machine learning with hematological parameters for COVID-19 prediction, but they do not consider previous studies that have already been published on this matter as published in [1]. 
Ans: The above-mentioned reference (reference 35) was cited in the text (“..all-markups” file: line 105). The text was modified accordingly my removing the statements including innovative approaches (“..all-markups” file:lines 40-41)..
Again, authors claim that the novelty lies in the external validation of the ML models across different populations and countries, which has not been explored in previous studies. Unfortunately, they do not consider [2], a study published two years ago with different dataset collected across 3 different continents.
Ans: The above-mentioned reference (reference 36) was extensively cited in the text (“..all-markups” file: lines 105, 149, 350, 389, 609, 614, 618, 625, 632 and 644). The statement “the novelty lies in the external validation of the ML models across different populations and countries, which has not been explored in previous studies” was removed. 
2) The diminished effectiveness of the model when trained with data from one population and applied to another raises concerns about its wider applicability. 
Ans: “The diminished effectiveness of the model when trained with data from one population and applied to another” has been illustrated in detail, citing evidence from reference 36 and present results (“..all-markups” file:lines 144-149, lines 617-622, lines 629-638)
The authors mention that “the combination of CBC parameters varies with ethnicity” (line 98), yet they provide no further elaboration or references to support this assertion. It's crucial, in my view, for the authors to delve deeper into this premise, as it underpins the main argument against the reliability of tools utilizing laboratory data across diverse datasets. I highly recommend a thorough review of reference [3].
Ans: As suggested by the reviewer, we delved deeper into the point - “the combination of CBC parameters varies with ethnicity”. Elaboration and references are added in the text (“..all-markups” file:, lines 109-134). 
3) Another significant limitation of this paper is the complete absence of details about the methodologies employed for the laboratory tests. While it's acknowledged that hematological instruments tend to be more standardized compared to clinical chemistry measurements, it is essential to specify the instruments used for the Complete Blood Count (CBC). This is necessary to identify potential discrepancies in results (such as platelet counts) that may arise from different technologies. This factor is another key aspect affecting the reliability of tools developed using machine learning, as elucidated in [4].
Ans: As suggested by the reviewer, the information on the instruments (hematology analyzer) is mentioned in the text “..all-markups” file:line:192; lines 219-220; line:229-230. For datasets 1 and 3, those were not available. Only available for dataset 2.
4) Considering the three major flaws of the work, I prefer not to delve into the details of the manuscript. However, I would like to point out that there are also many small defects to be fixed, such as typographical and grammatical errors noted, indicating a need for careful proofreading. There are many acronyms that are not explained, or they are explained but not the first time they appear in the text. Figure 2 A does not include the units of measurement.
Ans: Units were not available for the dataset 1, based on which Figure 2A was generated
.
References
1. Campagner A, et al. External validation of Machine Learning models for COVID-19 detection based on Complete Blood Count. Health Inf Sci Syst. 2021 Oct 23;9(1):37. doi: 10.1007/s13755-021-00167-3.
2. Cabitza F, et al. The importance of being external. methodological insights for the external validation of machine learning models in medicine. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2021 Sep;208:106288. doi: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2021.106288.
3. Carobene A, et al. How is test laboratory data used and characterised by machine learning models? A systematic review of diagnostic and prognostic models developed for COVID-19 patients using only laboratory data. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2022 May 5;60(12):1887-1901. doi: 10.1515/cclm-2022-0182.
4. Campagner A, et al. Everything is varied: The surprising impact of instantial variation on ML reliability. Applied Soft Computing Volume 146 October 2023 Article number 110644 doi:10.1016/j.asoc.2023.110644
Reviewer #6: The study addresses the critical issue of COVID-19 diagnosis, leveraging machine learning (ML) techniques to analyze hematological parameters. Its novelty lies in assessing the external validity of these ML-based predictions across diverse populations from Brazil, Italy, and Western Europe, using a significant sample size of 195,554. However, as I will argue later, this is not an original idea and the authors missed to consider a relevant previous contribution t this matter.
But to begin, I want to point out a sentence that I found puzzling: the authors write that "For the first time, we showed that the models trained and tested on the same population produce significant accuracy." This statement is the most obvious thing that can be said in the context of validating machine learning models, and I think it is either a typo or a sentence that the authors should rephrase or delete (more importantly, what do they mean by "for the first time"?).
Ans: The statement has been removed and rephrased, as suggested by the reviewer (“..all-markups” file: lines 40-45)
Second, I noticed that the authors did not consider perhaps the most important work conducting external validation of models that similarly try to diagnose covid-19 from routine blood chemistry data.
Cabitza, F., Campagner, A., Soares, F., de Guadiana-Romualdo, L. G., Challa, F., Sulejmani, A., ... & Carobene, A. (2021). The importance of being external. methodological insights for the external validation of machine learning models in medicine. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine, 208, 106288.
(https://doi-org.unimib.idm.oclc.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2021.106288)
Ans: The above-mentioned reference (reference 36) was extensively cited in the text (“..all-markups” file: lines 105, 149, 350, 389, 609, 614, 618, 625, 632 and 644).
The authors should therefore.
1) consider the degree to which their features overlap with the models presented in that work and, if there is any significant difference, justify that their model is more parsimonious or uses features that cost less to detect.
Ans: Detail discussion was added (“..all-markups” file: lines 623-654)
2) Consider whether their best model can outperform the one presented in that paper, which is already a few years old. If I am not mistaken, their model is also accessible with a free online application, accessible here: https://covid19bloodtests.pythonanywhere.com/.
Ans: Yes, one of the models (trained on dataset from Italy and tested on dataset of Brazil) has outperformed the one presented in that paper (“..all-markups” file: line 642-646)
3) In conducting step 3 they should plot their ROC curve and compare it with that of other authors. If their best model's curve intersects their best model's curve at some point, then they should not compare AUC scores to determine which is the best model. Instead, the comparison should be conducted by comparing the balanced accuracy, accuracy and F1 scores with the rspective confidence intervals.
Ans: balanced accuracy, accuracy and F2 scores were reported (Table 3). 
4) I strongly recommend plotting even for their models (or at least their best model) an External Performance Diagram (accessible here: https://qualiml.pythonanywhere.com/?tool=pills-plt2). 
Ans: External performance diagram was plotted (Figure 6).
The similarity between (internal) and external training datasets can be calculated with this tool: https://psicorrespondence.pythonanywhere.com/. I am citing work that is all clearly stated in the work cited above.
Ans: The similarity between internal and external datasets were computed using Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS) test (“..all-markups” file: line: 353-359). The online similarity tool indicated by the referee had some technical glitch; hence, we used the alternate method.
I noticed that I was invited to review a second revision. I noticed that the reviewers involved in the first round raised three important issues, which I also share.
First, I also need a clarification on the handling of dataset imbalances and the rationale behind dataset variations.
Ans: Imbalance in dataset was handled during external data validation by computing “Balanced Accuracy” and F2-score (“..all-markups” file: Table 3, line 360-380, 570, 592, 
Second, I also believe that the manuscript needs a more robust justification for the practical applicability of their model. Utility, in terms of Standardized Net Benefit could be evaluated. Third, last but not the least, the previous reviewers noticed that the study did not provide a comprehensive comparison with existing literature.
Ans: A new section has been added by comparing the results with the existing literature (“..all-markups” file: lines 623-654)
 Since I also believe that the most important study to date on their same field has been neglected, I also believe that the authors should improve their work before this can be considered acceptable for publication for an important venue as Plos One. I would add that if the authors fail to demonstrate that their model is better than the one presented in Cabitza et al. for example, in balanced accuracy, F1 score, utility or robustness (as might be inferred from the External Performance diagram that I requested them to report in the manuscript) then their work should *not* be published, because it does not represent an innovation in the field compared to the available SOTA. In that cae, however, there might also be some value in testing the best SOTA with the datasets the authors have collected to check its practical robustness.
Ans: I humbly ascertain that Balanced accuracy, F2 score were superior in some of the models presented in this study compared to the existing literature (we were unable to compute the standardized net benefit due to the technical glitch of the online tool to compute “External Performance Diagram”, suggested by the reviewer). SOTA is mentioned in the abstract and in the text (“..all-markups” file: lines 42-45 and 623-654)
AttachmentSubmitted filename: response_to_reviewers31032024.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0316467.r005Decision Letter 2
BrandaFrancescoAcademic Editor© 2025 Francesco Branda2025Francesco Brandahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
31 May 2024

PONE-D-23-15648R2The external validity of machine learning-based prediction scores from hematological parameters of COVID-19: A study using hospital records from Brazil, Italy, and Western EuropePLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Bandyopadhyay,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process. I have carefully evaluated the manuscript and the reviewers' comments. Below, I provide my evaluation and recommendations to the authors. First, the manuscript addresses a critical problem in the diagnosis of COVID-19 by exploiting machine learning techniques to analyze hematologic parameters. The novelty of the study is to evaluate the external validity of machine learning-based predictions in diverse populations, which is commendable. However, several problems and areas for improvement were identified by the reviewers that I agree with and pray for review. Although the manuscript addresses a major research gap, several corrections are needed to improve its clarity, rigor, and novelty. I recommend major revisions to comprehensively address the concerns raised by the reviewers. Once these revisions are implemented, we will evaluate whether the work meets PLOS ONE standards.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jul 15 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Francesco Branda, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments:
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #5: (No Response)
Reviewer #6: (No Response)
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #5: Partly
Reviewer #6: Partly
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #5: Yes
Reviewer #6: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #5: Yes
Reviewer #6: No
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #5: Yes
Reviewer #6: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #5: The manuscript has undoubtedly improved compared with the previous version. However, I am always surprised when authors only partially follow the suggestions of reviewers. On page 29, the authors stated:
"To note, machine learning (ML) models have inherent limitations, including dependency on datasets, size of the datasets, ethnic variabilities, phenotypic variabilities, and analytical instrumentation for clinical chemistry tests, etc."
Nevertheless, they failed to provide the necessary references as suggested in my previous revision. There is extensive literature on ML models developed using laboratory data that fails to acknowledge these data. As a result, most of these algorithms are not adopted in clinical practice. The specifics of the instrument, unit, and method are not "superfluous" information; without these details, the algorithm cannot be reproducibly applied in other clinical settings. This significant limitation of the study should be clearly stated.
Reviewer #6: I thank the authors for providing me with a point-by-point response letter. This is a very important thing that I also expect for the next response. I am happy to state that I believe the authors are on the right track. However, they have not yet reached a completely acceptable manuscript, for the reasons I'll share in what follows.
While I am very pleased that the authors have considered addressing robustness, I feel that my comment about the utility has been almost entirely disregarded. It is necessary for the authors to calculate the utility of the system, which is even more important since the authors insist on talking about it without measuring it ("The results promise the utility of these models when trained and tested on the same populations."). Personally, I am not aware of any other online tool for calculating the utility of a classification system other than the one available at this address: https://modelutility.pythonanywhere.com/. However, I think that even the tool used by the authors to calculate robustness should give an indication of the ECI or Brier Score ( which I find less understandable than the ECI). Also in regards to the AUC, I prefer the balanced accuracy score and I think the authors should report that in the robustness figure and not the AUC unless they convince me otherwise. Moreover, since the comparison with the State of the Art systems (SOTA) is critical, I am pleased that the authors show that one of their models is indeed better than the existing SOTA, but this noteworthy result should be shown in the robustness figure. SOTA has been shared on the Zenodo platform and is available online to test on authors' cases.
Since, as I already "disclosed" to the authors that I was enrolled as a reviewer during the second round to replace a reviewer who was no longer available, I want to make my own a comment that I feel was not adequately addressed by the authors regarding the absence of detailed information about the methodologies and instruments used for laboratory tests, particularly in the context of datasets and the corresponding units of measurement, In my opinion, the solution provided by the authors is still incomplete. However it is critical to underscore the importance of including comprehensive details on the instruments and units used across all datasets, not limited to a subset. The authors' reply addresses the instrument used only for dataset 2 and omits relevant information for datasets 1 and 3. This omission significantly impairs the scientific reliability and reproducibility of the results, which is necessary for any valuable research, but even crucial in studies involving machine learning algorithms. Indeed, the absence of such details can lead to inconsistent application and interpretation of the developed models, as laboratory measurements can vary significantly with different instruments and methodologies. Without standardization or at least a clear acknowledgment and documentation of the differences, any machine learning model developed from this data is at a risk of failing to generalize, thus limiting its practical utility and adoption in clinical settings. As noted in the literature, the lack of reproducibility and methodological transparency is a common reason for the limited real-world applicability of many research findings in the machine learning domain. In particular, the inability to verify the consistency of units and measurement techniques across datasets compromises the integrity of the analysis. I recommend that this limitation be clearly acknowledged in the manuscript to provide readers with a comprehensive understanding of the potential variability and implications for the study's outcomes.
Thus, all things considered, once authors will have addressed the above issue, as well as the utility issue, and improved the robustness diagram (which I really liked!) I believe the manuscript can be accepted for publication. Thank you for your comprehension and collaboration.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #5: No
Reviewer #6: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0316467.r006Author response to Decision Letter 2
Submission Version3
13 Aug 2024

Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #5: The manuscript has undoubtedly improved compared with the previous version. However, I am always surprised when authors only partially follow the suggestions of reviewers. On page 29, the authors stated:
"To note, machine learning (ML) models have inherent limitations, including dependency on datasets, size of the datasets, ethnic variabilities, phenotypic variabilities, and analytical instrumentation for clinical chemistry tests, etc."
Nevertheless, they failed to provide the necessary references as suggested in my previous revision. There is extensive literature on ML models developed using laboratory data that fails to acknowledge these data. As a result, most of these algorithms are not adopted in clinical practice. The specifics of the instrument, unit, and method are not "superfluous" information; without these details, the algorithm cannot be reproducibly applied in other clinical settings. This significant limitation of the study should be clearly stated.
Response: The reference is added on i) page 23; line 539 and page 30; line 712-714.
Reviewer #6: I thank the authors for providing me with a point-by-point response letter. This is a very important thing that I also expect for the next response. I am happy to state that I believe the authors are on the right track. However, they have not yet reached a completely acceptable manuscript, for the reasons I'll share in what follows.
While I am very pleased that the authors have considered addressing robustness, I feel that my comment about the utility has been almost entirely disregarded. It is necessary for the authors to calculate the utility of the system, which is even more important since the authors insist on talking about it without measuring it ("The results promise the utility of these models when trained and tested on the same populations.").
Response: The utility was estimated using standardized net benefit. The standardized net benefit equation was adopted from a cross-reference (equation 3 of Riley et.al. Statistics in Medicine, 2021, ug 30; 40(19):4230-51) of the reference, suggested by the reviewer; reference - 36 in this manuscript. As the online tool, suggested by the reviewer, is currently not working we could not replot the robustness diagram. The standardized net benefit values at different threshold values were reported in Table 3. 
 Personally, I am not aware of any other online tool for calculating the utility of a classification system other than the one available at this address: https://modelutility.pythonanywhere.com/. However, I think that even the tool used by the authors to calculate robustness should give an indication of the ECI or Brier Score ( which I find less understandable than the ECI). Also in regards to the AUC, I prefer the balanced accuracy score and I think the authors should report that in the robustness figure and not the AUC unless they convince me otherwise. 
Response: AUC and Brier scores were depicted against the similarity values in external performance diagram (Figure 6 and page 27; line 636). Although, the reviewer has suggested to report balanced accuracy score instead of AUC in the robustness figure, the online tool (https://modelutility.pythonanywhere.com) only provides AUC score and not the balanced accuracy, in the figure. To note, the tool is currently (as of on 8th August 2024) not working. Hence, we could not replot the figure. The advantage of balanced accuracy over AUC score was discussed (page 23; line 551-553). It is worthy to mention that we have not used any online tools. Instead, we used the equations given in several references and have written codes on our own to deduce the values.
Moreover, since the comparison with the State of the Art systems (SOTA) is critical, I am pleased that the authors show that one of their models is indeed better than the existing SOTA, but this noteworthy result should be shown in the robustness figure. SOTA has been shared on the Zenodo platform and is available online to test on authors' cases.
Response: We cannot show the robustness figure as the online tool suggested by the reviewer was not working, currently. However, we tried our best to consolidate the results of utility (in terms of standardized net benefit) in Table 3 and in the text – (page 16: line 361 – line 368); (page 23: line 553 – page 24: line 562); (page 25:line 584-page 26:line 591); (page 27:642 – page 28:651)
Since, as I already "disclosed" to the authors that I was enrolled as a reviewer during the second round to replace a reviewer who was no longer available, I want to make my own a comment that I feel was not adequately addressed by the authors regarding the absence of detailed information about the methodologies and instruments used for laboratory tests, particularly in the context of datasets and the corresponding units of measurement, In my opinion, the solution provided by the authors is still incomplete. However it is critical to underscore the importance of including comprehensive details on the instruments and units used across all datasets, not limited to a subset. The authors' reply addresses the instrument used only for dataset 2 and omits relevant information for datasets 1 and 3. This omission significantly impairs the scientific reliability and reproducibility of the results, which is necessary for any valuable research, but even crucial in studies involving machine learning algorithms. Indeed, the absence of such details can lead to inconsistent application and interpretation of the developed models, as laboratory measurements can vary significantly with different instruments and methodologies. Without standardization or at least a clear acknowledgment and documentation of the differences, any machine learning model developed from this data is at a risk of failing to generalize, thus limiting its practical utility and adoption in clinical settings. As noted in the literature, the lack of reproducibility and methodological transparency is a common reason for the limited real-world applicability of many research findings in the machine learning domain. In particular, the inability to verify the consistency of units and measurement techniques across datasets compromises the integrity of the analysis. I recommend that this limitation be clearly acknowledged in the manuscript to provide readers with a comprehensive understanding of the potential variability and implications for the study's outcomes.
Response: The limitation was clearly acknowledged in page 29; line 712-714, with proper reference. The reference was also added to page 23; line 539.
Thus, all things considered, once authors will have addressed the above issue, as well as the utility issue, and improved the robustness diagram (which I really liked!) I believe the manuscript can be accepted for publication. Thank you for your comprehension and collaboration.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to the Reviewers Comments 13082024.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0316467.r007Decision Letter 3
BrandaFrancescoAcademic Editor© 2025 Francesco Branda2025Francesco Brandahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version3
21 Aug 2024

PONE-D-23-15648R3The external validity of machine learning-based prediction scores from hematological parameters of COVID-19: A study using hospital records from Brazil, Italy, and Western EuropePLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Bandyopadhyay,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Although significant improvements have been made, however, there are still some things to be adjusted as suggested in the last review. Please proceed with what has been requested. 
Please submit your revised manuscript by Oct 05 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Francesco Branda, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #5: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #6: (No Response)
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #5: Yes
Reviewer #6: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #5: Yes
Reviewer #6: No
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #5: Yes
Reviewer #6: No
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #5: Yes
Reviewer #6: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #5: The authors have made considerable efforts to revise the manuscript, and I acknowledge the improvements that have been made. However, I remain concerned about the lack of novelty in this work, which was a primary point of feedback in earlier reviews. The extensive literature in this field has already covered much of what is presented here, and this diminishes the impact of the current study.
Regarding the suggestion to include the review, the intention was not merely to add a citation but to encourage the authors to consider the issue of "noise" in laboratory data—a factor often overlooked, which leads to the poor performance and limited adoption of these tools in practice. This aspect remains unaddressed.
The manuscript would have benefited from a more in-depth exploration of the "noise" in laboratory data (see https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2023.110644). Including such considerations would have added a layer of depth and relevance to the study, making it more compelling.
While the paper may be suitable for publication, it is unfortunate that, despite the detailed point-by-point revisions received, the authors have missed the opportunity to make it truly unique and of significant novelty in the field.
Reviewer #6: The article is much improved, I must give credit to the authors and indeed thank them for considering my suggestions. In my opinion now only the robustness diagram is missing, to compare it with the previous SOTA (which is the article 36). I personally checked that my previous suggestion was not feasible, as written by the authors in their response, but when I checked all the reported tools were working; to be precise, the tool for evaluating model calibration is available at https://calibrationassessment.pythonanywhere.com/; the one for the utility is available here: https://modelutility.pythonanywhere.com/; the one for calculating similarity here: https://psicorrespondence.pythonanywhere.com/ and finally the one for the robustness diagram here: https://qualiml.pythonanywhere.com/. I have no special contact with the authors of those tools: I just looked in the html code of the page I had reported earlier, namely: https://mudilab.github.io/dss-quality-assessment/ and extracted the links to the individual tools.
I believe that adding and discussing that diagram and making the codes and datasets available are necessary and sufficient steps to make the work of adequate quality for publication.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #5: No
Reviewer #6: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0316467.r008Author response to Decision Letter 3
Submission Version4
5 Oct 2024

Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #5: The authors have made considerable efforts to revise the manuscript, and I acknowledge the improvements that have been made. However, I remain concerned about the lack of novelty in this work, which was a primary point of feedback in earlier reviews. The extensive literature in this field has already covered much of what is presented here, and this diminishes the impact of the current study.
Regarding the suggestion to include the review, the intention was not merely to add a citation but to encourage the authors to consider the issue of "noise" in laboratory data—a factor often overlooked, which leads to the poor performance and limited adoption of these tools in practice. This aspect remains unaddressed.
The manuscript would have benefited from a more in-depth exploration of the "noise" in laboratory data (see https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2023.110644). Including such considerations would have added a layer of depth and relevance to the study, making it more compelling.
While the paper may be suitable for publication, it is unfortunate that, despite the detailed point-by-point revisions received, the authors have missed the opportunity to make it truly unique and of significant novelty in the field.
Response: The reviewer’s comment has been addressed by adding a separate section on “Impact of Instantial Variation (IV) on the external validation datasets:” pages: 27-29; lines: 660-704. Also mentioned in the conclusion, lines: 755-757 (line numbers according to version marked with markup)
Reviewer #6: The article is much improved, I must give credit to the authors and indeed thank them for considering my suggestions. In my opinion now only the robustness diagram is missing, to compare it with the previous SOTA (which is the article 36). I personally checked that my previous suggestion was not feasible, as written by the authors in their response, but when I checked all the reported tools were working; to be precise, the tool for evaluating model calibration is available at https://calibrationassessment.pythonanywhere.com/; the one for the utility is available here: https://modelutility.pythonanywhere.com/; the one for calculating similarity here: https://psicorrespondence.pythonanywhere.com/ and finally the one for the robustness diagram here: https://qualiml.pythonanywhere.com/. I have no special contact with the authors of those tools: I just looked in the html code of the page I had reported earlier, namely: https://mudilab.github.io/dss-quality-assessment/ and extracted the links to the individual tools.
I believe that adding and discussing that diagram and making the codes and datasets available are necessary and sufficient steps to make the work of adequate quality for publication.
Response: Finally, we were able to execute the online tool with a different browser. Robustness diagram is now added (Figure 6); lines: 599, 605.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: ResponseToReviewersComments02102024.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0316467.r009Decision Letter 4
BrandaFrancescoAcademic Editor© 2025 Francesco Branda2025Francesco Brandahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version4
5 Nov 2024

PONE-D-23-15648R4The external validity of machine learning-based prediction scores from hematological parameters of COVID-19: A study using hospital records from Brazil, Italy, and Western EuropePLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Bandyopadhyay,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
I recommend resolving the last issue raised by the reviewer. 
Please submit your revised manuscript by Dec 20 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Francesco Branda, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #5: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #6: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #5: Yes
Reviewer #6: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #5: Yes
Reviewer #6: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #5: Yes
Reviewer #6: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #5: Yes
Reviewer #6: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #5: I would like to thank the authors for addressing all comments and suggestions thoroughly. The paper is truly of high quality—congratulations!
Reviewer #6: Authors addressed all my requests. However, to enable reproducibility and acknowledge the due credit, they should state, in the caption on Figure 6, the URL (web address) of the tool they used to generate the Robustness Diagram. Once this has been done, the manuscript can be accepted without further review.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #5: No
Reviewer #6: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0316467.r010Author response to Decision Letter 4
Submission Version5
7 Nov 2024

Reviewer #6: Authors addressed all my requests. However, to enable reproducibility and acknowledge the due credit, they should state, in the caption on Figure 6, the URL (web address) of the tool they used to generate the Robustness Diagram.
Response: The URL (web address) has been added to the caption on Figure 6
AttachmentSubmitted filename: response to the reviewers05112024.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0316467.r011Decision Letter 5
BrandaFrancescoAcademic Editor© 2025 Francesco Branda2025Francesco Brandahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version5
12 Dec 2024

The external validity of machine learning-based prediction scores from hematological parameters of COVID-19: A study using hospital records from Brazil, Italy, and Western Europe
PONE-D-23-15648R5
Dear Dr. Bandyopadhyay,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager® and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Francesco Branda, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #6: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #6: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #6: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #6: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #6: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #6: The revised version can be accepted for publication. As I said in my previous review a further review was not necessary: I requested only a small revision to do.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #6: No
**********
10.1371/journal.pone.0316467.r012Acceptance letter
BrandaFrancescoAcademic Editor© 2025 Francesco Branda2025Francesco Brandahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
20 Dec 2024

PONE-D-23-15648R5 
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Bandyopadhyay, 
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
If revisions are needed, the production department will contact you directly to resolve them. If no revisions are needed, you will receive an email when the publication date has been set. At this time, we do not offer pre-publication proofs to authors during production of the accepted work. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few weeks to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps. 
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Francesco Branda 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE