pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC10395970PMC10395970.110395970103959703753132710.1371/journal.pone.0288586PONE-D-22-206931Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyDevelopmental PsychologyPervasive Developmental DisordersAutism Spectrum DisorderSocial SciencesPsychologyDevelopmental PsychologyPervasive Developmental DisordersAutism Spectrum DisorderBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyPsychological AttitudesSocial SciencesPsychologyPsychological AttitudesBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyDevelopmental PsychologyPervasive Developmental DisordersAutism Spectrum DisorderAutismSocial SciencesPsychologyDevelopmental PsychologyPervasive Developmental DisordersAutism Spectrum DisorderAutismMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsNeurodevelopmental DisordersAutismBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceDevelopmental NeuroscienceNeurodevelopmental DisordersAutismMedicine and Health SciencesNeurologyNeurodevelopmental DisordersAutismBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyBehaviorSocial SciencesPsychologyBehaviorBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyPerceptionSensory PerceptionVisionBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyPerceptionSensory PerceptionVisionSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyPerceptionSensory PerceptionVisionBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceSensory PerceptionVisionBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyPerceptionSensory PerceptionBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyPerceptionSensory PerceptionSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyPerceptionSensory PerceptionBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceSensory PerceptionSocial SciencesSociologyEducationWorkshopsComputer and Information SciencesComputer NetworksInternetComprehensive intervention for reducing stigma of autism spectrum disorders: Incorporating the experience of simulated autistic perception and social contact
Comprehensive intervention for reducing stigma of autism spectrum disordershttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-5437-7733TsujitaMasakiConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyVisualizationWriting – original draft HommaMihoData curationInvestigationMethodologyProject administration KumagayaShin-ichiroConceptualizationFunding acquisitionSupervisionWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4794-0940NagaiYukieFunding acquisitionResourcesSoftware 1
Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, Japan2
LITALICO Laboratory, LITALICO Inc., Meguro-ku, Tokyo, Japan3
International Research Center for Neurointelligence, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, JapanMantiFilippoEditor ]. It is a considerable problem that individuals with ASD and their caregivers have a lower quality of life than the general population [ – ]. Stigma is a crucial factor leading to a lower quality of life for individuals with ASD, considering previous studies regarding the association of stigma with quality of life in stigmatized social groups [ , ]. Stigma was originally defined as “an attribute that is deeply discrediting” [ ]. It was conceptualized by subsequent studies as a relationship between interrelated components of labeling, stereotyping, separating, emotional reactions, status loss, and discrimination in a power situation that allows these processes to unfold [ , ]. Effective intervention in the stigma of ASD needs to be developed to improve their quality of life.
One of the important factors that relate to stigma of ASD is knowledge about ASD. Previous studies have revealed that lack of knowledge about ASD leads to negative attitudes toward ASD, and intervention in the knowledge brings about decrease of stigma of ASD [ – ]. Recent ASD studies have been focusing upon the non-social domains, especially atypical sensory processing, which was included in DSM-5 as a core deficit. A large number of studies report atypical perception on a variety of modalities, such as audition [ ], smell [ ], touch [ ], taste [ ], and vision [ ]. A recent literature review suggested that the atypical sensory processing can impact selective attention to social information, which leads to social and communicative difficulties in ASD [ ]. Therefore, if individuals with TD acquire knowledge about the atypical sensory processing and its relation to social difficulties in ASD, they will regard sensory-related behaviors and derivative social difficulties as uncontrollable for ASD, and consequently have sympathy responses and helping behavioral intentions [ ].
A good solution for individuals with TD to understand autistic perception is to experience a simulated external world perceived by individuals with ASD. A virtual reality system is one of the most appropriate tools for realistically experiencing a simulated external world because it enables us to embody another person’s perceptual experiences through interaction between sensory information and voluntary action [ ]. Recently, a virtual reality simulator for atypical visual perception in ASD, called the ASD simulator, was developed [ ]. In this virtual reality system, visual fields on a head-mounted display are converted to autistic visual fields using visual processing techniques, depending on various features of the primary visual and auditory signals (e.g., brightness, motion, or loudness). The simulated visual fields include various atypical attributes, such as high contrast, high intensity, no color, and blurring, which were referred by interviews with individuals with ASD. An algorithm for adding simulated atypical attributes was developed based on the results of a psychophysical experiment for individuals with ASD [ ]. Simulated atypical perception by the ASD simulator holds considerable validity because of substantial community involvement: collaboration of a researcher with ASD as a co-author, identification of atypical visual attributes by interviews with individuals with ASD, and development of algorithm based on the psychophysical experiment for individuals with ASD. Individuals with TD can therefore experience faithfully reproduced autistic visual perception using the ASD simulator, and acquire accurate knowledge about autistic perception.
However, experiencing others’ simulated perceptions does not necessarily bring about an improvement in stigma. A study of stigma reduction interventions reported that intervention with simulated hallucinations led to increased positive attitudes or empathy but increased desire for social distancing from individuals with schizophrenia [ ]. Interestingly, this previous study also reported that increasing desire for social distancing disappeared if a simulation of hallucinations was combined with empathy manipulation intervention. These results suggest that social contact should be combined with intervention with simulation because it can contextualize atypical experiences provided by simulation [ ]. The findings of other studies also support the importance of social contact in an anti-stigma intervention, by both face-to-face [ ] and video-based [ ] contact. These studies indicate that social contact can be part of an effective intervention program to reduce the stigma associated with ASD.
The purpose of this research is to evaluate an effective intervention for the stigma of ASD, incorporating two components: experience of simulated autistic visual perception and video-based social contact. Therefore, we held an experiential workshop for the ASD simulator including video-based social contact and measured the attitudes of workshop attendees. If the intervention incorporating the two components is effective in the stigma of ASD, the negative attitudes of workshop attendees toward ASD would decrease after the intervention compared to before the intervention.

## Methods

## Research design
As can be seen in , we measured the attitudes three times: the period of registration with the workshop (pretest), during participation in the workshop (workshop period test), and six weeks after the workshop (follow-up test). The pretest was conducted via the Internet when attendees registered for participation in the workshop; thus, it was regarded as a reference to ascertain how the following attitudes would change. The workshop period test was conducted on the workshop day using a paper-and-pencil test. At that time, we randomly assigned the attendees to one of two groups to differentiate when the workshop period test was conducted. One group undertook the workshop test at the beginning of the workshop (beginning group), and the other did so at its end (end group). That is, for the beginning group, both the pretest and workshop period test were taken before the intervention; therefore, the differences between the two tests would be merely measuring time, place, and method (online or paper-and-pencil test).
 In contrast, for the end group, the difference between the pretest and workshop period test would reflect the short-term intervention effect because the workshop period test was conducted after the intervention. The purpose of dividing attendees into two groups was to confirm whether attitudes changes on the workshop test were attributed to the short-term intervention effect or artifacts resulting from participation in the workshop, such as nervousness and excitement. As for the follow-up test, both groups conducted it three weeks after the workshop via the Internet; thus, its scores would reflect whether attitudes changes on the workshop tests were transient or lasting. We compared the pretest and follow-up test with data from both groups.

## Participants
The participants comprised 217 individuals with TD who voluntarily attended an experience workshop of the ASD simulator (156 women, 61 men), with a mean age of 41.3 [SD = 9.1, Min = 18, Max = 65]. They did not paid or get fees for the participation. 88% of the total (192 participants) interacted with individuals with ASD as a family, friend, or co-worker in daily life. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants. This study was approved by the local ethics committee for life science research at the University of Tokyo (approval number: 18–35).

## Materials

## The ASD simulator
The participants experienced a simulation of autistic visual perception with a head-mounted display (the Samsung Gear VR into which the Samsung Galaxy S8 phone was inserted) and headphones. They watched three videos of daily life scenes: going from a dimly lit entrance room to light outside, waiting at a station platform where a rapid train passed through, and having a meal in a crowded cafeteria. The ASD simulator added various atypical visual attributes to the videos in response to the videos’ original visual and auditory signals ( ). The participants watched both original videos and videos with atypical visual attributes.
 

## Narrative video of individuals with ASD
The participants watched a video in which individuals with ASD narrated their atypical perceptions to have them feel and understand the reality of autistic perception. The video comprises two components. First, individuals with ASD narrated their hypersensitivity while walking around a downtown area and going into a coffee shop with an interviewer. In this part, it was also explained that their hypersensitivity leads to inattention to or unawareness of social information necessary for social interaction and communication. Second, the video showed an introduction of practices to deal with hypersensitivity at a shopping center or a company hiring many individuals with ASD.

## Sociodemographic questionnaire
The participants were asked to state their age, gender, and whether they interact with individuals with ASD in their daily lives. Questions about education, financial status, and occupation could not be included in the sociodemographic questionnaire.

## Japanese version of the multidimensional attitudes scale (MAS)
The MAS was originally developed to measure attitudes toward physical disabilities but was subsequently applied to attitudes toward ASD [ – ]. In this scale, respondents are required to read a vignette describing a social interaction between a protagonist and an individual with a targeting disability or disorder, and then to rate the degree of likelihood that the protagonist might experience multidimensional attitudes in the situation: a dimension of affect (e.g., “Fear” or “Calmness”), cognition (e.g., “He/she seems to be an interesting guy/girl”), and behavior (e.g., “Move to another table”). It has good reliability and validity [ ] and has been widely used in Africa [ ], Asia [ , , ], and Europe [ , – ].
The Japanese version of the MAS [ ] presented a vignette describing the interaction between “person A” and an individual with ASD at a coffee shop. Respondents were required to rate the degree of likelihood that “person A” might experience various attitudes in the situation, using a 5-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (“not at all”) to 5 (“very much”). It consists of 25 items, which can be subdivided into four attitude subscales (negative affect, calm, cognitions, and behaviors). Note that items in the negative affect and calm subscales belong to the “affect” dimension in the original version of the MAS [ , ]. Higher scores on all four subscales represent more negative attitudes because items phrased in the opposite direction were reverse-coded. Specifically, a high negative affect subscale score represented more unpleasant emotions, such as “Fear”; a high calm subscale score represented less pleasant emotions, such as “Calmness”; a high cognitions subscale score represented fewer positive thoughts, such as “He/She seems to be an interesting guy/girl”; and a high behaviors subscale score represented more avoidance and escape behaviors, such as “Move to another table.”

## Procedure
Participants found recruitment for participation in the workshop through web pages in a developmental disability web portal that a developmental disability support company managed or emails from a company’s mailing list. They voluntarily registered for participation 5–35 days before the workshop (Min = 5, Q1 = 24, Median = 26, Q3 = 29, Max = 35). During recruitment, two adjacent days were announced as the workshop days. They were required to decide to participate in either of the two adjacent days. In this registration, they responded to the sociodemographic questionnaire and the MAS as the pretest via the Internet.
On the workshop day, participants first received an explanation of the ASD simulator and a short lecture on autistic perception (45 min). Second, they experienced autistic visual perception using the ASD simulator (60 min). Third, they watched the narrative video of individuals with ASD as a video-based social contact (15 min). Finally, a group discussion was held for 90 min. To sum up, the workshop took 210 min in total.
In the group discussion, the participants were divided into small groups of five to seven participants and one workshop staff member. The workshop staff supported and facilitated active discussions. Participants shared their feelings regarding the simulated experience and the narrative video and their plans for practices to relieve perceptual distress of individuals with ASD in their daily lives.
They responded to the MAS at the beginning or end of the workshop using a paper-and-pencil test as the workshop period test. Two adjacent workshop days were randomly assigned to the beginning or end group. The recruitment for participation in the workshop was conducted three times; thus, the workshop was held for six days in total. The number of participants per day was approximately 30–50. The beginning and end groups comprised 110 and 107 participants, respectively.
Six weeks after participation in the workshop, attendees were required to respond to the MAS via the Internet as a follow-up test. As a result, 85 participants (39.1%) responded to the follow-up test.

## Data analysis
Four sub-scale scores (negative affect, calm, cognitions, and behaviors) were calculated by averaging the item scores of the MAS. A two-way mixed analysis of variance (ANOVA) with two tests (within-subject factor; pretest, workshop period test) and two groups (between-subject factor; beginning group, end group) was conducted for each sub-scale score to test whether and how the attitudes after the workshop increased or decreased from those before the workshop, as compared to simple repetitions of the measurement before the workshop. Furthermore, a paired samples t-test with two tests (pretest and follow-up test) was conducted for each sub-scale score to test whether attitudes changed over six weeks after the workshop. A two-way mixed ANOVA with two tests (within-subject factor; pretest, follow-up test) and two groups (between-subject factor; beginning group, end group) was additionally conducted to confirm whether the long-term attitude changes are equivalent between two groups. Significance tests were conducted at an alpha level of 5%. Alpha adjustment for multiple testing to the four sub-scale scores was not applied because each sub-scale score was individually tested [ ]. Generalized eta squared statistics (ηg2), and Hedges’ g statistics were estimated as the effect size for the ANOVA and t-test, respectively.

## Results
 shows descriptive statistics of age, gender, and interaction with individuals with ASD for the beginning and end groups. These sociodemographic variables were compared between the two groups to confirm equality. The results showed no significant differences and negligible effect sizes for age (Welch’s two-sample t-test, t(208.96) = 0.45, p = .652, Hedges’ g = 0.06), gender (χ2 test, χ2(1) = 0.39, p = .530, φ = .043), and interaction with individuals with ASD (χ2 test, χ2(1) = 0.02, p = .889, φ = -.009). Therefore, these sociodemographic variables were not included as covariates in the subsequent ANOVA.
 shows the means and standard deviations of the four subscale scores. “Beginning group” and “End group” in enable us to compare changes in sub-scale scores, from the pretest to the workshop period test, between the two groups. These descriptive statistics were calculated using the data in which participants who did not respond to the follow-up test were included. Moreover, “both groups responded to follow-up test” in , enabling us to compare between the pretest and follow-up test. The beginning and end groups were merged in this comparison because the pretest and follow-up test in the two groups were entirely homogenous (see ).
 

## Attitudes changes from pretest to workshop period test
The negative affect score of the workshop period test (M = 3.59) was nearly equivalent to that of the pretest (M = 3.67) in the beginning group. In contrast, in the end group, the score in the workshop period test (M = 3.34) was lower than that of the pretest (M = 3.61). A two-way mixed ANOVA revealed a significant main effect for the test (F(1, 215) = 15.96, p < .001, ηg2 = .020) and group (F(1, 215) = 4.46, p = .036, ηg2 = .015) and a significant two-way interaction (F(1, 215) = 4.58, p = .034, ηg2 = .006). The simple effects test for a two-way interaction showed no significant effect for test in the beginning group (F(1, 109) = 2.39, p = .125, ηg2 = .005), while it showed a significant effect for test in the end group (F(1, 106) = 14.51, p < .001, ηg2 = .040). These results indicate that the workshop caused a significant short-term reduction in negative affect, although the effect size for the two-way interaction was small.
In both groups, the calm score of the workshop period test (beginning group: M = 3.63, end group: M = 3.49) was higher than that of the pretest (beginning group: M = 3.49, end group: M = 3.40). A two-way mixed ANOVA showed a significant main effect for test (F(1, 215) = 5.11, p = .025, ηg2 = .008), while no significant main effect for group (F(1, 215) = 2.87, p = .092, ηg2 = .009) nor a significant two-way interaction (F(1, 215) = 0.21, p = .647, ηg2 < .001) was found. These results indicate that participants had already lost calmness, relaxation, or serenity toward individuals with ASD when the workshop started, regardless of participation in the workshop.
The cognitions score of the workshop period test was equivalent to that of the pretest in the end group (pretest: M = 2.95, workshop period test: M = 2.96) as well as the beginning group (pretest: M = 2.93, workshop period test: M = 2.98). A two-way mixed ANOVA showed no significant main effect for test (F(1, 215) = 0.67, p = .413, ηg2 = .001) or group (F(1, 215) < 0.01, p = .978, ηg2 < .001) and no significant two-way interaction (F(1, 215) = 0.34, p = .562, ηg2 = .001).
The behaviors score of the workshop period test was equivalent to that of the pretest in the end group (pretest: M = 2.60, workshop period test: M = 2.50) as well as the beginning group (pretest: M = 2.78, workshop period test: M = 2.75). A two-way mixed ANOVA revealed a significant main effect for group (F(1, 215) = 4.74, p = .031, ηg2 = .015); however, neither a significant main effect for test (F(1, 215) = 0.98, p = .323, ηg2 = .001) nor a significant two-way interaction (F(1, 215) = 0.36, p = .547, ηg2 = .001) was found.
In summary, short-term stigma reduction by the intervention was observed only in the negative affective attitude. Although reduction from the pretest to the workshop period test was also observed in the calm attitude, it was not due to the intervention. No change was observed in the cognitive and behavioral attitudes.

## Attitudes changes from pretest to follow-up test
The negative affect score at the follow-up test (M = 3.52) was still lower than the pretest (M = 3.67). The paired samples t-test showed a significant difference between the follow-up test and the pretest (t(84) = 2.28, p = .025, Hedges’ g = 0.25). These results indicate that the reduced negative affect caused by participating in the workshop persisted even after six weeks. A two-way mixed ANOVA showed a significant main effect for test (F(1, 83) = 5.12, p = .026, ηg2 = .016); while no significant main effect for group (F(1, 83) = 1.02, p = .315, ηg2 = .009) nor a significant two-way interaction (F(1, 83) = 0.02, p = .887, ηg2 < .001) was found.
The calm score of the follow-up test (M = 3.44) returned to the pretest level (M = 3.47). The paired samples t-test showed no significant difference between the two tests (t(84) = 0.32, p = .751, Hedges’ g = 0.03), which indicates that the increase in the workshop period test in both groups may be transient and did not persist six weeks after the workshop. A two-way mixed ANOVA revealed a significant main effect for group (F(1, 83) = 4.09, p = .046, ηg2 = .025); however, neither a significant main effect for test (F(1, 83) = 0.10, p = .753, ηg2 = .001) nor a significant two-way interaction (F(1, 83) < 0.01, p = .973, ηg2 < .001) was found.
The cognitions score of the follow-up test (M = 2.90) was still equivalent to the pretest (M = 2.93). The paired samples t-test showed no significant difference between the follow-up and pretest (t(84) = 0.51, p = .610, Hedges’ g = 0.06). These results indicate that the three components of the workshop did not affect cognitive attitudes toward individuals with ASD. A two-way mixed ANOVA showed no significant main effect for test (F(1, 83) = 0.37, p = .545, ηg2 = .003) or group (F(1, 83) = 0.22, p = .640, ηg2 < .001) and no significant two-way interaction (F(1, 83) = 1.58, p = .212, ηg2 = .006).
Note that the behaviors score of the follow-up test (M = 2.86) was higher than that of the pretest (M = 2.62). The paired samples t-test found a significant difference in the behaviors score between the pretest and follow-up test (t(84) = -2.45, p = .016, Hedges’s g = -0.26). These results suggest that the behavioral attitudes toward individuals with ASD did not change at the end of the workshop; however, the attitudes increased over six weeks after the workshop. A two-way mixed ANOVA showed a significant main effect for test (F(1, 83) = 6.20, p = .015, ηg2 = .018); while no significant main effect for group (F(1, 83) = 1.48, p = .227, ηg2 = .013) nor a significant two-way interaction (F(1, 83) = 1.14, p = .288, ηg2 = .003) was found.
In summary, persistent stigma reduction was observed only in the negative affective attitude. No change was observed in the calm and cognitive attitudes. Strangely, significant increase over six weeks after the workshop was observed in the behavioral attitude despite no change at the end of the workshop. There was no significant interaction between attitude change and group in all four subscales.

## Discussion
To evaluate an effective intervention for the stigma of ASD, we held a workshop incorporating two components: experience of simulated autistic visual perception and video-based social contact, measuring attendees’ attitudes toward individuals with ASD. We assigned the participants to one of two groups (beginning and end groups) to confirm the effectiveness of the intervention. We repeated measuring the attendees’ attitudes three times (pretest, workshop period test, and follow-up test) to observe the time-series variation of the attitudes.
Our main finding is that an intervention incorporating the two components effectively reduces negative affective attitudes toward individuals with ASD. The MAS results immediately after the workshop showed a significant reduction in the negative affect from the period of workshop registration compared with the test immediately before the workshop. Moreover, the MAS results six weeks after the workshop showed that the reduction in the negative affect persisted. Although the effect size for the interaction between the test and group factors was small, the effect size for the difference from the pretest was acceptable, both in the test immediately after the workshop and six weeks afterward. These results suggest that participation in the workshop persistently relieves negative affective attitudes toward individuals with ASD.
Unexpectedly, the results of the present study showed an increase in negative attitudes for some dimensions. First, the calm score increased at the workshop period test compared to the pretest. This increase can be interpreted as not a harmful effect of the intervention but an accidental attitude change that was happen regardless of the intervention, by virtue of the special research design in which the participants were assigned to either the beginning or end group. The calm attitude increase at workshop period test was observed in the beginning group as well as the end group. As mentioned in Methods, for the beginning group, both the pretest and workshop period test were taken before intervention. This means that mere arrival at the workshop venue could lead to the calm attitude increase. A possible explanation for this might be that participants became tense and excited throughout the workshop because of their participation and the opportunity to communicate with other participants. They consequently answered with low calming emotions because their scenario was similar to that in the MAS during social interaction with a stranger. Another explanation might be that difference of response method between a paper-and-pencil or online test induced the increase of the calm score. In this study, the pretest and follow-up test was conducted via Internet whereas the workshop period test was conducted using a paper-and-pencil test. Several studies have demonstrated an increase in careless responding in Internet-based research compared to paper-and-pencil research [ – ], therefore it is possible that less careless responding in the workshop period test resulted in the increase of the calm score.
Second, our results showed an increase in the behaviors score only in the follow-up test. This finding is curious because the behaviors score immediately after the workshop did not change, and the other scores did not increase; in fact, the negative affects score decreased at the follow-up test. This increase might be caused by coincidence between the narrative videos of individuals with ASD and the MAS. The narrative video included content where an individual with ASD cannot listen to a companion’s voice in a coffee shop on account of their hypersensitivity to various noises. Likewise, in the MAS, respondents were asked to imagine a situation where the protagonist sits at a table with an individual with ASD in a coffee shop. In each item of the behavior subscale, they answered on the likelihood that avoidant behaviors (e.g., “Move to another table”) might arise in the protagonist. Hence, it is possible that participants were aware of various noises in their daily lives for six weeks after the workshop and answered with a high likelihood of avoidant behaviors at the follow-up test in consideration of a stressful situation in which an individual with ASD might interact with the protagonist in a coffee shop. No increase in other attitudes at the follow-up test also supports the possibility that the increase in the behaviors score did not result from rejection of social interaction with an individual with ASD but rather in consideration of their perceptual distress.
Despite limited effectiveness in the negative affective attitude dimension, our results indicate that the intervention with two components is capable of reducing the stigma of ASD. This finding is in line with previous studies that stigma toward mental illness decreased through an intervention with experience of simulated perception [ ] or social contact [ , ]. It is also consistent with a similar study which showed effectiveness of an intervention with experience of simulated perception in decrease of ASD stigma [ ]. Moreover, our study demonstrates that the decrease of the stigma persists even six weeks after the intervention. This persistent decrease is comparable to the effectiveness of the intervention with an educational message combined with personalized interaction [ ]. It can thus be suggested that experience of simulated perception and social contact are useful as components of an intervention to reduce the stigma of ASD.

## Limitations
There are some limitations to this study that should be addressed in future research. We could not use a random sampling method because we conducted the research in the workshop. Participants recognized workshop announcements via web pages or emails that a developmental disability support company managed, and voluntarily decided to participate in the workshop. Hence, it is likely that most of them were caregivers or families of individuals with ASD and already held positive attitudes toward individuals with ASD. In fact, all attitudes at the pretest in this study were low, except negative affects compared to a previous, Internet-based survey with the Japanese version of the MAS [ ]. It means that the sample in this study was not representative of general population, hence our results need to be interpreted with caution.
The results of the comparison between the pretest and the follow-up test must be interpreted with caution because less than half of the participants responded to the test. The reason for such a low response rate is that attendees voluntarily participated in the workshop without pay and thus responded to the follow-up test out of kindness. Therefore, the results of the comparison between the pretest and the follow-up test may not represent the total number of attendees but are biased toward samples of cooperative attendees who were impressed with the workshop.
Our results could not specify which components of the intervention could relieve the stigma of ASD. Although the effectiveness of two components (experience of simulated autistic visual perception and video-based social contact) on stigma has been revealed in the context of various stigma studies (see ), its effectiveness on the stigma of ASD remains unclear. We could not randomly assign participants to different types of intervention because we conducted this study as a workshop to efficiently collect data from unpaid volunteers.
We only measured negative attitudes toward individuals with ASD. In other words, it is unclear whether the measured scores in this study represented negative attitudes toward individuals with ASD or ordinary attitudes toward others in general. Therefore, it is possible that the decrease in the negative affects score in this study does not represent a reduction in negative affective attitudes toward individuals with ASD but merely represents holding positive affective attitudes toward a stranger, regardless of whether the stranger has ASD.

## Future directions and conclusion
Future studies with random sampling from general population should be conducted to confirm generalization of our finding. Future studies with paid volunteers should be conducted to obtain a high response rate to the follow-up test. Future studies examining which components help reduce stigma should be conducted to develop an intervention that is efficient enough to be implemented in various fields. Future studies should measure attitudes toward individuals with TD as well as ASD to compare them.
In conclusion, the present study provided evidence that an intervention incorporating the experience of simulated autistic perception and video-based social contact can relieve negative affective attitudes toward individuals with ASD among individuals with TD. It is worth noting that a single-day workshop brought about persistent relief of the negative affective attitude for six weeks, even though we could not observe relief in the other three attitudes. Our findings suggest that implementing our intervention in education, medical and welfare services, or businesses may bridge knowledge gap about autistic sensory experiences between individuals with ASD and TD. Further studies need to be carried out to validate generalizability of the intervention and elaborate its components.

## Supporting information
S1 Protocol

## A detailed protocol for this research.
dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.q26g7y9e9gwz/v1.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Dataset

## Dataset used in the analysis.
dx.doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/QZE39.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.

We would like to thank Yuhei Suzuki, Jyh-Jong Hsieh, Ayaka Yamamoto, Miya Sabi, and many staff members for helping management and operation of the workshop.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0288586.r001Decision Letter 0
SelvarajJerrittaAcademic Editor© 2023 Jerritta Selvaraj2023Jerritta Selvarajhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
8 Jan 2023

PONE-D-22-20693Comprehensive Intervention for Reducing Stigma of Autism Spectrum Disorders: Incorporating the Experience of Simulated Autistic Perception and Social ContactPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Tsujita,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process. Please submit your revised manuscript by Feb 22 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Jerritta Selvaraj
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf

and https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf.
2. Thank you for stating the following in your Competing Interests section: 
“The authors declare that they have no competing interests.”
Please complete your Competing Interests on the online submission form to state any Competing Interests. If you have no competing interests, please state ""The authors have declared that no competing interests exist."", as detailed online in our guide for authors at http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submit-now
This information should be included in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
3. In your Data Availability statement, you have not specified where the minimal data set underlying the results described in your manuscript can be found. PLOS defines a study's minimal data set as the underlying data used to reach the conclusions drawn in the manuscript and any additional data required to replicate the reported study findings in their entirety. All PLOS journals require that the minimal data set be made fully available. For more information about our data policy, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability.
Upon re-submitting your revised manuscript, please upload your study’s minimal underlying data set as either Supporting Information files or to a stable, public repository and include the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers within your revised cover letter. For a list of acceptable repositories, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-recommended-repositories. Any potentially identifying patient information must be fully anonymized.
Important: If there are ethical or legal restrictions to sharing your data publicly, please explain these restrictions in detail. Please see our guidelines for more information on what we consider unacceptable restrictions to publicly sharing data: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions. Note that it is not acceptable for the authors to be the sole named individuals responsible for ensuring data access.
We will update your Data Availability statement to reflect the information you provide in your cover letter.
4. We note that you have indicated that data from this study are available upon request. PLOS only allows data to be available upon request if there are legal or ethical restrictions on sharing data publicly. For more information on unacceptable data access restrictions, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions.
In your revised cover letter, please address the following prompts:
a) If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially sensitive information, data are owned by a third-party organization, etc.) and who has imposed them (e.g., an ethics committee). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent.
b) If there are no restrictions, please upload the minimal anonymized data set necessary to replicate your study findings as either Supporting Information files or to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. For a list of acceptable repositories, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-recommended-repositories.
We will update your Data Availability statement on your behalf to reflect the information you provide.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: some procedural and statistical errors were found in research paper, the author need special attention to correct these procedural and statistical errors. the method and result section need further clarity and advancement
Reviewer #2: This is an interesting study and the authors have collected a unique dataset using the cutting-edge methodology. The paper is generally well structured. However, in my opinion, the paper has some shortcomings in regard to some text. In the manuscript, numerous text is vague and rambling (e.g. line 53-57, 61-64, etc.) It is suggested to edit the manuscript carefully and rewrite the long sentences to make them more impactful and easy for the reader.
In discussion, it is suggested to cite literature which is supporting your argument even if the hypothesis is not accepted. In the Limitation section, the author has given recommendations. It is suggested to write recommendations under different headings instead of rambling limitations. Furthermore, there is no need of mentioning results in this section. With Given these shortcomings, the manuscript requires revisions.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: pd.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0288586.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
17 Mar 2023

>Review Comments to the Author
>Reviewer #1: some procedural and statistical errors were found in research paper, the author need special attention to correct these procedural and statistical errors. the method and result section need further clarity and advancement
We described detailed procedure on protocols.io, and conducted additional analysis to confirm that the extraneous variables are controlled in this study. We also added a new table to display participants’ characteristics.
>Abstract 
>Described the sample selection, procedure, age, and gender base characteristics of the sample briefly. 
We added information of the sample and procedure.
>Introduction is good and well write, need some advance researches.
We replaced some references in Introduction with more recent one.
>Method
>2) Sentence no 134, need rephrasing.
As you mentioned, the first sentence in the section of Research design was unnecessary and helpless to understand the research design. We therefore deleted it.
>3) Explain the standard procedure and protocol, while conducting experimental research.
We described the protocol of this intervention on protocol.io according to recommendation of the editor. We added supporting information section to the manuscript to inform readers about it.
>4) Result discrepancy while assessing the attitude online (pre-test), while the other two-assessment method face to face with individual. Justify? 
The follow-up test was not face to face with individual but was online as well as the pretest. We therefore concluded that decrease of the negative affect score and increase of the behavior score at the follow-up test were not caused by the difference between online or face to face. Rather, it is possible that the difference of assessing method might induce increase of the calm score at the workshop period test. We added the explanation of the possibility at line 159.
>5) Participants demographic characteristics such as age, education, financial status, and occupation are missing. 
Participants’ age was described at line 245 and Table 1. 
We could not include questions about education, financial status, and occupation in the sociodemographic questionnaire for a careless mistake. We added the explanation at line 280.
>6) How the extraneous variables are controlled while conducting experimental method.
As for allocation bias, we randomly assigned two adjacent days to either the beginning or end groups. It seems that there was no allocation bias in this study, considering the results that there was no difference of age, gender, and interaction with individuals with ASD between the beginning and end groups. We also conducted additional analysis to confirm the allocation bias was controlled (see question 8). As for sampling bias, we could not sufficiently control sampling because we recruited participants through a developmental disability support company and as a results most of them were caregivers or families of individuals with ASD. We discussed this sampling bias in the Limitation section starting from line 570.
>7) Need further tabulation on the bases of participant’s characteristics.
We added table of sociodemographic variables as Table 1.
>8) Need further analysis clarify the result?
In order to confirm that the allocation bias did not affect the long-term attitude changes, we additionally conducted a two way mixed ANOVA with two tests (within-subject factor; pretest, follow-up test) and two groups (between-subject factor; beginning group, end group). 
>9) Overall manuscript are not according the standard format APA 7th 
We checked our manuscript and corrected the style and format, according to PLOS ONE submission Guidelines (https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines).
>Reviewer #2: This is an interesting study and the authors have collected a unique dataset using the cutting-edge methodology. The paper is generally well structured. However, in my opinion, the paper has some shortcomings in regard to some text. In the manuscript, numerous text is vague and rambling (e.g. line 53-57, 61-64, etc.) It is suggested to edit the manuscript carefully and rewrite the long sentences to make them more impactful and easy for the reader.
>In discussion, it is suggested to cite literature which is supporting your argument even if the hypothesis is not accepted. In the Limitation section, the author has given recommendations. It is suggested to write recommendations under different headings instead of rambling limitations. Furthermore, there is no need of mentioning results in this section. With Given these shortcomings, the manuscript requires revisions.
We agree that the manuscript was vague and rambling, therefore we rewrite it to be clarify and easy to read. In Introduction, we deleted redundant explanations of references and combined some paragraphs. In discussion, we added a paragraph with citations of related literatures to support our argument at line 556-567. We removed recommendations from the Limitations section to the new section named Future Directions and Conclusion. We also deleted mentions of results. Additionally, we deleted a paragraph mentioning internalized stigma in Limitations section because it is extraneous.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0288586.r003Decision Letter 1
MantiFilippoAcademic Editor© 2023 Filippo Manti2023Filippo Mantihttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
2 Jul 2023

Comprehensive Intervention for Reducing Stigma of Autism Spectrum Disorders: Incorporating the Experience of Simulated Autistic Perception and Social Contact
PONE-D-22-20693R1
Dear Dr. Tsujita,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Filippo Manti
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
10.1371/journal.pone.0288586.r004Acceptance letter
MantiFilippoAcademic Editor© 2023 Filippo Manti2023Filippo Mantihttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
7 Jul 2023

PONE-D-22-20693R1 
Comprehensive Intervention for Reducing Stigma of Autism Spectrum Disorders: Incorporating the Experience of Simulated Autistic Perception and Social Contact 
Dear Dr. Tsujita:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Filippo Manti 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE