pmcPlant CellPlant Cell95plntcell9208688plcellThe Plant Cell1040-46511532-298XOxford University PressPMC12012775PMC12012775.112012775120127754026088010.1093/plcell/koaf043koaf0431EditorialAcademicSubjects/SCI01270AcademicSubjects/SCI01280AcademicSubjects/SCI02286AcademicSubjects/SCI02287AcademicSubjects/SCI02288Embracing the challenges ahead: a new chapter for the plant cell leadership
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3589-4414ManavellaPablo A
The Plant Cell, American Society of Plant Biologists, USA
Instituto de Hortofruticultura Subtropical y Mediterránea (IHSM, UMA-CSIC), 29010 Málaga, Spain .
 Article processing charges (APCs) are also frequently a mystery for authors. I believe this is an aspect that needs the highest degree of transparency. The debate about subscription vs. open access publishing, APCs, and why authors pay them, has been extensively discussed before, and this editorial is not the place to bring that topic to the table again. However, I firmly believe that it is important that journals clearly explain where the charges go, as most of the authors' payments are from tax-funded grants. Opposite to commercial journals with exorbitant APCs that end up mostly in the pockets of shareholders, The Plant Cell is a nonprofit society journal that reinvests publication revenues into supporting the scientific community. In this sense, both the journal—through its Editor-in-Chief sponsoring scientific conferences or supporting ECRs through our Assistant Features Editor (AFE) program—and journal owner ASPB—through initiatives such as fellowships, travel grants, the Plant Biology conference, and educational programs—seek to return the community their support. The nonprofit ethos allows us to support programs and events that otherwise struggle for funds. This ethical use of resources, which ensures that tax-money originally destined to support science ends up doing so, underscores the value of choosing to publish in society journals over for-profit alternatives. I’ll admit publication fees can sometimes feel like a black box. As a means of changing that, we will design clear infographics that break down where your money goes so you can be proud of seeing how your paper is supporting a broader scientific ecosystem.
The shift to open access publishing is another area where transparency is critical. While I wholeheartedly support the principles of open science as they reflect a positive trend in democratizing science, we need to strike a balance that maintains the journal's accessibility and sustainability, as open access publishing presents challenges, particularly for society journals. We must avoid that, in an effort to reach open science, we end up creating inequity at the moment of covering publication fees for ECRs and scientists from low-income countries. Thus, I aim to work closely with our publishing partners to strike a fair balance between Open Access options and subscription models, ensuring that The Plant Cell remains accessible to all while maintaining the quality and sustainability our community values.
Plant science is evolving rapidly, and so must we. Over the next few months, you’ll notice some exciting changes at The Plant Cell. We have transitioned to the Editorial Manager submission management system to increase the journal's ability to engage new tools and technology throughout the submission and review process. We have also initiated continuous publication, so accepted papers will be available online immediately after acceptance and indexed in an issue more quickly. And, as enhancing the author experience is another of my priorities, we are exploring new ways to amplify the impact of your research. So, in the coming months, we will implement new tools to increase the visibility of your work, including graphical abstracts, AI-assisted summaries, and editor-curated highlights. We want to make your research accessible to both specialists and our broader readership. Because, let's be honest, your work deserves to be celebrated, not just cited. In today's interconnected world, effective communication is key to amplifying scientific discoveries. We aim to harness social media, blogs, and other platforms to share the remarkable work published in The Plant Cell with a broader audience, ensuring it reaches specialists and the public. But most importantly for your benefit: in a time when visibility, impact, and citations of your work, and not the metrics of the journal, are becoming the principle mechanisms for evaluation, we aim to make your paper reach the largest audience possible.
Our commitment to diversity and inclusion will also guide every decision. We aim to amplify voices from underrepresented regions, ensuring that our editorial board reflects the global plant science community. By fostering open dialog among authors, reviewers, and editors, we hope to create a journal that feels accessible, inclusive, and deeply connected to its community. Personally, I’m also committed to supporting events that feature speakers from the global South or, even better, international events in such locations. Supporting ECRs is also central to my mission. Initiatives like the AFE program provide invaluable opportunities for young scientists to engage with cutting-edge research and develop their skills in science communication. I am committed to expanding such initiatives to nurture the future leaders of our field.
None of this would be possible without the tireless efforts of our reviewers. I want to recognize their invaluable contributions, whose expertise forms the backbone of our journal. In collaboration with the Editors-in-Chief of our sister journals, Plant Physiology and Plant Direct, I hope to introduce initiatives that better acknowledge and reward reviewers across our journals, fostering a spirit of collaboration and community.
To our readers, authors, reviewers, editors, and journal staff: thank you for your trust and partnership. I am deeply honored to lead The Plant Cell and am here with an open-door policy, ready to listen and learn from you what you need from me. The next chapter of The Plant Cell begins now. Let's write it together—with innovation, collaboration, and of course by enjoying the journey.
Warmly,

Pablo Manavella

Editor-in-Chief, The Plant Cell