3674eclinmeClinicalMedicineeClinicalMedicineElsevierPMC1170148411701484117014843976417610.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102698COVID-19 among migrants, refugees, and internally displaced persons: systematic review, meta-analysis and qualitative synthesis of the global empirical literature
HintermeierMaren GottliebNora RohlederSven OppenbergJan BaroudiMazen Pernitez-AganSweetmavourneen LopezJanice FloresSergio MohsenpourAmir WickramageKolitha BozorgmehrKayvan aSection Health Equity Studies & Migration, Department of Primary Care and Health Services Research, Heidelberg University Hospital, Im Neuenheimer Feld 130.3, Heidelberg 69120, GermanybDepartment of Population Medicine and Health Services Research, School of Public Health, Bielefeld University, Universitätsstraße 25, Bielefeld 33615, GermanycDepartment of Epidemiology and Global Health, Umeå University, Umeå 901 87, SwedendMigration Health Division, International Organization for Migration, 24th Floor BDO Towers, Paseo de Roxas, Makati City 1226, PhilippineseDepartment of Public Health and Caring Sciences, Uppsala University, Box 564, Uppsala 751 22, SwedenfUN Migration Agency, Global Data Institute, Migration Health Division, International Organization for Migration, Taubenstr. 20-22, Berlin 10117, Germany∗Corresponding author. Department of Population Medicine and Health Services Research, School of Public Health, Bielefeld University, Universitätsstraße 25, Bielefeld 33615, Germany. kayvan.bozorgmehr@uni-bielefeld.de
107202474102698102698612025© 2024 The Author(s)This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary

## Background
Evidence amounted early that migrants, who are often side-lined in pandemic response or preparedness plans, are disproportionately affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and its consequences. However, synthesised evidence that quantifies the magnitude of inequalities in infection risk, disease outcomes, consequences of pandemic measures or that explains the underlying mechanisms is lacking.

## Methods
We conducted a systematic review searching 25 databases and grey literature (12/2019 to 09/2023) and considered empirical articles covering migrants, refugees, asylum-seekers, and internally displaced persons reporting COVID-19 cases, hospitalisation, ICU admission, mortality, COVID-19 vaccination rates or health consequences of pandemic measures. Random-effects meta-analysis of observational studies and qualitative analysis were performed for evidence synthesis. A protocol was registered with PROSPERO (CRD42021296952).

## Findings
Out of 17,088 records, we included 370 reports in the review. For the quantitative studies (n = 65; mainly from high income countries), meta-analysis with over 53 million participants studied showed that, compared to non-migrants, migrants have an elevated risk of infection (RR = 1.84; 95%-CI: 1.44–2.35) but similar risk for hospitalisation (RR = 1.10; 0.91–1.33), while the probability of ICU admission was higher (RR = 1.23; 0.99–1.52). Among those hospitalised, migrants had a lower risk of mortality (RR = 0.56; 0.42–0.76), while their population-based mortality tended to be higher (RR = 1.46; 0.95–2.26). The qualitative synthesis (n = 75) highlighted the complex interplay of social and COVID-19-related factors at different levels. This involved increased exposure, risk, and impact of pandemic measures that compromised the health of migrants.

## Interpretation
Even in the advanced stages of the pandemic, migrants faced higher infection risks and disproportionately suffered from the consequences of COVID-19 disease, including deaths. Population-level interventions in future health emergencies must better consider socio-economic, structural and community-level exposures to mitigate risks among migrants. Enhancing health information systems is crucial, as the lack of migration variables makes it difficult to close coverage gaps, leaving migrants largely ‘invisible’ in official data.

## Funding
None.

Keywords: COVID-19, Refugees, Asylum seekers, IDP, Migration, Health inequality, Meta-analysis, Quantitative synthesis

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Apr 23; Revised 2024 Jun 6; Accepted 2024 Jun 6; Collection date 2024 Aug.

## Research in context

## Evidence before this study
Existing reviews on inequalities in COVID-19-related health risks during the early phase of the pandemic found that migrants were disproportionally affected, but the magnitude of inequalities between migrants and non-migrants in multiple key outcomes has not been quantified. Reviews covering studies until October 2021 focused on individual health effects, e.g., mental health, risk of infection, or severity of COVID-19 disease among migrants, and were limited in their geographic scope (e.g., focus on single countries, or high-income countries), the outcomes considered, or covered only single or specific migrant groups.

## Added value of this study
We mapped the global empirical literature and synthesised the available qualitative and quantitative literature (published in English, German, and Spanish) on multiple COVID-19-related outcomes among diverse categories of migrants, as well as the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on migrant populations by September 2023, covering over 53 million participants. Our results showed higher infection risk among migrants compared to non-migrants, and hinted at different patterns by geographical or contextual exposures. Contrary to previous (narrative) systematic reviews, we found no evidence for increased hospitalisation risk in migrants (living in high-income countries) compared to non-migrants among COVID-19-cases, but higher risk for ICU admission and death as far as population-level estimates are considered. Findings from the qualitative synthesis uncover not only the ways in which interrelated social risks and inequalities engender severe and unique impacts on migrants; they also pinpoint potential sources of resilience at individual, community and societal level.

## Implications of all the available evidence
Migrants were at higher risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection throughout the pandemic compared to non-migrants, and seemed to have more severe courses of disease requiring ICU admission. Hospital-based mortality was lower, while population-based mortality tended to be higher in migrants than non-migrants, indicating that the venue for reducing such inequalities is through population-level rather than clinical interventions. To better prepare for future health emergencies and avoid future pandemic measures from unfolding (unintended) negative consequences for migrants, it is urgently required to improve health information systems, ensure the inclusion of migrant populations in national pandemic response plans, and align these with social and health equity policies.

## Introduction
Global health emergencies like the COVID-19 pandemic occur unpredictably, and effective responses require well elaborated and actionable preparedness strategies in line with the International Health Regulations. National pandemic preparedness and response plans are part of such strategies and are supported by the WHO, e.g., through a strategic plan published on February 4, 2020, with subsequent ongoing elaboration. , However, migrants have been side-lined in such plans, prompting a call for urgent global action to consider migrants in pandemic responses from the Lancet Migration early in the pandemic (April 10, 2020). 
Evidence from the early phase of the pandemic (i.e., year 2020) suggests that migrants were disproportionally affected by the COVID-19 pandemic at all levels. Reviews of the early literature found an increased risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection in migrant populations and elevated all-cause mortality compared to non-migrants. , However, most reviews restricted their focus to high-income countries (HIC); little is known about low- and middle-income countries (LIC/MIC). Migrants living in crowded housing conditions, but also undocumented migrants and migrant healthcare workers, were found to be at higher infection risk. , A study examining outbreaks in German accommodation centres for asylum seekers and refugees found a significantly higher attack rate if indiscriminate mass-quarantine was applied to all camp inhabitants compared with targeted contact tracing. Several studies identified risk factors such as precarious working conditions, crowded housing, language barriers, or legal barriers to healthcare among migrants as well as negative effects of pandemic control measures on mental health. , , , , 
Despite these early efforts to compile evidence on differential risks and exposures between migrant and non-migrant populations, there is a lack of synthesised evidence quantifying the magnitude of inequalities in infection risk, consequences of disease, or vaccination rates. Furthermore, there is still a dearth of consolidated knowledge on the impact of pandemic response strategies on migrant health beyond studies published at the onset of the pandemic.
We conducted a systematic review covering the literature from 12/2019 to 09/2023 to map the global landscape of the empirical literature and synthesise the evidence in this field. We investigated the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infections and the consequences of disease (measured by hospitalisation, intensive care unit (ICU) admission, and mortality rates) among migrants, including asylum seekers, refugees, and internally displaced persons (IDP) compared to non-migrants; vaccination coverage among migrants and non-migrants; and the impact of lockdown and pandemic control measures on migrant health.

## Methods

## Search strategy and selection criteria
We conducted a systematic literature review in line with the Preferred Reporting for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guideline. Studies were eligible for inclusion if (first generation) migrants, IDP, refugees, or asylum seekers were studied (following definitions of the International Organisation for Migration (IOM) and the United Nations High Commissioner (UNHCR) ); health effects of COVID-19 (cases, hospitalisation, ICU admission, mortality, vaccination) or corresponding policy measures among refugees and migrants were assessed; and if written in English, German, or Spanish. We performed the search in the Cochrane Library and the WHO Covid-19 Research Database (representing a comprehensive source of 24 bibliographic databases), thereby updating and complementing the search of a previously published review now covering all studies from 12/2019 to 09/2023. All study designs were considered except case series, theoretical research papers, and policy analyses without empirical data. We included peer-reviewed articles and official reports from the IOM and European Public Health Association websites, as well as studies from previous reviews known to the authors. For systematic reviews, only the primary studies were considered. The inclusion and exclusion criteria are listed in . The review protocol was registered with PROSPERO (CRD42021296952).
Search terms were developed, refined, and validated among the review team, and databases searched by experienced reviewers (SR, MH) of the Rapid Response Review Unit (RRRUN) (as of 09/2023) ( ). Website searches were performed by three reviewers (JL, SA, JO) (as of 11/2021). Identified records were uploaded to a management tool for systematic reviews (Covidence), where two reviewers each screened titles and abstracts independently. The same applied to full-texts. Discrepancies were resolved by a third reviewer (KB) and decisions were consented in constant discussion among the review team.
The volume of included articles required adjustments to the protocol regarding data extraction and quality assessment. Data extraction was done individually and cross-checked by MH. The following items were extracted: Generic bibliographic information (author, title, year published, journal); study objectives, hypothesis, and research questions; study characteristics (research method, sample size, geography); population and context characteristics; findings (e.g., main outcomes in quantitative studies, major themes/minor themes in qualitative studies) and conclusions as reported. For the quantitative synthesis, we added the crude numbers of COVID-19 cases (identified using different methods e.g., PCR-test, seroprevalence, self-reported), hospitalised cases, ICU admissions, and deaths among migrants and non-migrants (i.e., resident population of the countries underlying the studies).
The Joanna Briggs Institute’s (JBI) critical appraisal tools were used for the quality assessment, which was performed by pairs of two reviewers independently. Articles were rated using the respective checklist based on their study design. A quality score (range 0–100%, from lowest to highest quality) was constructed based on the answers of applied checklists (questions indicated as “not applicable” were not counted into the overall quality score in order to avoid artificial downrating of studies). For each study, the scores obtained from two independent ratings were averaged, and studies were grouped based on their scores and classified as high (100-75% of possible score), moderate (74-50%) and low (<50%) quality studies ( ). Rating discrepancies in case of considerably different scores were resolved by discussion among the team. The quality of modelling studies was assessed using an adapted instrument derived from existing tools as used in previous reviews. , , , , 

## Evidence synthesis
We descriptively synthesised and mapped all included studies ( ) and performed analytical synthesis of selected qualitative and quantitative studies. For the quantitative synthesis, we included only moderate- or high-quality articles that reported on COVID-19 cases, hospitalisations, ICU admissions, and mortality among migrant and non-migrant populations, in order to draw reliable conclusions from the literature. We checked all quantitative reports for their eligibility. Low quality articles, those reporting outcomes among migrants without comparison groups or stratified results for migrants or without denominators were excluded from the quantitative synthesis. Studies reporting on vaccination coverage could only be synthesised narratively, as less than five studies provided data that qualified for meta-analysis.
Panel 1

## Overview of identified global empirical literature on COVID-19-relatedhealth outcomes and effects of pandemic control measures (e.g., lockdown) among migrants (12/2019–09/2023), N = 370 studies.

## Study designs
Out of 370 included studies, 256 (69.2%) had a quantitative design, e.g., (repeated) cross-sectional, (retrospective, prospective) cohort, or case–control design, 18 (4.9%) were modelling studies. 76 studies (20.5%) were qualitative research, and 20 (5.4%) studies had a mixed method design.

## Geographic scope
Most studies (72.9%) were conducted in high-income countries (n = 270), 51 studies (13.7%) took place in (upper) middle-income countries, 45 (12.1%) in lower middle-income countries, and only ten studies (2.7%) were conducted in low-income countries. Some studies did not report a specific country context (e.g., modelling studies) or comprised multiple countries.

## Migrant groups
The migrant groups studied varied widely. Study populations consisted mainly of a) international migrants (n = 208; 56.2% of studies) as defined by (a combination of) various indicators such as region of origin, country of birth, nationality, language-proficiency, or migrants/immigrants without further specification; b) international migrants with a specific legal status that was reported, including international students (n = 10; 2.7%), refugees (n = 56; 15.1%), asylum seekers (n = 23; 6.2%), labour migrants (n = 58; 15.7%), undocumented migrants (n = 17; 4.6%), Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) detainees (n = 6; 1.6%); c) IDP (n = 10; 2.7%); d) internal migrants (mainly in India and China) (n = 14; 3.8%); e) returnees (n = 8; 2.2%); and f) ecological (net) migration flows (n = 25; 6.8%).

## Health outcomes
54 (14.6%) studies investigated infection risk, 29 (7.8%) transmission risk, 127 (34.3%) health outcomes of disease (i.e., COVID-19 cases, hospitalisation, ICU admission, mortality, or pneumonia), 22 (5.9%) health services access, 68 (18.4%) mental health (e.g., depression, anxiety, trauma or stress), 110 (29.7%) looked at the effects of pandemic control measures (e.g., lockdown, mask wearing, etc.), and only 30 (8.1%) studies addressed vaccination.
Note: Numbers do not add up to 100% in the sections geographic scope, migrant groups and health outcomes as some studies covered multiple categories.
 , p.39ff. for study characteristics of all included studies.

We performed meta-analyses for the binary outcomes (COVID-19 cases, hospitalisation, ICU admission, and mortality) using the effect sizes relative risk (RR) and risk difference (RD), which allow estimation and interpretation of pooled proportional and absolute risk, respectively, associated with migratory status compared to non-migrants. Given that the denominators for mortality differed (i.e., deaths based on hospitalised cases or population-based mortality), we performed separate analyses. As we assume that studies are likely to have functional differences and that the true effect size varies between studies, we fitted random-effects models using inverse variance weighting. We carefully assessed the heterogeneity between studies, used sensitivity analyses to check for robustness of models, and performed explorative subgroup analyses.
The measure of between-study heterogeneity estimates the variations in the true effect size . It was calculated using the restricted maximum likelihood (REML) method and the Q-Profile method to compute corresponding 95% confidence intervals (95%-CI). , The measure was not suitable for assessing heterogeneity, as it tends toward 100% when studies have large sample sizes, which is the case for many of the included studies. The measure , however, is insensitive to the precision of the included studies. Based on , we calculated a prediction interval (PI) that allows to quantify the range into which a future study might fall based on the evidence considered. The PI provides a meaningful interpretation of . To calculate the 95%-CI for both the pooled estimate and PI, we used the modified Hartung-Knapp (HK) method with ad hoc variance correction given that (i.e., standard error of HK model compared to classical DerSimonian-Laird model). In addition, we performed subgroup analyses for study regions and indicators of migratory status where appropriate, to identify possible explanations for heterogeneity. We used sensitivity analysis to carefully check the robustness of the models for each outcome and effect size and, as a result, excluded studies from the meta-analysis. Therefore, we calculated influence diagnostics to detect extremely influential studies that have a high impact on and . We excluded studies based on extreme or implausible values of standardised residuals, Cook’s distance, hat value, and leave-one-out cross-validation (LOO-CV) to measure direct impact on and . We performed further sensitivity analyses to assess the impact on our estimates of duplicate data sources underlying the different primary studies. provides more information on the sensitivity analysis. The results of the meta-analyses are presented in forest plots as well as in drapery plots ( ). Analysis and visualisations were performed using R 4.2.0 statistical programming language. Meta-analyses and sensitivity analyses were performed using the meta and dmetar packages. , 
For the qualitative synthesis, we included all studies that conducted qualitative research (i.e., purely qualitative studies or mixed-method studies reporting qualitative results) and rated moderate- to high-quality. A coding scheme was developed following the model of Diderichsen et al.; and the extracted data was coded using ATLAS.ti 8 software. The development of the coding scheme involved both inductive and deductive coding strategies. During the first round, codes were developed inductively from the data. They were then compared and integrated with the existing model, which describes COVID-19-related inequalities for migrants in three categories: exposure, risk, and impact. Through iterative meetings (first within the qualitative analysis-team (NG, MB, SA, JL), then the entire review-team), we elaborated the original model as follows: 1) through inductive coding, we added further codes to the categories; 2) the original model was linear (from exposure to risk to impact), while our data showed many interrelations and feedback loops within and among the categories; 3) within each category, we distinguished between factors on the micro-, meso- and macro-level; 4) we added the category “sources of resilience”, which interacts with the other three categories.

## Role of the funding source
There was no funding source for this study.

## Results
The search yielded 17,013 records from databases and 75 from websites. After the removal of 5220 duplicates, 11,868 records were screened based on their title and abstract; 762 reports were sought for retrieval, and 723 assessed for their eligibility whereof 374 did not meet the criteria ( ). Another 21 reports were included based on previous reviews (n = 8) or snowball sampling (i.e., primary studies from reviews) (n = 13) ( ). A total of 370 reports were included ( ). Of these, 75 qualified for qualitative synthesis ( ) and 65 for meta-analysis ( ).
 Based on the sensitivity analysis, some studies were not eligible for the quantitative synthesis and therefore excluded from the meta-analysis ( ). Among the 34 studies reporting on COVID-19 cases, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 25 were eligible for quantitative synthesis. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 
Sample sizes comprised over 53 million participants studied (migrant and non-migrant groups) for COVID-19 cases, 903,797 for hospitalisation, 138,442 for ICU admission, and 738,247 for mortality.
The risk of infection among migrants was 1.84 (95%-CI: 1.44–2.35) times the risk of non-migrants, with a RD of 0.05 (95%-CI: 0.03–0.07) ( a). Drapery plots confirm that RR and RD also apply with 99%-CI ( ). Inequalities in infection risk between migrants and non-migrants living in North America (RR = 2.72; 95%-CI: 1.62–4.56) or Northern Europe (RR = 2.00; 95%-CI: 1.42–2.83) seemed to be larger than inequalities observed in Southern Europe (RR = 1.53; 95%-CI: 1.10–2.13), whereby the actual RD compared to non-migrants was 0.10 (95%-CI: 0.05–0.15) in North America and 0.05 and 0.02 (95%-CI: 0.02–0.08; −0.01–0.05) in Northern and Southern European countries, respectively ( b).
 The main migrant category studied was international migrants defined by various indicators of migratory status ( ). We grouped studies based on the underlying indicators of migratory status and provide an explorative subgroup analysis in the supplement ( ). Among these groups, infection risk in migrants whose migratory status was defined by country of birth or region of origin was almost twice the risk of non-migrants (with narrow PIs), and inequalities appeared to be more pronounced among foreign workers and when migration status was defined via language ( ). Inequalities in infection risk compared to non-migrants were varying widely (wide PI) in migrants living in any kind of shared accommodation (refugee camp, dormitory, detention facility) indicating high between study variations (e.g., through the socioeconomic development (HIC vs. lower MIC) of the countries of study or setting (reception centre and detention facility vs. large refugee camps)). , , 
Twenty studies reported on hospitalisation of migrant and non-migrant SARS-CoV-2 infected individuals, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , whereof 12 studies were eligible for quantitative synthesis. , , , , , , , , , , , Overall, the risk of hospitalisation appeared to be comparable among both population groups (RR = 1.10; 95%-CI: 0.91–1.33) ( ). The analysis showed no significant effect, which is also confirmed by the drapery plots ( ). However, studies from Southern Europe tended to report a lower risk in migrants compared to non-migrants, , , , , whereas studies conducted in Northern Europe reported slightly elevated risk among migrants ( ). , , , , , 
 The meta-analysis of the outcome ICU admission included 12 out of 19 studies and showed 1.23 (95%-CI: 0.99–1.52) times the risk in migrants compared to non-migrants ( ). , , , , , , , , , , , The risk difference among the groups was 0.02 (95%-CI: −0.00-0.04) ( ). Drapery plots confirmed significant effects ( ).
 As for mortality, 22 out of 30 studies were eligible for meta-analysis ( ). , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , Studies with mortality as outcome used different denominators: hospitalised cases vs. population-based mortality within the respective time-period and geographic region. This resulted in different trends and patterns of inequality. If studies reported mortality due to or associated with COVID-19 using all deaths in the population as denominator (population-based mortality), the risk for fatal outcomes tended to be higher (RR = 1.46 (95%-CI: 0.95–2.26)) in migrants compared to non-migrants with an absolute risk difference of 0.08 (95%-CI: −0.01–0.16) ( ). However, only four studies using population-based mortality fed into the synthesis ( ). With hospitalised cases as denominator for incident COVID-19 associated deaths (hospital mortality), the mortality risk in migrants appeared to be almost half that of non-migrants (RR = 0.56; 95%-CI: 0.42–0.76) with a risk difference of −0.06 (95%-CI: −0.09–(−0.03)) ( ) based on a sample size of 51,171 participants analysed. Drapery plots confirmed a 99%-CI in the results for RR and RD ( ).
 Overall, 16 studies were potentially based on non-unique data sources. Sensitivity analyses showed estimates to be robust against potential duplicates, with the exception of ICU admission and hospital-based mortality estimates ( ).
The qualitative synthesis was based on 75 high-to moderate-quality articles and provided insights into the syndemic nature of the COVID-19 pandemic by showing the complex interactions between social and COVID-19-related factors that have resulted in relative disadvantages for migrants. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 
 illustrates exposures, risks, and impact of COVID-19 measures as well as sources of resilience for migrant populations, each at micro-, meso-, and macro-levels (i.e., at the level of the individual, the family/community, and state/society, the latter including policies and institutions such as the healthcare system and the labour market). “Exposure” refers to aspects in the living and working environment of a person that determine the extent to which that person comes into contact with SARS-CoV-2; whereas “risk” designates factors shaping that person’s interaction with these exposures. Factors in the different categories and on the different levels interacted and compromised the physical and psychosocial health of migrants in severe and sometimes unique ways.
 Our synthesis shows that migrants faced exposures at meso- and macro-level; among these exposures, crowded housing conditions, working in essential and/or high-risk jobs and precarious conditions, and lack of governmental support emerged as particularly critical. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , Some studies further pointed to the role of social norms in creating exposures, describing for instance that some communities may tend to put pressure on their members to participate in gatherings and events. Risks existed at all three levels. At the individual level, the included studies identified unaffordability of personal protective equipment, low health literacy, and language barriers. , , , , , These risk factors can be cross-referenced to the macro- and meso-level. Studies reported late, insufficient, or no provision of health information in ways that accommodate linguistic diversity, formal barriers to health services, and distrust in institutions, including public health services. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , Several studies described discrepancies between the official health information provided and the actual living conditions of some migrant populations as a source of frustration and alienation, which, in turn, could lead to an overall rejection of pandemic measures; for example, when camp-like settings (camps, accommodation centres for asylum-seekers, shared housing for labour migrants, detention centres) made it impossible for the residents to maintain social distancing or adequate hygiene practices. Further risks at the meso-level include retaliation from employers, camp managers and detention officers, which deterred migrants from demanding preventive and response measures such as the provision of protective equipment, testing, or quarantining. , , , , , 
Among the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and pandemic measures, two interrelated factors figured prominently across the literature: On the individual level, lockdown measures entailed severe economic consequences (such as job loss) which, in turn, sometimes necessitated hazardous alternative livelihood strategies such as survival prostitution or child labour. On the macro-level, pandemic measures impacted on migration prospects and migration trajectories (e.g., related to disruption of relevant services such as visa and work permit renewal or the processing of asylum applications, or return migration). Combined, these factors generated major legal and social insecurity for migrants and, as a corollary, fears of failing one’s “migration project”. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , The above factors are intertwined with meso-level factors: the inability to fulfil social roles (such as acting as the family’s breadwinner, sending remittances) influenced family dynamics, including gender and intergenerational roles , , , , , , , , , , , ; and the transnational character of their lives added to migrants’ distress as they feared for the wellbeing of their beloved ones back home while experiencing crisis in their host country (“living the pandemic twice”). , , , Further impacts on the macro-level include increased discrimination and aggravated barriers to health and social services. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , In some settings, they involved the effects of differential pandemic measures. For instance, migrants in camp-like settings as well as in-house domestic workers were often subjected to severe mobility restrictions. On top, in many camp-like settings, collective response measures such as mass quarantine or obligatory testing were imposed on the residents. , , , , , , , , , Our analysis highlights the severe, to some extent unique, and in part unintended consequences of pandemic control measures for migrants. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , More than the pandemic itself, these unintended consequences of pandemic measures have contributed significantly to the severe psychosocial impact on migrants. , , , , 
Our analysis pinpoints sources of individual, community and systemic resilience that can counteract some of the above described exposures, risks, and impact of pandemic measures. Among the main individual-level sources of resilience are optimistic framings of the crisis (e.g., “We’ve been through worse.”) and the exchange with family and peers via social media. , , , , , , , , , , Mutual material and psychosocial support as well as decent work conditions that allow for a sense of control and participation are important community-level sources of resilience. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , Macro-level sources of resilience include access to governmental assistance, the tailored provision of health information, trust in the authorities, and legal status, which is key to being able to assert one’s rights. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , Our analysis shows that many of these meso- and macro-level sources of resilience have been inaccessible for migrants during the COVID-19 pandemic, especially during the pandemic’s first phase. , 
In later phases of the pandemic, in some contexts, policy responses to the Covid-19 pandemic were adjusted, for instance, in terms of migrants’ inclusion in the provision of governmental assistance and tailored health information, leading to improved social and health outcomes. , Eventually, our analysis highlights the multifaceted interrelations among the various factors in the different categories and on the different levels, with some key factors triggering cascading effects and feedback loops ( ).
Panel 2

## Vignettes to illustrate cascading effects and feedback loops for different migrant groups deriving from pandemic control measures.

## Vignette a) “Migrants with precarious legal status”
The pandemic-related closure of offices and services obstructed the renewal of residence and work permits for migrants with precarious legal status. Informal labour markets were severely impacted by pandemic measures, leading to widespread loss of jobs and livelihoods, with no social safety nets in place. The resulting legal and economic insecurities amplified existing power differentials, put migrants at risk of exploitation, and generated major psychosocial distress due to the uncertain future prospects in the host country. Pressures to send money to families and communities back home exacerbated such distress. The coping strategies of migrants and their families sometimes involved extremely hazardous employment, including child labour and survival prostitution. This, in turn, increased the exposure to and risk of a SARS-CoV-2 infection, but also other health issues such as injuries, sexually transmittable diseases, violence, unwanted pregnancies, and ill mental health. Adverse social consequences include descent into extreme poverty, food insecurity, impacts on children’s education, stigma, and tensions within families over changing gender and intergenerational roles. Access to social and health services, including tailored services such as walk-in clinics for uninsured patients, were also compromised due to the pandemic. The only available source of material and psychosocial support were often informal networks based on kinship, diaspora and religious communities.

(Synthesis based on Babuc 2021, Da Mosto et al. 2021, Knights et al. 2021, Filippi & Giliberti 2021, Im & George 2021, Martuscelli 2021, Sabar et al. 2021, Sanò & Della Puppa 2021, Sohel et al. 2021, Thomas et al. 2021, Yee et al. 2021, Zambrano-Barragan et al. 2021)

## Vignette b): “Migrant domestic care workers”
Domestic care workers faced particularly strict pandemic measures and related changes in their working conditions: With their work permit and visa often bound to a specific employer/client, many had to accept severe mobility restrictions, namely cohabitation with their client in combination with strict curfews, and increased workloads (e.g., more cleaning and washing), alongside obligatory quarantine and testing measures, in order to keep their job. Cohabitation with the client meant a loss of personal freedom and privacy, longer working hours, constant availability, less rest and breaks, and more stress. Non-compliance with health and safety protection such as a lack of protective equipment or of paid sick leave was frequently noted. This increased health risks for domestic workers, including burnout and other mental health problems. Domestic workers were very concerned about being terminated due to a SARS-CoV-2 infection or for other health reasons. In some studies they described their work situation during the pandemic as a “prison” or as being trapped in a climate of constant control, abuse and fear, with no options to leave an employer without also losing their work permit and visa.
In studies that described their situation in positive terms (e.g., as having a safe job and income and a safe place to stay), such framings depended on the quality of the relationship with the employer/client and decent employment practices (e.g., ensuring the worker’s day off and participation in familial decision-making). Being able to communicate with the family back home during the pandemic, e.g., via social media, was described as another source of resilience—and at the same time as potential stressor. Many migrant domestic care workers continued being responsible for their families in the home country. This double responsibility of care translated into a “dual-country experience of the pandemic”; that is worries for the well-being of the family back home, increased pressure to send remittances, alongside the (often sole) responsibility for the care and health of the client in the host country.

(Synthesis based on
de Diego-Cordero et al.
2022, Lui et al.
2021, Kaur-Gill et al.
2021, Kuhlmann et al.
2020, Nasol & Francisco-Menchavez 2021, Sabar et al.
2021, Sanna 2021)

Evidence for vaccination coverage among migrant populations was mixed. We identified 30 studies that investigated vaccination coverage. Nine studies focused on migrant populations only. , , , , , , , , Eighteen articles investigated migrants compared to the non-migrant populations and one examined migrants in different settings. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , Two-thirds of the studies using comparison groups showed that the migrant populations had lower vaccination rates than non-migrants (ranging from 5 to 34 percentage-points difference in population based settings; in specific settings (e.g., informal settlements) the difference was up to 43 percentage-points). , , , , , , , , , , , The majority of studies was conducted in HIC (n = 21) and upper MIC (n = 6). Only two studies reported data from lower MIC. Five studies (conducted in Switzerland, USA, Canada and China) found higher or similar vaccination rates in migrants compared to non-migrant groups. However, the difference amounted to a maximum of eight percentage points and there were considerable differences with regard to the migrants' countries of origin. , , , , Differences across country contexts may also stem from access and accessibility to health information, as suggested by the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control technical report. Alongside the empirical studies, two modelling studies with medium and low quality recommended to include migrants in the national vaccination strategy to prevent COVID-19 incidence and ensure cost-effectiveness. , Overall, studies were very heterogenous regarding the study population, sample size, setting, reporting of vaccination coverage, and countries of studies.

## Discussion
Our meta-analysis quantified inequalities in risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection, hospitalisation, ICU admission, and mortality between migrants and non-migrants in HIC. We found that the infection risk was nearly twice the risk among migrants compared to non-migrants, at five percentage-points higher on average. Inequalities tended to be more pronounced in Northern Europe and North America, and lower in Southern Europe. These differences could be related to differences in access to health systems (e.g., based on legal status), in testing policies and management of COVID-19 cases, or in environmental risks (e.g., occupation and accommodation). Especially precarious living conditions such as overcrowding or lack of sanitation and/or pandemic control measures applied in the settings (e.g., mass quarantine) may lead to higher infection risk.
We found no evidence for inequalities in risk of hospitalisation, which stands in contrast to inequalities observed between ethnic minorities (e.g., Hispanic, Black, Asian) and majority populations (e.g., White), indicating that different mechanisms are at play in the pathway between health and ethnicity versus migration. The different hospitalisation risks could also stem from different functioning of health systems in different countries of studies. Moreover, lower hospitalisation rates are not per se a “positive” outcome, as they may also indicate under-treatment in the sense that migrants may have received less referrals to hospitals despite being at (same or higher) need for tertiary care compared to non-migrants. Formal evaluations of differences in need for tertiary care (e.g., symptom severity) between migrants and non-migrants were not performed in the identified studies (beyond adjustments for age and sex). The assumption of under-treatment or late referral appears plausible, as our meta-analysis indicates that once infected and hospitalised, migrants experienced more severe courses of disease: the risk of being admitted to ICU was 23% higher in relative, and two percentage points higher in absolute terms among migrants compared to non-migrants (albeit with broad PIs). While the share of migrants in deaths among hospitalised cases was lower (likely due to age differences), their share among deaths at population-level measured by population-based mortality was 46% higher in relative and eight percentage points higher in absolute terms, compared to non-migrant populations in the respective studies. Higher population-based mortality in migrant populations might be due to adversities related to social determinants such as income, work environment, housing, education, or health services access (e.g., under-treatment) and even legal aspects concerning migratory status. Overall, the meta-analysis of this review is mainly based on data from HIC and thus may not apply to (lower) MIC/LIC.
Intersections among COVID-19-related exposures, risks, and impacts of pandemic measures in migrant populations compromised their physical and mental health in severe and sometimes unique ways, which was found not only in high- and upper-middle-income but also in (lower) middle- and low-income countries. Cascading effects and feedback loops became evident, highlighting the syndemic nature of the COVID-19 pandemic. , We also found (potential) sources of resilience, indicating entry points for measures to better protect migrants during health emergencies. Notably, our analysis highlights examples where greater inclusion of migrants in pandemic measures and social support mechanisms during later phases of the pandemic (e.g., provision of tailored information and of governmental assistance) has led to better social and health outcomes. Overall, the qualitative results highlight intersecting socio-economic, work-related and legal precarity as key determinants of health inequalities faced by migrants. , , This is further underscored by studies, which describe some states’ special policies to recruit migrant workers amid lockdowns for agricultural and care work, often in precarious labour contexts. , , , , Asylum seekers and other undocumented migrants were also absorbed in “essential” sectors to meet labour shortages. These examples illustrate the reliance of globalised economies on migrants as an essential, yet precarious workforce. The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted that the same extractivist economic approach shifts the social costs of labour, including health risks, to the migrant workers and their communities. The qualitative results thus underscore the importance of a political economy-perspective to understand the structures that generate and sustain social and health inequities for migrants. Sub-regional and regional governance structures that promote trade and mobility for economic cooperation need to ensure migrant and worker health as a key requisite of development and sustainability. There is a critical need for governments, international organisations, civil society and migrant communities to engage with industry actors (e.g., employers, industry associations, unions) in sectors and industries where migrant workers are overrepresented. The underutilisation of the domain of work, including occupational safety and health programs, in addressing the health of migrants is truly a missed opportunity for global health. 
We found a high degree of heterogeneity among studies regarding the design, migrant populations, quality of data (including the different classifications of COVID-19 cases), and countries of studies. Poor reporting in primary studies raised considerable challenges in meta-analysis. This was most pronounced for mortality due to the use of different denominators: population, COVID-19 cases, COVID-19-related hospitalised cases or all-cause deaths in the total population. The latter two ways of reporting mortality have been identified by Karanikolos and McKee as a factor which substantially limits the comparability of COVID-19-related mortality between countries. Another way to address mortality related to the COVID-19 pandemic was to examine differences in all-cause mortality before and during or after the pandemic (excess all-cause mortality). However, we did not include such studies in our meta-analysis due to the lack of comparability with the other studies. Our review underlines the need for harmonised reporting in future health emergencies to ensure comparability of mortality estimates across countries and studies. The trend to lower mortality rates in hospitalised cases is dependent on testing strategies, and adjustment for age and comorbidities, which was not always performed in primary studies yielding estimates prone to confounding. In contrast, excess rates of age- and sex-standardised mortality due to COVID-19 among the population are more likely to reflect the true mortality risks. As a consequence of the unadjusted estimates reported in our review the population-based mortality in migrant populations might be underestimated as migrants tend to be younger than the general population in the country of destination. In view of this, our results indicate that migrants tended to be at considerably higher risk of death associated with COVID-19 than non-migrants during the pandemic (until 09/2023). Nevertheless, estimates from our meta-analysis should be used with caution given the mostly unadjusted data reported in most primary reports.
The strength of this review is the synthesis of all (high- to moderate-quality) evidence retrievable from indexed and considered grey-literature sources, comprising both qualitative and quantitative studies on health-related impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on migrants globally. The analysis of the interconnectedness of exposure, risk, and impact of pandemic measures at micro-, meso-, and macro-levels benefitted from qualitative research, which captures social phenomena in their complexity and within their particular context, thereby allowing us to contextualise findings. Despite an overwhelmingly broad landscape of literature, however, our knowledge of some groups and migration phases still remains scarce and sketchy, for example, related to labour migrants, undocumented migrants, migrants with disabilities, elderly migrants, returnees, migrants in transit, or in pre-migration phases. Countries of studies were mainly destination countries so that evidence is skewed toward COVID-19-related migrant health in the post-migration phase. Further efforts are required to better reflect health-related aspects of the complex migration trajectory by considering pre- and peri-migration aspects. Additionally, quantitative findings clearly focus on HIC, so that evidence on COVID-19 outcomes of disease in migrants in low- and middle-income countries remains scarce despite our global search.
The meta-analysis provides valuable evidence of the magnitude of COVID-19-related inequalities, despite being limited by the striking heterogeneity of underlying primary studies and the reliance on crude (i.e., unadjusted) estimates. Cautious interpretation is required due to poor quality of reporting in primary quantitative studies. As mentioned above, we could not adjust the RR for age and sex because the data were either not reported or even unavailable to the authors of primary studies upon request. This risk of confounding negatively impacts on our results, and highlights the urgent need to improve the reporting quality and primary data in studies and routine data presenting migration-stratified outcomes (in health emergencies and beyond). Another source of potential bias stems from the fact that we could not deduplicate individuals, whose data may have been included in different reports but who essentially were drawn from the same dataset or cohort. This related to 16 studies (Norway: n = 5, Sweden: n = 3, Italy: n = 3, Spain: n = 3, Canada: n = 2) and mostly referred to estimates derived from population-based registries. However, following a sensitivity analysis ( ), we can assume that the effects on the estimates of overlapping data sources were marginal; as effects with and without respective potential duplicate data sources did not differ significantly (with the exception of estimates for ICU admission and hospital-based mortality). The grey literature search was comprehensive, but not exhaustive as further potentially relevant websites (UNHCR, WHO, Regional Public Health Associations) were not searched due to time and resource constraints. Overall, the broad search enabled to include studies from different research fields, but this posed a challenge to the applicability of the quality appraisal tools. For 15 studies, only a few questions of the JBI checklists were applicable. We included English, German and Spanish articles, so that articles in other languages, e.g., French, Chinese or Arabic, could not be considered and thus studies from respective countries may not have been included. However, we can assume that relevant papers would have been indexed in searched databases and would have been identified by our non-restricted search. We can also assume that most of the information published on COVID-19 is published in English. Given only four articles were excluded based on language, a risk of selection bias induced through language restrictions may be negligible.
Our review sheds a glaring light on the lack of evidence on important measures of pandemic response, such as vaccination coverage among migrants, until September 2023. We found only 8% of studies investigating vaccination coverage among migrant populations. The results were mixed, with two thirds of the studies with comparison groups reporting lower vaccination coverage among migrant groups. There was a huge heterogeneity in reporting of coverage rates, as well as in study population, setting, sample size and countries of studies. While there are some studies on vaccination rates, the focus of the research appears to remain on vaccination hesitancy, knowledge and attitudes toward COVID-19 vaccination, or different ethnic groups, rather than on coverage rates in migrants as defined previously, and the underlying barriers to effective vaccination (beyond individualised approaches of vaccine hesitancy). The scarcity and poor quality of reporting of studies points to the weakness of Health Information Systems (HIS) to provide reliable data on key aspects of migrant health such as vaccination coverage. The lack of harmonisation across different indicators of migratory status and outcome measures puts validity and comparability of findings severely at risk. Our findings hence call for urgent implementation of existing recommendations and technical guidance to enhance the integration and availability of indicators of migratory status in HIS. , , This requires prompt action in the post-COVID-19 recovery phase to bridge the divides between health and migration governance by means of effective collaboration structures at all levels of government (local, national, international). Monitoring migrant health should be considered an essential component of pandemic preparedness, and future national plans must secure an adequate inclusion of migrant groups which promote social and health equity. This includes anticipation and prevention of unequal effects or unintended (negative) consequences of the pandemic on migrant health that are exacerbated by language barriers, stigma, and discrimination, and by financial, administrative, and legal barriers to health systems.

## Contributors
MH: Conceptualization, Review methodology, Investigation, Data curation, Formal analysis—statistical analysis, Writing—Original Draft, Visualization, Project administration.
NG: Investigation, Formal analysis—qualitative analysis, Data curation, Visualization, Writing –Review & Editing.
SR: Review methodology, Investigation, Statistical methodology, Formal analysis—statistical analysis, Data curation, Visualization, Writing—Review & Editing.
JO: Investigation, Data curation, Formal analysis, Visualization, Writing—Review & Editing.
MB: Investigation, Formal analysis—qualitative analysis, Writing—Review & Editing.
SA: Review methodology Investigation, Formal analysis—qualitative analysis, Writing—Review & Editing.
JL: Review methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis—qualitative analysis, Writing—Review & Editing.
SF: Investigation, Writing—Review & Editing.
AM: Investigation, Writing—Review & Editing.
KW: Conceived the study, Conceptualization, Review methodology, Writing—Review & Editing.
KB: Conceived the study, Conceptualization, Review methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Validation, Writing—Review & Editing, Supervision.
All authors had full access to all data in the study and had final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication.

## Data sharing statement
A full list of studies identified in the search as well as the full data extracted from included studies are available for academic research projects by request to the corresponding author: Kayvan.bozorgmehr@uni-bielefeld.de.

## Declaration of interests
AM, KB, MH, SF received an individual honorarium from IOM, for which they do not declare any conflicts of interest. AM, KB, MH report to have consulted for Robert Koch-Institute. KB reports institutional grants from the Federal Ministry of Health Germany, the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research, the Federal Agency for Health Education Germany, DFG—German Science foundation, Global Health Academy of the German Alliance for Global Health Research (GLOHRA) and an issued grant/licence for Refugee Care Manager© (RefCare). KB is also elected member of the Steering Committee of GLOHRA. SR reports having consulted for German Association of Psychosocial Centres for Refugees and Victims of Torture (BAfF). All other authors declare no competing interests.

## Acknowledgements
No funding received. We thank Masha Ertel for her vigorous support in title and abstract screening.

## Footnotes
Appendix ASupplementary data related to this article can be found at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102698.

## Appendix ASupplementary data

## Supplementary Chapters, Figs. S1–S21, and Tables S1–S9

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Supplementary Chapters, Figs. S1–S21, and Tables S1–S9