Environ Health Perspect253envhperEnvironmental Health Perspectives0091-67651552-9924American Chemical SocietyPMC1316938PMC1316938.1131693813169381271299410.1289/ehp.111-a212b1Research ArticleComing together for children.
WakefieldJulie420031114122677A212A214010420032112200504092018pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlyyespmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes
 Bringing Science
to Justices
California Court of Appeals justice
Thomas E. Hollenhorst jokes that he and
many other judges chose law as a career to
escape science and math. "I think that for
the typical judge, there was a Y in the road
when they started college about whether
they were going to be involved in hard sci-
ence or soft science," he says. "I think that
many of them fled to soft science because
they didn't have the wiring to do hard sci-
ence, and they've continued to just stay
away from it."
For science-averse judges everywhere,
however, those days are over. Ever since
1993, when the U.S. Supreme Court ruled
in Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals
that federal judges must take greater
responsibility in weeding out unreliable
"junk science" in courts, the judicial
remove from hard science has been shrink-
ing. Even though Daubert applied only to
federal courts, most states have since
adopted similar standards. At the same
time, the development of the Human
Genome Project and the explosion of legal
and ethical questions surrounding genetics
are bringing science into the courtroom
like never before.
In response to this growing need for
greater judicial scientific knowledge, the
NIEHS and the U.S. Department of Energy
have joined together to provide funding for
the Einstein Institute for Science, Health
and the Courts (EINSHAC), a nongovern-
mental organization created in 1993 to
educate judges about genetic science.
EINSHAC enthusiast James K. Selkirk, who
is deputy director of the National Center for
Toxicogenomics at the NIEHS, says that
NIEHS director Kenneth Olden saw a need
for an entity to help jurists deal with their
new responsibilities. "Ultimately, part of our
goal as an institute is not only to seek
scientific truths, but to communicate those
truths out to the world," Selkirk says.
"EINSHAC is a venue by which judges can
be educated in information they're not
routinely exposed to in their legal training."
Reaching a Level of Comfort
According to lawyer Franklin Zweig, who
has served full-time as president of
EINSHAC from its start, the organization
has conducted 37 programs to date and
built its network of participating judges--
who, because of limited resources, must be
invited by other EINSHAC judges--to
about 3,000. As its numbers have grown,
so has the breadth of EINSHAC's interest.
In addition to genetics, EINSHAC
programs now examine environmental
science, molecular biology, biotechnology,
and bioterrorism.
"Our mission," Zweig says, "is to make
the science understandable, to extract the
mystique, and render it in `plain vanilla' so
that judges, who tend to be phobic about
science, have a better chance of accessing it
and turning its implications into procedur-
al benefits for case management."
EINSHAC events, which are run pri-
marily by judges and a few scientists, range
from half-day seminars to larger conferences
of several days. Typically, each event fea-
tures one topic that gets broken down into
subtopics addressed by keynote speakers
and discussion panels. In "adjudication
clinics," small groups of about a dozen
judges break out to discuss hypothetical
cases with a scientific advisor. "We don't
prescribe outcomes," Zweig says. "[The
judges are] the decision makers; they must
determine the outcomes."
Although EINSHAC strives to provide
judges with comprehensive scientific infor-
mation, its objective in doing so is much
narrower. "We seek to increase judges'
comfort and confidence that they can
control the expert testimony in a proceed-
ing," Zweig says. "We find that that's the
most valuable objective for judges, whose
main gatekeeping role is to determine what
A 210 VOLUME 111 | NUMBER 4 | April 2003 * Environmental Health Perspectives
Environews NIEHS News
Comstock
evidence should be brought in and what
should be excluded."
In the case of bioterrorism education,
however, the goal is broader. Rufus G.
King III, chief judge of the Superior Court
for the District of Columbia, has been an
EINSHAC bioterrorism panel member
several times, and he says it's helped him
and others come to grips with a variety of
administrative questions related to
bioterrorism. For instance, King says,
"What if a lawyer comes up and says,
`My client has told me that he [pos-
sesses the smallpox virus] and that he's
doing everything he can to see that
everyone in the building dies'? What
do you do? You're responsible; this is
your courtroom. Do you close the
court? Do you excuse people? Do you
get that person into the cell block?"
Taking It to the Courtroom
One judge, who requested anonymity,
listed several ways in which her EIN-
SHAC experience helped her in deter-
mining real-life outcomes. In one, a
medical negligence case, the lawyers
and their scientific experts were vigor-
ously arguing whether the matter
would ever get to a jury. The judge's
EINSHAC training helped her recog-
nize the scientific problems the case
would face if it went to trial at that
point. "Because of my EINSHAC
experience, I was able to suggest that
they go on their own to a neutral sci-
entist for evaluation [of the evidence],"
she says. "I actually suggested a doctor
who's never in the court system; he doesn't
participate in the adversary process and has
a very good reputation. They went to him,
and the case disappeared."
She credits her EINSHAC education
for providing a "certain comfort level with
science" that has convinced her twice to
disqualify scientific experts during trial
because they lacked the competence neces-
sary for the case--not something a judge
does lightly. In one of the situations, the
case disappeared because the parties could-
n't come up with the qualified expert
required by the judge. In the second, the
dismissal was upheld on appeal.
In addition, says this same judge, her
experience with EINSHAC gave her the
idea of providing case-specific scientific
glossaries for jurors, which she has used
several times at trial. "Every juror in the
box has a long glossary of terms so that
when these terms are used by the experts,
they can look at them and understand
what's being said," she says. "I require the
lawyers to agree on the glossary; they have
to write it up."
The primary EINSHAC goal of helping
judges better identify the scientific evidence
to be allowed at trial doesn't apply to appel-
late judges, who can't bring new evidence
into their review of lower courts' findings.
But Hollenhorst said that his EINSHAC
education has still been helpful. "At the
appellate level, it gives us a much better
encyclopedia to deal with terminology and
the correctness of assertions that have been
made in the trial court," he says. "It's
caused me to look at the scientific issues
with a more discerning eye about how they
were handled."
King says that his own education from
EINSHAC greatly increased his comfort
with DNA evidence in criminal trials
involving serious felonies such as murder
and rape. It also gave him an idea: why not
develop some basic scientific materials to
guide jurors when they hear complex
scientific cases? The result, in 2001, was a
25-minute video that explains basic DNA
science. "Now, instead of a juror's first
experience with any DNA science being
from an expert who has a motive, their
first exposure is from somebody trying to
give them sort of a high-school-level
background on it," he says. "Then, when
they start to listen to the experts, who are
perhaps trying to exert a particular spin,
there's a little greater level of sophistication."
King has used the video in court and made
copies available at EINSHAC programs,
where, he says, they are very popular.
Widening Perspectives
One EINSHAC program, the Genetics
Adjudication Resource Project, or GARP,
is designed to assist judges by predicting
new kinds of cases that may arise from the
Human Genome Project's mapping of all
human genes. Judge Pauline Newman of
the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal
Circuit, who chairs the GARP Advisory
and Review Committee, says, "The
committee's job is to keep track of
everything that's being done and is
proposed to be done, and to provide
advice, suggestions, and critical com-
mentary on it." (Newman has a Ph.D.
in chemistry and worked as a chemist
before switching to law.)
In following the science, EIN-
SHAC is taking on a more global per-
spective, according to Zweig. "When
we started, we focused on federal and
state courts exclusively, but as the sci-
ence clearly [spread] across the globe
and the disputes inspired by science
and technology became more and
more international, we started and
enhanced an international focus."
To that end, EINSHAC judges
have traveled to other countries to
discuss what they've learned about
scientific advances in the United
States. Those trips are part of an
EINSHAC project called Interna-
tional Working Conversations,
which will conclude in mid-2004
with the Third Courts International
Working Conversation on Enviro-
Genetics Disputes and Issues in
Australia, and the subsequent publication
of an international guidebook on court
management of life science technology
disputes and evidence.
Where science deals in broad data
about probabilities, courts operate on a
case-by-case basis. This creates an inherent
uneasiness between the two, and one of
EINSHAC's goals is to reduce that uneasi-
ness. Sheila Newton, director of the
NIEHS Office of Policy, Planning, and
Evaluation, uses the analogy of a chemical
exposure level to demonstrate the differ-
ence between the two realms: Where a sci-
entific study may be able to identify what
percentage of a group of people will be
affected by a specific exposure level, courts
are interested in determining whether an
individual is likely to have sustained an
injury due to an exposure, she says. The
process for determining justice based on
scientific probabilities is difficult, but
judges are the ones who have to make it
work, Newton says. "That's why we think
that the work that EINSHAC is doing is
so critical." -Richard Dahl
Environmental Health Perspectives * VOLUME 111 | NUMBER 4 | April 2003 A 211
NIEHS News
Our mission is to make the
science understandable, to
extract the mystique, and
render it in "plain vanilla" so
that judges, who tend to be
phobic about science, have a
better chance of accessing it
and turning its implications
into procedural benefits for
case management.
-Franklin Zweig
EINSHAC
Coming Together
for Children
When it comes to environmental expo-
sures and health, children are not just
small adults. They also aren't "big rats,"
quipped Daniel Swartz, executive direc-
tor of the Children's Environmental
Health Network, a national organization
devoted to protecting the fetus and child
from environmental health hazards and
promoting healthy surroundings. His
remark drew a round of laughs, yet
resounded with participants at a recent
symposium titled "Children's Envi-
ronmental Health: Identifying and
Preventing Environmental Threats to
Children." The attendees knew all too
well that rodent studies are particularly
difficult--even impossible--to accurately
extrapolate to children.
Fortunately, the field of children's
environmental health has moved
beyond merely recognizing the unique
vulnerability of children--it has
advanced to understanding why and
how they are more vulnerable than
adults and toward developing and
implementing ways to protect children,
said Elaine Faustman, director of the
Institute for Risk Analysis and Risk
Communication at the University of
Washington School of Public Health
and Community Medicine in Seattle.
Faustman helped plan the 24-26
February 2003 conference.
"We're in the midst right now of a
scientific revolution about the links
between environment and health that
will provide tremendous opportunities to
protect health," said John Peterson
Myers, a senior research associate with
Commonweal, an environmental research
institute in Bolinas, California, and
coauthor of the 1996 book Our Stolen
Future. "The revolution, as it unfolds,
will require a complete overhaul not
only of specific regulatory standards, but
of the entire approach that has been
used to protect public health from envi-
ronmental exposure."
Much work remains not only to fill
existing research gaps but to successfully
put policy and prevention efforts in
place. "It's simply not enough to do a
good basic science study, publish in the
very best journals, and there it sits,"
asserted NIEHS director Kenneth
Olden. "We want that information
translated into public health policy and
the practice of medicine. In order to do
that, you need people, you need commu-
nities, you need stakeholders, you need
A 212 VOLUME 111 | NUMBER 4 | April 2003 * Environmental Health Perspectives
NIEHS News
PhotoDisc
Headliners Air Pollution
Understanding Effects of Organic Diesel Exhaust Particles
Li N, Wang M, Oberley TD, Sempf JM, Nel AE. 2002. Comparison of the pro-oxidative and
proinflammatory effects of organic diesel exhaust particle chemicals in bronchial epithelial
cells and macrophages. J Immunol 169:4531-4541.
Numerous epidemiologic studies have shown that exposure to ambient particu-
late matter (PM) can exacerbate asthma and cause allergic inflammation. Diesel
exhaust particles (DEPs)--an easily respirable component of PM--are known to
cause proinflammatory effects in the respiratory tract. Although much is known
about how DEPs affect macrophages, it is not known how the oxidative stress
response differs between macrophages and epithelial cells, two primary cell tar-
gets of PM. New research by NIEHS grantee Andreas Nel and colleagues at the
University of California at Los Angeles sheds light on these differences, as well
as on mechanisms by which exposure to DEPs may adversely affect the respira-
tory system by inducing oxidative stress in bronchial epithelial cells.
DEPs consist of a carbonaceous core with a large surface area to which
chemicals--including organic chemicals such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocar-
bons and their oxygenated derivatives--are absorbed. The researchers extracted
organic chemicals from DEPs and applied them in culture to macrophages and
bronchial epithelial cells. Then they compared the responses.
The researchers demonstrated that oxidative stress in epithelial cells caused
the formation of heme oxygenase 1 and other markers. Although macrophages
responded in a similar manner, epithelial cells produced more superoxide radi-
cals and were more sensitive to cytotoxic effects resulting from mitochondrial
damage, superoxide production, and energy depletion. In addition, the thiol
antioxidant N-acetylcysteine protected macrophages against cytotoxic DEP
chemicals but did not protect epithelial cells.
According to the researchers, these findings show that organic DEP chemi-
cals induce a range of oxidative stress-related biological responses in epithelial
cells and macrophages. They propose that this constitutes a stratified cellular
response to oxidative stress, with the activation threshold for cellular injury
requiring higher oxidative stress levels than those for cytoprotective responses.
A stratified oxidative stress model in which biological end points are selected
relevant to the level of oxidative stress and PM exposure may therefore prove
useful in study of the adverse health effects of PM, they say. -Jerry Phelps
NIEHS-Supported Research
Environmental Health Perspectives * VOLUME 111 | NUMBER 4 | April 2003 A 213
NIEHS News
journalists, you need everybody. So that's
what this conference did--it brought
everybody together."
Profiling Threats to Children
Besides assembling leaders in environ-
mental health research, policy, communi-
ty outreach, and communications, the
conference succeeded in achieving its core
goals, according to symposium planning
committee members, who included
NIEHS staff David Brown, Gwen
Collman, and Kevin Wheeler. The main
objectives included profiling environmen-
tal threats to children, addressing ways to
translate science into action to protect
children, identifying research gaps and
initiating plans to fill them, and dis-
cussing ways to better communicate risk
through strengthened media relations.
The symposium was divided into five
key areas: respiratory disease and air quali-
ty, neurological impairments, childhood
cancer, birth defects, and endocrine dis-
ruption. For each issue area, presenters
and panelists discussed the current state of
the knowledge, its application, research
gaps, how research findings are being
implemented in children's health care,
implications for outreach policy, and
communications and media relations by
researchers and policy makers. Olden
noted that other research areas such as
violence and accidents are also important
to children's environmental health,
although they were not emphasized in the
program agenda.
A general consensus was expressed
across many broad themes at the confer-
ence. "Prevention of exposure is the single
most effective means of protection against
environmental threats," said Terri Damstra,
a scientist in the International Programme
on Chemical Safety Interregional Research
Unit of the World Health Organization.
Moreover, in human health the timing
of exposure remains the most critical fac-
tor in disease outcomes. In particular, a
growing number of experts believe that
fetal programming--critical exposures in
the womb that can impact a child's devel-
opment and health for life--will turn out
to be a vital part of the story. "We will
leave children behind [in terms of educa-
tion and health] if we don't get a handle
on exposure in the womb and early devel-
opment," said Rich Liroff, policy director
of the World Wildlife Fund's Wildlife
and Contaminants Program.
Progress has been made on many
fronts, especially research. "The universe of
folks engaged in this research is expanding
as rapidly as the pace of the science," Myers
explained. "New papers are coming out
every week, if not every day. Researchers
are tackling old problems in new ways and
extending the tools to address them." For
instance, the growing use and development
of increasingly sophisticated geographic
information systems is helping researchers
get a clearer picture of at-risk populations,
reported Marie Lynn Miranda, who directs
the Children's Environmental Health
Initiative at Duke University.
From Consensus to Direction
Yet, more new approaches and paradigms
for thinking about the problems are need-
ed. For a start, "we must develop a more
complex model of human diseases,"
Olden said, one that involves interaction
between genetics and environment as a
function of age, stage of development,
and behavior.
Despite the expanding knowledge
base on potentially toxic exposures and
the known neurotoxic effects of many
compounds, such as those containing mer-
cury and manganese, there has been a lack
of research into the effects of children's
exposure to such compounds, said Philip
Lee, a senior scholar at the Institute for
Health Policy Studies at the University of
California, San Francisco, School of
Medicine. For example, researchers know
that manganese is a neurotoxicant that con-
tributes to inattention, impulsivity, and
hyperaggression. They also know that
infants have virtually no ability to excrete
excess manganese. Yet, infants are common-
ly exposed to manganese at fairly high con-
centrations in cow's milk and soy formula.
Prevention policies and strategies also
need improvement. Lead has been
removed from gasoline, plumbing pipes,
new paint, and other sources, dramatical-
ly reducing childhood blood lead levels
nationally. But lead exposure remains a
major problem, according to recent
papers on the subject. Too many children
are still being exposed through sources in
old housing, such as old paint, Lee said.
Physicians are treating these children after
the fact, which is too late, as studies reveal
irreversible damage is done even when
lead is removed from the blood through
chelation therapy.
Olden advocated a three-pronged
approach to children's environmental
health. First, identify risk factors, be they
genetic or environmental, from basic fun-
damental clinical, community, and popu-
lation-based studies. Second, develop ways
to reduce exposure to those risk factors to
prevent their expression. And finally,
translate knowledge and scientific informa-
tion into public health policy and medical
practice. "I encourage [NIEHS-funded]
scientists to do all three," Olden said.
"Without that, we are not doing our job."
"If there's one area where we need
improvement in public health and also in
science in general, it is risk communica-
tion to the public through the media,"
Lee added. Science and environmental
journalists at the symposium encouraged
researchers and policy advocates to help
the media do its job. They explained the
tight time and space constraints, the need
PhotoDisc
to simplify ideas for a lay audience, and
other pressures that journalists face in try-
ing to get stories out, factors that often
frustrate scientists. On the other hand,
journalists will happily "take spoon-feed-
ing" to ensure they are understanding sci-
entists' stories correctly, said Reuters
health and science correspondent Maggie
Fox. "Sometimes we can help extend the
limits of what can be said on a subject,"
added Francesca Lyman, a veteran envi-
ronmental columnist and author.
Moving Forward
Part of the challenge facing researchers is
managing the uncertainty entailed in the
scientific process. Although work remains
to fill the research gaps across the five key
areas of children's health covered at the
symposium, there will always be uncer-
tainty. It's inherent in the scientific
process. For example, the role the envi-
ronment plays in birth defects is still
largely unknown. A recent report estimat-
ed the number of birth defects that are
environmentally related to be 3-25%.
Such a range of uncertainty makes
informing the public difficult.
Moreover, calls for more research
often end up frustrating the advocacy
community. While more research is gen-
erally considered a good thing, a call for
more research may be a ploy to stall a
sound new policy from being implement-
ed. Panelists emphasized the need to
implement prevention strategies and take
action in the face of uncertainty because
that's what the world of research is all
about. In many cases, enough data have
been collected to implement safer and
better practices. It's more a matter of
challenging existing perceptions about
what is dangerous and improving com-
munication with communities. Policies
have not always progressed with the sci-
ence, but have been mired in a metaphor-
ical Jurassic period, Myers asserted.
Many panelists also encouraged par-
ticipants to expand the push to improve
children's environmental health interna-
tionally. Developing countries, in particu-
lar, face more daunting threats, especially
when compounds outlawed in the United
States are still in widespread use there,
and prevention, outreach, and policy lag
further behind that in this country.
Olden plans to continue working to
sustain the momentum that the NIEHS
and others have generated in recent years
on the children's environmental health
front. Together, the NIEHS and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency have
funded 12 children's environmental health
research centers, with the first 8 centers
opening in 1998. A request for applications
for funding of up to 6 new centers was dis-
cussed at the meeting. Funding for 8 of the
existing 12 centers will run out this fiscal
year, but existing centers may reapply
under the new request for applications.
For more than 30 years the NIEHS
has sponsored research on a host of
threats to child health including asthma,
birth defects, learning and behavioral dis-
orders, developmental disorders, cancer,
and low birth weight. Bringing stakehold-
ers together is one way to further build
momentum in this field. "We don't want
to lose the enthusiasm generated by this
symposium," Olden said. Above all, he
said, "I don't want us to forget what we're
really talking about are children. These
are not bland statistics, but real people."
-Julie Wakefield
A 214 VOLUME 111 | NUMBER 4 | April 2003 * Environmental Health Perspectives
NIEHS News
The 10th Report on Carcinogens, the biennial listing by the
federal government's National Toxicology Program on substances
likely to cause cancer in humans, is now available!
New listings in this report:
* steroidal estrogens used in contraceptives
and estrogen replacement therapy
* ultraviolet radiation
* wood dust
* nickel compounds
More information on the Report on Carcinogens
can be found at http://www.ehponline.org/rocorder
Order Yours Today! Call 1-866-541-3841
Now Available: the 10th Report on Carcinogens!