pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC10602303PMC10602303.110602303106023033788346310.1371/journal.pone.0293509PONE-D-22-313681Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesMental Health and PsychiatryPsychological StressBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyPsychological StressSocial SciencesPsychologyPsychological StressMedicine and Health SciencesHealth CareNursing ScienceBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyEmotionsAnxietySocial SciencesPsychologyEmotionsAnxietyPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsEducational StatusUndergraduatesMedicine and Health SciencesCardiologyHeart RateBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyAcademic SkillsBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyAcademic SkillsSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyAcademic SkillsResearch and Analysis MethodsResearch DesignSurvey ResearchQuestionnairesMedicine and Health SciencesHealth CareNursing ScienceNursing EducationNursing students’ perceived anxiety and heart rate variability in mock skill competency assessment
Perceived anxiety and heart rate variability in mock skill assessmenthttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-6640-1323WongCho LeeConceptualizationFormal analysisMethodologySoftwareWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5321-5791ChienWai TongSupervisionWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2582-4917WayeMary Miu YeeResourcesWriting – review & editing SzetoMark Wun ChungWriting – review & editing LiHuiyuanWriting – review & editing 1
The Nethersole School of Nursing, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, SAR, China2
School of Life Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, SAR, ChinaUsecheSergio A.Editor ]. In addition, it emphasises the ability of students to make critical, informed judgements and reasonable decisions in nursing practice, as well as the skills competency to provide patient care [ ]. In order to ensure that students can provide safe and high-quality patient care in clinical environments, students are being taught the essential components and psychomotor skills for performing the nursing skills and then being regularly assessed in a set laboratory environment to ensure that the required competency level is achieved before implementing in clinical areas.
Although skill competency assessment is an indispensable part of nursing education and clinical practicum, the frequent and demanding skills assessments are considered stressful and anxiety-provoking for most nursing students [ – ]. Stress responses arise from any physical or psychological stimuli that disrupt homeostasis [ ]. Anxiety, one the other hand, is a mood state characterised by autonomic responses that trigger vague and uneasy feelings, causing the individual to experience or anticipate threatening or dangerous events [ ]. Nursing students often experience significant degrees of stress and anxiety due to frequent testing of fundamental nursing skills, heavy assignments in various clinical settings, fear of making mistakes, concerns about the pass/fail grade, interactions with clinical staff and faculty, and deficiencies in professional nursing knowledge and skills [ ]. Previous studies have shown that the stress and anxiety levels experienced by nursing students were higher than that experienced by students of other healthcare majors [ , , ]. An integrative review concluded that the key sources of stress amongst undergraduate nursing and midwifery students emanated from clinical and academic issues [ ]. In particular, preparation for and sitting examinations, coupled with the fear of failure and making mistakes, were identified as the main assessment-related stressors experienced by clinical nursing students [ , ]. Although medical students perceive stress within an acceptable range as beneficial to their academic work [ ], excessive stress and anxiety levels can negatively impact nursing students’ overall assessment performance [ , ]. Moreover, Khalaila [ ] found that test anxiety (refers to responses that accompany concern about possible negative consequences of failure on an exam) [ ], negatively correlated with academic achievement in a sample of undergraduate nursing students. More recently, Brodersen and Lorenz [ ] revealed that nursing students who failed an exit exam experienced significantly higher levels of perceived stress after the exam than those who passed the exam. As such, nurse educators need to understand students’ anxiety and stress levels in response to assessments. These allow them to provide students with more effective support and interventions to respond flexibly to stress during their undergraduate education, thereby improving academic performance.
To date, little is known about nursing students’ stress and anxiety levels during the skill competency assessment. However, studies have consistently shown that during written or clinical examinations, university students’ self-reported stress and anxiety are generally increased [ , – ]. Compared to a low-stakes homework condition (part of the prelicensure course requirement), prelicensure nursing students experienced higher perceived stress and a higher level of salivary alpha-amylase after a high-stakes exit examination (i.e. part of the curriculum of the prelicensure nursing programme) [ ]. Specifically, Ping et al. [ ] examined the patterns of anxiety symptoms amongst medical students during a clinical examination assessed using a self-reported Spielberger Test Anxiety Inventory-Trait. The results suggested that perceived anxiety symptoms peaked around 10 minutes before the assessment but decreased as the assessment progressed [ ]. Additionally, evidence suggests that female students are more likely to perceive stress on academic performance than male students [ ]. Sex is known to play an important role in human development and behaviours, with potential cardioprotective effects of estrogen in females [ ]. As such, there may be sex differences in HRV. Studies have also shown that sex differences exist in study habits and coping mechanisms to stress, which can significantly impact academic performance [ ].
Some studies have adopted heart rate variability (HRV) as a reliable measure of the sympathetic and parasympathetic activity of the autonomous nervous system to assess the stress levels of students, instead of relying on self-reported questionnaires [ , ]. HRV is also an important biomarker for capturing individuals’ psychological status, such as anxiety [ , ]. HRV is described as the variation over time of the intervals (i.e. rhythm-to-rhythm (R-R) interval) between consecutive heartbeats and oscillations between consecutive, instantaneous heart rates [ ]. If a person is under stress, the sympathetic activity will increase, and at the same time, the vagal activity of the heart will decrease, increasing the heart rate (HR) with a decrease in HRV [ ]. Several studies have found that when compared with non-academic occasions such as during the semester [ ], during holidays [ ] and after holidays [ ], university students exhibited lower HRV before or during examinations. Hammoud et al. [ ] investigated the changes in HRV in a group of 90 science students 1 hour before, 2 hours during, and 1 hour after a final examination. Results suggested that HRV after the examination was significantly higher than that before or during the examination, indicating a release from examination-related stress after the examination. Additionally, male students presented significantly higher HRV than female students before and after the examination, suggesting a sex difference in stress management [ ]. To date, HRV is rarely used in nursing programmes as a critical physiological measure of students’ anxiety. An optimal level of HRV reflects healthy function and an inherent self-regulatory capacity, adaptability, or resilience [ ]. Therefore, incorporating HRV as an objective measure of nursing students’ stress during assessments may promote the use of physiological measurement technologies in nursing education, as well as help assess students’ adaptability to stress.
For high-stakes tests (e.g. skill competency assessments), in which students would face significant consequences such as failing to enrol in a particular course or having to remain at a certain level until the requisite score is achieved, may make their experience more stressful [ ]. Mock skill competency assessment is therefore adopted as a common method by faculty. The design is structured as an additional step in the standard competency assessment so that students, prior to undergoing the faculty-led competency assessments, are evaluated for their performance in a simulated competency assessment [ ]. This can allow students to realistically simulate the actual assessment at the time, so that students can be fully familiar with the assessment process and be prepared in advance for the potential challenges and difficulties that may be faced in the actual assessment. Meanwhile, it also allows educators to identify in advance those underperforming with unusually high stress levels to provide them with support to improve student performance and relieve their high stress levels. Extensive evidence has demonstrated that HRV is known to relate to an emotional condition and a stressful situation, and to correlate with mental and psychological states after stress due to various academic examinations in students [ , , ]. However, evaluation of the physiological and psychological anxiety and performance in mock skill competency assessment prior to the actual assessment, and their associations throughout the mock skill competency assessment are limited. Monitoring physiological HRV-based stress in undergraduate nursing students before the actual assessment may help build evidence on new ways to evaluate students’ performance and overall professional qualities in nursing programmes.
The overarching aims of this study were (1) to examine the perceived anxiety and HRV and their changes in nursing students across (before, during and after) the mock skill competency assessment; (2) to examine the differences in perceived anxiety, HRV and performance between female and male students across (before, during and after) the mock skill competency assessment; (3) to examine the relationships amongst perceived anxiety, HRV and performance in nursing students.

## Materials and methods

## Design
This study adopted a cross-sectional correlational design.

## Setting and participants
This study was conducted at the Nethersole School of Nursing, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong. Two hundred and sixteen first-year Bachelor of Nursing students enrolled in a mandatory fundamental nursing course were informed about the study and invited to participate. Those taking any medication or having health conditions that could induce abnormal changes in the heart rate signal and those with a history of anxiety and stress disorders were excluded.

## Course and mock skill competency assessment
The fundamental nursing course is a first-year undergraduate-level course that commences in the second term of the academic year. The course encourages students to understand the application of basic principles of nursing care to help clients meet their basic living needs safely. Students must attend a 2-hour lecture and a 2-hour practical session every week. The final assessment includes a 2-hour written examination and a skill competency examination. The skill competency assessment is designed to enable students to demonstrate their level of competency in aseptic technique using a clinical scenario in a structured laboratory setting. Students are expected to perform the scenario about wound dressing on the manikin by adopting the nursing process, including assessment, planning, implementation, evaluation and reporting [ ]. Passing the course is a prerequisite for subsequent clinical placement. Since this is the first skill competency assessment, a mock skill competency assessment is arranged before the actual assessment to help students familiarise themselves with it [ ]. The perceived anxiety, HRV and performance of nursing students in this mock skill competency assessment were examined in this study.

## Outcome measures

## Socio-demographic characteristics
Socio-demographic data of students were collected, including gender, age, smoking status (yes/no), alcohol drinking status, caffeine consumption, physical exercises, periodic medication and medication taken in the last 24 hours.

## State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI)
The State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) was developed by Spielberger et al. [ ] to measure state and trait anxiety. The STAI consists of 40 items clustered into two subscales: State‐Anxiety (20 items) and Trait‐Anxiety (20 items) subscales. Items in the STAI are measured on a 4‐point scale (from 1 to 4). The subscale scores are summed to give a total subscale score ranging from 20 to 80, with higher scores indicating higher anxiety levels [ ]. Tsoi et al. [ ] translated the Chinese version of STAI, and the internal consistency of C‐STAI was 0.90 [ ]. As time is a consideration for students to fill in STAI before their mock skill competency assessment, the Short-Form State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (SF-STAI) [ ], a six-item version of the Spielberger STAI, was adopted in this study. Participants were suggested to indicate the extent to which they currently feel comfortable, anguished, eased, nervous, concerned, and good. The items concerning comfortable, eased, and good are reverse scored. The scores are summed to give a total score ranging from 6 to 24, with greater scores indicating a high level of anxiety. The Cronbach’s alpha coefficient of the current study was 0.89.

## Heart rate variability
The stress level amongst participants was objectively assessed by a wearable earphone device using ActivHeartsTM dynamic heart rate sensing technology. This earphone device uses photoplethysmography (PPG) to provide accurate heart rate and HRV measurements in this study. PPG is a non-invasive technology that uses a light source and a photodetector at the skin’s surface to measure the volumetric variations of blood circulation, which is unlikely to distract the participants’ daily activities [ ]. The popularity of PPG technology as an alternative heart rate monitoring technique has recently increased, mainly due to the simplicity of its operation, the wearing comfortability for its users, and its cost-effectiveness [ ]. Before the assessment, students were asked to wear earphones. The HRV could be directly recorded using the ActivHeartsTM dynamic heart rate sensing technology in the earphone device according to the guidelines of the task force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology [ ]. The R-R interval reduction represents the degree of stress at a particular moment, and the frequency of heart rate peaks represents the number of episodes of elevated stress [ ].

## Performance during mock skill competency assessment
The student performance during the mock skill competency assessment was evaluated by the scores obtained in the mock assessment rated by a nursing tutor/educator. The competency form consists of 19 items assessing three aspects of skills performance by individual students, including assessment and planning skills (6 items), implementation skills (12 items), and evaluation skills (2 items) on performing a wound dressing. Items are measured on a 6‐point Likert scale from 0, “not done”, to 5, “very good”. Each of these three sets of skills would contribute to a different percentage of the total score. The total score of the assessment is 0 to 100, with a passing grade of 50. The RR interval relevant to skills performance was grouped and categorised into three levels in terms of the range of their assessment scores, including low (score below 68; rate as C or below), moderate (score between 68 to 79; rate as B- to B+), and high (score 80 or above; rate as A- or above) performers. The levels and score ranges are identified by the school’s programme director, course coordinator and education committee. It has been widely used in various nursing courses in nursing school and as an evaluation standard for nursing students’ performance.

## Procedure
All first-year undergraduate students enrolled on the course were approached by a research assistant (RA) after a lecture one month before the mock skill competency assessment. The RA introduced and explained the purpose and procedure of the study to the respective students in the lecture hall. Students were provided with an information sheet detailing the study objectives. Those interested in the study were invited to sign a written informed consent form.
Individual participants were required to download a mobile application on respective application stores (Google Play and Apple iTunes). The main functions of the mobile application included: (1) inputting questionnaire responses and (2) uploading the HRV data. All participants received a briefing on how to download the mobile application, use and recharge the earphone device, and upload the HRV data.
Each participant was asked to abstain from any caffeinated beverages/alcohol/smoking on the day of the skill competency assessment. They were required to arrive at the assessment venue 30 minutes before the assessment. Upon arrival, each participant was asked to wear the earphone device and connect them to the mobile application, through which they entered their responses to questionnaires, including STAI‐State 10 minutes before the assessment. Afterwards, they were asked to sit in a chair and breathe regularly without talking for 20 minutes. HRV was measured over 10 minutes before, throughout the 20-minute mock skills competency assessment, and 10 minutes after the assessment. Ten minutes after the assessment, students were asked to complete the questionnaires again in a quiet room next to the assessment venue. The mock skill competency assessment performance was obtained from the assessment records. Participants who completed all data collection received a $100 coupon as an incentive.

## Ethical considerations
Ethical approval was obtained from the Joint CUHK-NTEC Clinical Research Ethics Committee (Ref. No. 2020.502). All study procedures involving human participants complied with the Declaration of Helsinki. Students were assured that their participation was entirely voluntary and their right to withdraw at any time was upheld. Each participant was assigned a unique study ID, and the downloaded questionnaire and HRV data were compiled in an encrypted data file without any personal identifying information. All collected information was kept confidential, and the encrypted data file was only accessible to the research team. All electronic data would be destroyed three years after the completion of the study.

## Data analyses
All statistical analyses were conducted using IBM SPSS Statistics (version 25.0, IBM Corporation, New York, USA). Questionnaire responses and HRV data were downloaded, coded and input into the SPSS. HRV data were generated directly by ActivHeartsTM dynamic heart rate sensing technology in the earphone device and uploaded into the mobile application. Raw data was inspected for any artefacts [ ]. The HRV data for each student were divided into three segments: 10 minutes prior to the assessment, 20 minutes during the assessment, and 10 minutes after the assessment. Descriptive statistics, including means, standard deviations (SD), medians, interquartile range (P25, P75), frequencies, and percentages, were used to summarise and present students’ characteristics and all outcome measures.
Since the data were not normally distributed, nonparametric tests, including the Wilcoxon Signed Rank test, were used to assess changes in perceived anxiety scores measured at two points within the group. Friedman test was adopted to test the changes in HRV as measured by RR interval (milliseconds, ms) on three occasions. Kruskal-Wallis test was used to compare the differences in HRV in three levels of performers. Post-hoc tests with all pairwise comparisons were further conducted to explore differences between any two groups if a significant difference was indicated in three groups. Mann-Wahitney U test was used to compare scores on continuous variables for two unpaired groups, especially exploring differences in median RR interval (ms), STAI, and scores during mock skill competency assessment between male and female nursing students. Finally, the Spearman test was used to evaluate the correlations between two continuous variables, such as the RR interval with perceived anxiety and assessment scores. The statistical significance of all tests was set at p < 0.05 (two-sided).

## Results

## Participants’ characteristics
A total of ninety students participated in the study, with a response rate of 41.7%. Participants were 18.40 (SD = 0.80) years, with the majority females (74.4%). All of them had never smoked, and 95.6% (n = 86) were not on periodic medication. Most did not meet the World Health Organization’s physical activity guideline (82.2%), which is at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity aerobic physical activity throughout the week. No significant differences were indicated in the scores of the participants’ socio-demographic characteristics between the male and female students (p > 0.05).

## Perceived anxiety before and after assessment
The scores of perceived anxiety 10 minutes before and 10 minutes after the assessment were 11.00 (9.00, 15.00) and 11.00 (8.50, 15.00), respectively. No significant differences were noted before and after the assessment and across gender ( and ).
 

## HRV before, during and after the assessment
The median HRV as measured by RR interval at 10 minutes before, during and 10 minutes after assessment were 677.54(ms) (616.48, 753.21), 524.94(ms) (474.61, 588.45), and 704.26(ms) (637.48, 780.76), respectively. The median RR interval varied significantly across the three occasions (p < 0.01). The RR interval decreased significantly during the assessment, indicating that students were physiologically anxious during the assessment. The RR interval 10 minutes after the assessment increased compared to that before, indicating that the students were more physiologically relaxed after the assessment. There was no significant difference in HRV data between female and male students on the three occasions (p > 0.05, , ).
However, the Friedman test indicated significant within-group differences from 10 minutes before the assessment to 10 minutes after the assessment in HRV data (p < 0.01, ). Post-hoc tests also ( and ) showed that both male and female students showed significant decreases in their HRV from 10 minutes before the assessment to during the assessment, indicating significant increases in physiological stress (all p < 0.01). In addition, both groups showed significant increases in their HRV from during the assessment to 10 minutes after the assessment, indicating significant releases in physiological stress (all p < 0.01).

## HRV and mock skill competency assessment scores
Participating students’ mean mock skill competency assessment scores were 73.08 (63.20, 79.20), indicating an overall average performance ( ). The percentages of the participants in each category were also summarised in . There was no significant difference between female and male students.
 and show the median HRV and perceived anxiety of the high, medium and low performers 10 minutes before, during and 10 minutes after the assessments. The results indicated that high performers were physiologically more stressed during and after the assessment. There were significant differences between the mean HRV during (p < 0.01) and after (p = 0.04) the assessment across the three groups. The post-hoc comparisons ( and ) further showed that the HRV of medium (p = 0.01) and high performers (p < 0.01) were significantly lower than that of low performers during the assessment. The HRV of high performers were also significantly lower than that of low performers 10 minutes after the assessment (p = 0.03). In addition, the Friedman test indicated significant differences within three-level-performance groups in HRV, which revealed an average HRV trend that decreased first and then increased throughout the assessment process ( and ). The post-hoc tests further demonstrated this significant changing process ( and ).
 With regard to the score of perceived anxiety, non-significant differences were noted amongst the three groups before and after the assessment (p > 0.05). Within-group analysis also indicated non-significant differences in perceived anxiety scores at two time points within three levels of performers (p > 0.05, ).

## Correlations amongst perceived anxiety, HRV, and mock skill competency assessment scores
 presents the correlations amongst the measures of perceived anxiety, HRV and mock skill competency assessment scores. The results showed a significant positive correlation between the scores of perceived anxiety 10 minutes before and 10 minutes after the assessment (r = 0.41, p < 0.01). The median HRV 10 minutes before the assessment showed significant negative associations with perceived anxiety 10 minutes before (r = –0.37, p < 0.01) and 10 minutes after the assessment (r = –0.29, p < 0.01), respectively. As shown in , the level of median HRV (RR interval) during the assessment was positively associated with that measured 10 minutes before the assessment (r = 0.68, p < 0.01). The median HRV (RR interval) 10 minutes after the assessment was also positively correlated with that measured at the other two time points (p < 0.01). Moreover, significant negative correlations were indicated between the scores of skills competency assessment and median HRV during (r = –0.38, p < 0.01) and 10 minutes after the assessment (r = –0.32, p < 0.01), respectively.
 

## Discussion
This study used HRV to objectively evaluate the physiological stress and self-reported questionnaire to evaluate the perceived anxiety of nursing students throughout the mock skill competency assessment. The results showed that HRV varied significantly before, during and after the assessment; in particular, the HRV decreased significantly during the assessment, indicating that participants were particularly stressed during this period. In addition, high performers had significantly lower HRV during and after the assessment than moderate and low performers. Results also showed that assessment scores were negatively correlated with HRV during and after the assessment, suggesting that some stress may be beneficial to assess performance.
Significant changes in HRV indicated a first decline and then an increase following the mock skill competency assessment for all participants. The changes in HRV concurred with those reported in Al-Ghareeb et al. [ ], which found that students were physiologically stressed (as indicated by reduced variability in RR interval) during the assessment but felt relaxed at the end (as characterised by gradually increased variability in RR interval). A previous study has found that HRV can reflect an individual’s capacity to self-regulate and adapt effectively to changing social or environmental demands [ ]. The decline in students’ HRV during the assessment indicated they had inherent self-regulatory adaptability to different nursing challenges or stressors, such as the nursing skills competency assessment. At the same time, students’ knowledge and experience may influence the performance of nursing skills in a structured laboratory setting [ ]. During their first year, entrance into an undergraduate nursing programme is a significant transition from the classroom to the clinical setting, fraught with uncertainty, ambiguity, and confusion [ – ]. First-year nursing students are engaged in challenging nursing coursework that involves both theoretical knowledge and practical skills. However, they may lack preparation and support when it comes to their first clinical skill operation. Since the aseptic technique is a relatively complex nursing skill for first-year undergraduates, students may not be sure what to expect or whether they have enough knowledge and relevant experience to manage the skills [ ], resulting in higher stress and lower HRV during the assessment. In contrast, an increased post-assessment HRV might indicate that the students were becoming more familiar with procedures and assessment scenarios, which may help relieve their physiological stress, leading to higher post-assessment HRV.
When we compared the mean RR interval of high, medium and low performers, no significant difference was reported 10 minutes before the assessment, suggesting that the three groups experienced similar levels of anticipatory stress, with results comparable to a previous study [ ]. The possible reason may be while mock skill assessment can evoke anticipatory stress, the relationship between anticipatory stress and performance likely involves the interplay of intrinsic factors, such as one’s level of experience and perception of task-related demands versus resources, as well as extrinsic factors such as the complexity of the task and the nature and intensity of related stressors [ ]. However, significant differences were observed between the three groups during and 10 minutes after the assessment, with high performers having significantly lower median HRV than moderate and low performers. Recent studies using self-reported measures to assess the relationship between stress and academic performance have yielded inconsistent findings, with some studies suggesting that higher levels of stress during the examination period was associated with poorer average performance [ – ]. A study of medical students in their first clinical year even found a weak correlation between psychological distress and academic performance [ ]. This difference might be because the characteristics of research participants were different, and the researchers relied heavily on self-reported questionnaires as a tool for measuring stress, which is thought to be not objective and scientific measurements for use as concrete guidance in actual educational situations. However, our results mirrored a recent study assessing the association between HRV-measures stress and written/skills examination scores. The results showed that students who experience higher stress with a lower level of HRV have higher academic performance [ ]. The result likely because when students’ stress increases to an optimal level, they may become more focused on their work and thereby improve their performance. This finding could be supported by the evidence of ‘learning zones’ that a moderate stress level benefits effective learning [ ]. Nevertheless, the optimal stress level for achieving the best performance was largely unknown. On the other hand, it is suggested that an individual’s adaptive success is based on the ability of the autonomic nervous system to cope with challenges [ ]. Testing HRV can help confirm the flexibility or adaptability of the autonomic nervous system activity and assess the sympathetic nervous system/parasympathetic nervous system balance level to objectively evaluate the psychological and emotional states of an individual. Students with stronger autonomic nervous system responses, indicated by greater reductions in HRV and parasympathetic activity in response to assessments, and greater autonomic flexibility, tend to perform better [ ]. When stress lasts for a certain period of time, the principle of homeostasis helps maintain balance in the mind and body, making stress a driving force that can increase an individual’s efficiency and productivity [ ]. However, students with poor coping skills may experience decreased and imbalanced autonomic nervous activity, leading to anxiety, depression, and poor academic performance. Future studies are needed to explore the optimal stress level that leads to the best performance and the association of autonomic flexibility with assessed performance and its associated factors.
Our results differed from those reported by an Australian group that studied second- and third-year nursing undergraduates enrolled in a two-hour simulation session [ ]. Their findings suggested that a low level of anxiety might lead to optimal performance; by contrast, our study showed that high performers had high levels of physiological stress throughout the assessment. The difference could be explained by different analytical methods, in which their study categorised students according to their physiological anxiety levels. Our study categorised students into three performance levels (low, medium and high) and assessed the students’ stress levels longitudinally. Nonetheless, our findings also highlighted a short-term dynamic changing trajectory in that three distinct groups of performers reflect a changing curve of HRV-measured stress, respectively. The results may help predict the variation of physiological stress throughout the mock assessment in nursing first-year students and to provide students with effective supportive and educational programmes for stress management based on HRV results during nursing education. Variations in HRV can be further explored to investigate individual differences in academic performance and clinical practice, which may help improve students’ future performance in nursing or other health disciplines.
Our results demonstrated that mock skill competency assessment scores were inversely correlated with HRV during and 10 minutes after skills assessment, suggesting that stress might benefit the assessment performance. A previous study yielded similar findings, showing that simulated scenarios induced anxiety, leading to better performance and retention of ACLS skills in medical students [ ]. Skills competency assessments require a certain degree of engagement and stress. Appropriate stress could increase an individual’s attention to engagement, memory, and cognition abilities to adapt to changes in the external environment, which could be seen as a positive psychological response [ ]. Nevertheless, there was a lack of significant correlations between perceived anxiety levels and HRV during and after assessment and between assessment scores. A systematic review also found that OSCE-associated test anxiety has little effect on OSCE performance amongst health professional students [ ]. However, it is notable that unlike HRV, which objectively assesses students’ stress levels, perceived anxiety is a self-reported measure that may be influenced by psychosocial factors such as personality traits [ , ]. The Hawthorne effect is also suggested as an influencing factor on the perceived anxiety level. Participants may modify their behaviour when they feel singled out for special attention [ , ]. This possible reason may help explain why there might be differences in self-reported anxiety and HRV.
Interestingly, female students experienced lower levels of perceived anxiety and HRV-measured stress than male students before and after the assessment but showed higher levels of HRV-measured stress than male students during the assessment, despite the statistical insignificance reported. Further research is needed to investigate the influence of sex on professional performance among first-year nursing students.

## Limitations
Several limitations were noted in this study. First, HRV was assessed on the day of the skills competency assessment, but the stress level might reflect their stress on daily life activities and general health. Nevertheless, it has been shown HRV had satisfactory reliability in short-term recordings. Therefore the results likely reflect the students’ actual stress levels due to mock skills competency assessments [ ]. Second, students were only recruited from the first year of one cohort in the undergraduate nursing programme. Female students made up the majority of the sample, thus limiting the generalisability of the results. Third, this study revealed physiological stress and one psychological state (anxiety) and its correlations with mock assessment performance before an actual skills competency assessment. The results of this study might not be generalised to the physio-psychological condition of the nursing students during the actual skills competency assessment. Therefore, further investigation is suggested to examine nursing students’ perceived anxiety, HRV and competency assessment scores during the actual skills assessment, compare the changes in the students’ conditions between the mock and actual assessments, and explore the predictive factors in changes in students’ health conditions via cohort study design. Thus, the findings can provide evidence about how the mock exam can affect or inform the students’ physio-psychological state and assessment performance in a subsequent actual skills assessment. Fourth, it is possible that the Hawthorne effect [ ] might have influenced the student’s anxiety and stress levels due to observational and monitoring effects.

## Implications for future research and nursing education
This study offered some implications for future nursing education. First, the mock skill competency assessment showed that first-year undergraduate nursing students encountered both physiological stress and psychological anxiety when faced with mock assessment. Clinical nurses are usually exposed to high levels of stressors from emotions that arise in the context of patient care to the situations in which they practice. The stress experienced by undergraduate nursing students during their education can significantly influence their psychological attitudes as students and as healthcare professionals in the future. Our results highlighted the importance of considering assessment-related stress and anxiety in the context of student health. Therefore, wellness initiatives such as stress management and resilience promotion should be developed for health professional education programmes to address the emotional needs of students associated with stress and anxiety induced by assessments in the curriculum, thus laying a good foundation for their mental health in the future [ ]. Secondly, the test of HRV in our study indicates that HRV could be used as an index to evaluate the physiological adaptability of undergraduate nursing students to a changing environment of skill assessments or training involving changes in the autonomic nervous system. Measuring HRV with non-invasive devices also compensates well for the limitations of using self-reported questionnaires to measure perceived stress on students’ academic performance. Understanding the relationship between HRV-measured stress and performance will help nursing educators develop counselling and educational programmes for stress management based on objective HRV results and performance. Thirdly, as the autonomic nervous system and the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis are the two primary systems involved in adapting to stressful situations, HRV has been shown to be a powerful indicator of the autonomic nervous system, while salivary cortisol has been suggested as an indicator of HPA axis functioning. Further studies are suggested to explore the potential use of salivary cortisol as diagnostic tool for detecting stress-induced situations and investigate the relationship between HRV, stress response, and the cortisol level in student populations.
This study also provides implications for future studies. First, the current findings could only indicate the relationship between HRV and performance; that is, higher stress (lower HRV) could contribute to higher performance. However, whether those who performed better experienced higher stress before the assessment remains unclear. A two-way causal relationship could be further explored in future studies. Moreover, this study only investigated the students’ overall mock skill competency assessment performance. Considering the mock skill competency assessment involved three aspects, students may perform diversely in different parts and show relevancy with HRV in the other perspective. Further studies may consider analysing the potential relevance between HRV and various aspects of the performance. Despite the correlations amongst perceived anxiety, HRV, and performance indicated, the mechanism for changes throughout assessment remains unclear. Given an optimal level of HRV is critical to the flexibility and resilience that characterises good health, and both higher and lower than normal levels may adversely affect cognitive processing and therefore academic performance. Therefore, to understand the role of HRV in clinical performance and facilitate optimal learning outcomes, it is necessary to explore the optimal levels of HRV that predict optimal nursing performance. Future qualitative studies may help enrich the understanding of the stressful experience during skill competency assessments and identify students’ needs.

## Conclusion
This study investigated the perceived anxiety, stress levels (assessed by HRV) and mock skill competency assessment scores of first-year nursing students during a mock skill competency assessment. The results revealed significant changes in stress levels throughout the assessments, with higher stress levels (lower HRV) during the assessment. In addition, nursing students with higher stress levels (as measured by HRV) during and after assessments achieved higher scores, highlighting that certain degrees of stress can positively impact performance. Future studies are warranted to assess perceived anxiety and stress amongst diverse and representative samples in actual competency assessments and compare the changes in the students’ conditions between the mock and real assessments.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## Pairwise comparisons of three time points for all participants and different gender.
Each node shows the sample average rank of HRV.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Fig

## Pairwise comparisons of performance level during and 10 minutes after the assessment.
Each node shows the sample average rank of performance.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Fig

## Pairwise comparisons of three time points for different levels of performers.
Each node shows the sample average rank of performance.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Table

## Post-hoc comparison after the Kruskal-Wallis test for the HRV changes within gender groups across time.
Each row tests the null hypothesis that the Sample 1 and Sample 2 distributions are the same. Asymptotic significances (2-sided tests) are displayed. The significance level is 0.05.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Table

## Post-hoc comparison after the Kruskal-Wallis test for the HRV in three performance-level groups across time.
Each row tests the null hypothesis that the Sample 1 and Sample 2 distributions are the same. Asymptotic significances (2-sided tests) are displayed. The significance level is 0.05.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Table

## Post-hoc comparison after the Kruskal-Wallis test for the HRV changes within three performance-level groups across three time points.
Each row tests the null hypothesis that the Sample 1 and Sample 2 distributions are the same. Asymptotic significances (2-sided tests) are displayed. The significance level is 0.05.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.

We thank Well Being Digital Limited (WBD101) and Actywell Digital Limited (Hera Leto) for providing the earphone device and developing the mobile phone application for data collection. We would also like to express our thanks to two research assistants, Dr Mark Szeto and Ms Kenway Ng for data collection.

## Abbreviations
ACLSAdvanced Cardiovascular Life Support
C-STAIChinese version of STAI
CUHK-NTECChinese University of Hong Kong-New Territories East C
HRheart rate
HRVheart rate variability
msmilliseconds
OSCEOrganization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
PPGphotoplethysmography
RAresearch assistant
R-Rrhythm-to-rhythm
SDstandard deviations
SF-STAIShort-Form State-Trait Anxiety Inventory
STAIState-Trait Anxiety Inventory
 10.1371/journal.pone.0293509.r001Decision Letter 0
UsecheSergio A.Academic Editor© 2023 Sergio A. Useche2023Sergio A. Usechehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
24 Jan 2023

PONE-D-22-31368Nursing students’ perceived anxiety and heart rate variability in mock skill assessmentPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Wong,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Your paper has been assessed by three acknowledged experts in the field covered by the study. Overall, all the referees agree on the fact that the study has potential, but some key revisions are needed to reconsider my decision. Among their points, issues such as the description of the methods (needing various amendments and clarifications), presentation of results, and their subsequent interpretation stand out. Notwithstanding, please note that all the comments received must be responded to, providing suitable answers in a rebuttal letter, supporting your rationales with pertinent sources and arguments, and tracking all the changes made in the revised version of the manuscript.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Mar 10 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Sergio A. Useche, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2. We note that you have indicated that data from this study are available upon request. PLOS only allows data to be available upon request if there are legal or ethical restrictions on sharing data publicly. For more information on unacceptable data access restrictions, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions. 
In your revised cover letter, please address the following prompts:
a) If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially sensitive information, data are owned by a third-party organization, etc.) and who has imposed them (e.g., an ethics committee). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent.
b) If there are no restrictions, please upload the minimal anonymized data set necessary to replicate your study findings as either Supporting Information files or to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. For a list of acceptable repositories, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-recommended-repositories.
We will update your Data Availability statement on your behalf to reflect the information you provide.
3. Your ethics statement should only appear in the Methods section of your manuscript. If your ethics statement is written in any section besides the Methods, please delete it from any other section. 
4. Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information. 
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: No
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: This paper presents a study revolving around first year nursing students’ perceived and physilogically measured anxiety during a mock skill assessment.
I find the paper clearly written and well-structured. The authors do a good job of clearly defining the goals of the study early in the paper meanwhile the methods they employ are appropriate. However, I will list some points of discussion below, which I would appreciate if the authors considered before their study is published:
- Early in the paper, the authors state "Little is known about levels of stress and perceived anxiety and their relationship in the mock skill competency assessment". While this statement might be true in the current context, I believe that plenty is known regarding the relationship of stress, HRV, and assessed tasks in general. In fact, it is widely known that stress and task performance show an inverted U-shape relationship. I believe the authors should at least acknowledge the fact that a lot of studies have been conducted in the broad fields of psychology, physiology and skill assessment. The fact that a particular study has not validated this general knowledge in the specific domain of first year nursing students does not mean that the above principles do not apply or should necessarily be re-validated. The above being said, I believe that the present study lacks novelty and/or societal and scientific impact. I would like the authors to identify and emphasize what scientific gaps their study aims to fill.
- Please provide your working (or external) definitions of "stress" and "anxiety".
- I believe that an interesting part of this study (referring back to my first point) is the exploration of relationships between stress and performance. In this specific field, I would expect that a certain level of stress -which may be quite high- is expected in real-life nursing tasks. High-stake work in healthcare is objectively a stress-inducing domain. Therefore, would you agree that stress management and resilience are soft skills that nursing students should be developing? In simple words, is a certain level of stress during training/assessment not necessary to prepare students for their professional career? If yes, I encourage the authors to re-consider framing stress as not necessarily just as a possible negative influence on performance; but as an unavoidable consequence, or part of these students' potential work life that needs to be embraced and controlled.
- Line 199: please elaborate more on how these ranges were selected. It seems that medium-performing students occupy a significantly smaller range of scores. Also, it seems that no student failed this mock assessment; is that true? I would appreciate an overview of what percentage of the participants scored in which category.
- Line 280 and line 354: It seems that lower HRV (higher stress) is positively correlated with higher performance. However, the authors only address this observations from a single angle: higher stress causes higher academic performance. However, one may argue that the expectations of (generally)high-performing students can cause an increase in their stress measurements before and during an assessment. In simple words, students who expect themselves to do well in an assessment tend to have increased anxiety due to their own expectations. On the contrary, students who were not as well prepared, or simply do not care about their grades as much, showed lower stress for the respectively opposite reasons. I believe that this correlation is not necessarily a one-way causal relationship (as discussed in the paper) but a two-way relationship instead.
- I believe that the discussion section lacks a critical, well, discussion of the obtained results. Most of the discussion rotates around previous relevant studies and whether the results illustrated validate or contradict them. I encourage the authors to perform a fair, critical evaluation of their results. For example, the last paragraph of discussion is devoted to the relationship of gender and stress, however, this study showed that there is no such (significant) relationship. That being said, the discussion on this topic feels more like a literature review. In my opinion, it does not necessarily add any value to the study. Moreover, related to my previous point, the HRV-performance relationship seems to be borderline (statistically) insignificant, and could certainly be discussed in more detail. What is the p-value of both points' significance tests? A p-value of, for example, <=0.1 indicates a near-significant finding, which still deserves to be discussed.
- Minor points: a box appears in the .pdf version around line 165. Also, would you consider adding the tables to the main text instead of the appendix?
Reviewer #2: This paper addresses an interesting topic. Although the theoretical motivation for this paper is relatively sound, major revisions are necessary before publication. .
Below I highlight issues to be addressed:
Formatting issues need to be corrected (e.g. a square appears in particular places where a hyphen should be instead).
Thorough revision of the manuscript is necessary for correction of grammatical mistakes. Initially, the manuscript was relatively well written, but as it progressed, I came across more and more mistakes, especially in the resuts section (where there were also issues with reporting) and discussion. This is just one example: "The results indicated that high performers were physiological more stressful during and after the assessment. > physiologically more stressed.
p. 5. "If a person is under stress, the sympathetic activity will increase and at the same time, the vagal activity of the heart will decrease, resulting in an increase in heart rate (HR) and also a decrease in HRV (Traina et al., 2011). Several studies have found that when compared with non-academic occasions such as during the semester (Dimitriev et al., 2008), during holidays (Tharion et al., 2009) and after holidays (Melillo et al., 2011), university students exhibited lower HRV than before or during examintaton." >> If according to Traina et al., 2011, stress is associated with a decreased HRV, then the information in the second sentence does not follow. To clarify, you mean to say that HRV is lower during or before exams? If so, then the second sentence needs to be corrected.
Why is it relevant to mention that participants did not meet the WHO physical activity guideline? And the mean time of getting out of bed? Would not the average hours of sleep make more sense? Also, how do hours of sleep influence HR & HRV?
In terms of performance, since there were different parts to the examination, and perhaps students performed better in some than in others, this might lead to more insightful analyes and conclusions.
In the methods section, please further elaborate on how HRV/ RRI is calculated.
p. 14 -"The mean HRV as measured by RRI at 10 minutes before, during and 10 minutes after assessment were 688.73(ms) (SD = 116.98), 537.62(ms) (SD = 94.82) and 714.67(ms) 266 (SD =
267 119.68), respectively. " I am not sure I understand these values - what is "ms" an abbreviationf for? I am used to it representing milliseconds.
p. 15 You only report that there is a difference somewhere between the 3 times HRV was measured, but you do not report the output of the Friedman test nor post-hoc tests to demonstrate where the differences ere significant.
Remove the title for the section: "Different performers and their perceived anxiety and HRV" as it falls under the previous section already. Since you have values presented in tables, I would suggest just reffering to the table instead of repeating them in a text.
Since the assessment had 3 compontents, it might have been relevant to measure HRV spearately for those 3 components.
Since you are reporting results of non-parametric tests, you should be reporting medians and not means.
Use abbreviations/ terminology consistently. Sometimes you use RR interval, and sometimes you use RRI.
Discussion:
p. 18 "This study also showed that high-performing students had lower average HRV." Remove this sentence, since in the subsequent sentence you indicate that the difference was not significant.
The discussion should not include numbers/ statistics, but rather should be interpreting what was reported in the Results section.
I find it interesting that higher performance was correlated with lower HRV. This demonstrates that stress (as measured by lower HRV) seems to be beneficial. You discuss optimal levels of stress and differences between individuals in terms of their performance, yet it is not clear whether and how your conclusions are/can be supported by your data (refer to p. 19: "Therefore, students with stronger autonomic nervous system responses (i.e., greater reductions in HRV and parasympathetic activity in response to assessments), and, suggestively, greater autonomic flexibility, have been shown to be positively associated with higher performance (Mathewson et al., 2010)" > How can you make this conclusion based on your data / analyses?)
p. 20 "Nonetheless, our findings also highlighted a dynamic changing trajectory that three distinct groups of performers experience stress levels simultaneously, which may help predict the variation of physiological stress throughout the mock assessment in nursing freshmen and provide inspiration on psychological support during nursing education. " > You only compute the average HRV, so how are you highlighting a dynamic changing trajectory? What do you mean by "experience stress levels simultaneously?"? "and provide inspiration on psychological support" > this is vague
I would remove the discussion on gender differences, particularly since this was something that was not controlled for, nor theoretically motivated in the introduction.
Implications for further studies were rather shallow and could be discussed in a more critical manner.
Reviewer #3: Dear authors,
Thank you for this interesting manuscript. I can 100% imagine how these skill tests must be nerve wrecking.
Firstly, I strongly recommend to provide full statistical information, and not only p values.
Also, figures are much easier to interpret when you have data like this than providing numbers in texts of tables. E.g. line graphs with CI95% or SE bars.
If you say there are significant differences (e.g. page 15, line 284-285), also please tell the reader what the differences were (e.g its much better to say that Lisa is taller than Jenny, than to say the two girls are of different height). Again, figures make it much easier to then 'see' what that looks like.
page 16, section Correlations amongst perceived anxiety, HRV, and mock skill competency assessment score: You don't have to write out the whole correlation table....
Page 17, line 313, you mean self-reported anxiety?
What is meant on page 21 at the following alinea? IF it wasn't significant, there was no difference? And if I remember right there are hardly any gender differences found right?
399 Interestingly, female students experienced higher levels of perceived anxiety after the
400 assessment compared to their pre-assessment scores, despite statistically insignificance was
401 reported.
I don't agree with the implications for further research. Your study did not show " the importance of the mock assessment" and also, how does it show that anxiety should be considered? If anything, your study suggests that yes, ofcourse like always, assessments cause some anxiety, but they don't cause problems right?
Oerall: the discussion can be more concise.
ALso, there are some small errors (often missing a word or e.g. missing an 'a' in front of a word, for example line 325 "previous study showed" instead of "A previous study" and "students may not be sure what to be expected" or "The difference likely be explained" (I am not going to note all mistakes, a careful editing will take care of them). Overall the writing is clear though.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0293509.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
22 Mar 2023

Response to reviewers
We thank the Editor and Reviewers for their time and consideration. We have modified the manuscript in response to the comments. For your convenience, the line and page numbers referenced below refer to the corresponding line and page numbers in the revised manuscript. The changes are highlighted in red in the manuscript, except the part on changes resulting from editing.
Response to Editor:
Thank you very much for your comments. Our answers are as follows:
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

Response to Editor comment No. 1: Thanks for your comments. We carefully checked the Title, Author, Affiliations Formatting Guidelines of PLoS One, adjusted the formatting issues and ensured the title page met the journal’s style requirements. Please refer to page 1.
In addition, we also carefully checked the PLoS One style template for main body and formatted the whole text to make the manuscript meet the journal’s instructions, including the file naming. Tables were included directly after the paragraph in which they were first cited. Please refer to the whole text.
2. We note that you have indicated that data from this study are available upon request. PLOS only allows data to be available upon request if there are legal or ethical restrictions on sharing data publicly. For more information on unacceptable data access restrictions, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions

In your revised cover letter, please address the following prompts:
a) If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially sensitive information, data are owned by a third-party organization, etc.) and who has imposed them (e.g., an ethics committee). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent.
Response to Editor comment No. 2a: Thanks for your comments. The detail of the reason that data were available upon request due to ethical restrictions was added in ‘Availability of data and materials’ section. We also provided the contact emails of the university's clinical research ethics committee and corresponding author for sending data requests. 
The datasets generated and analysed during the current study are not publicly available due to privacy protection and ethical restrictions by the Joint CUHK-NETEC Clinical Research Ethics Committee. The Chinese University of Hong Kong’s Research Ethics Board has imposed data sharing restrictions as they do not allow identifiable or de-identified data to be electronically transmitted outside of university including open access repositories. Requests can be sent to Clinical Research Ethics Office (Phone: 852 3505 3935; email: crec@cuhk.edu.hk). Requests can also be sent to the corresponding author (jojowong@cuhk.edu.hk).
b) If there are no restrictions, please upload the minimal anonymized data set necessary to replicate your study findings as either Supporting Information files or to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. For a list of acceptable repositories, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-recommended-repositories. 
We will update your Data Availability statement on your behalf to reflect the information you provide.
Response to Editor comment No. 2b: Thanks for your comments. Our data availability has ethics restrictions. The detail of the reason that data were available upon request due to ethical restrictions was added in ‘Availability of data and materials’ section. We also provided the contact emails of the university's clinical research ethics committee and corresponding author for sending data requests. 
3. Your ethics statement should only appear in the Methods section of your manuscript. If your ethics statement is written in any section besides the Methods, please delete it from any other section.
Response to Editor comment No. 3: Thanks for your comments. We agree that the ethics statement should only appear in the Methods section and thus deleted the ethics statement at the end of the manuscript. Please refer to page 33, lines 601-607.
4. Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information. 
Response to Editor comment No. 4: Thanks for your comments. We uploaded a file named ‘STROBE_checklist_cross-sectional.docx’ as a Supporting Information file when we first submitted our manuscript in the system. As it is a reporting guideline checklist for a cross-sectional study for review purpose only by the editorial office, not for publication. Thus, we did not add an in-text citation and the caption for this Supporting Information file at the end of our manuscript.
On the other hand, as we further did other statistical analyses according to the reviewers’ comments, the related findings were added as Supporting Information files. The captions of our Supporting Information files were added at the end of the manuscript, and the in-text citations were also updated accordingly. Please refer to pages 17-19, and 45-46.
Response to Reviewer #1:
This paper presents a study revolving around first year nursing students’ perceived and physilogically measured anxiety during a mock skill assessment.
I find the paper clearly written and well-structured. The authors do a good job of clearly defining the goals of the study early in the paper meanwhile the methods they employ are appropriate. However, I will list some points of discussion below, which I would appreciate if the authors considered before their study is published:
Response: Thank you very much for your thorough review. We have answered each of your points below.
1. Early in the paper, the authors state "Little is known about levels of stress and perceived anxiety and their relationship in the mock skill competency assessment". While this statement might be true in the current context, I believe that plenty is known regarding the relationship of stress, HRV, and assessed tasks in general. In fact, it is widely known that stress and task performance show an inverted U-shape relationship. I believe the authors should at least acknowledge the fact that a lot of studies have been conducted in the broad fields of psychology, physiology and skill assessment. The fact that a particular study has not validated this general knowledge in the specific domain of first year nursing students does not mean that the above principles do not apply or should necessarily be re-validated. The above being said, I believe that the present study lacks novelty and/or societal and scientific impact. I would like the authors to identify and emphasize what scientific gaps their study aims to fill.
Response to Reviewer comment No. 1: Thank you for your comment. We agree that a particular study has not validated this general knowledge in the specific domain of first-year nursing students does not mean that the above principles do not apply or should necessarily be re-validated. We added the related description and acknowledged in the background part that a lot of studies have been conducted to indicate the relationship between stress and performance in the broad fields of psychology, physiology, and skill assessment. Please refer to page 7, lines 130-133.
In addition, we also highlighted the educational and scientific impacts of this study. 
� First, evaluating HRV is an objective way to know about the stress level in undergraduate nursing students during the mock skill competency assessment. As most studies adopted scales/questionnaires related to anxiety to assess students’ perceived anxiety, adopting HRV to objectively reflect nursing students’ stress may help promote the application of physiological measurement technologies in the nursing education field.
� Second, few data exist on the levels of stress in undergraduate nursing students in health programmes using subjective and physiological measures and their relationship to performance in the mock skill assessment. Monitoring physiological HRV-based stress in undergraduate nursing students before the actual assessment may help build evidence on new ways to evaluate students’ performance and professional overall qualities in nursing programmes.
We emphasised this significance in the introduction part. Please refer to pages 4-5, lines 80-83, pages 6-7, lines 114-118, pages 7-8, lines 137-139.
2. Please provide your working (or external) definitions of "stress" and "anxiety".
Response to Reviewer comment No. 2: Thanks for your comments. We added the definitions of ‘stress’ and ‘anxiety’ in the Introduction part. Please refer to page 4, lines 62–66. 
3. I believe that an interesting part of this study (referring back to my first point) is the exploration of relationships between stress and performance. In this specific field, I would expect that a certain level of stress -which may be quite high- is expected in real-life nursing tasks. High-stake work in healthcare is objectively a stress-inducing domain. Therefore, would you agree that stress management and resilience are soft skills that nursing students should be developing? In simple words, is a certain level of stress during training/assessment not necessary to prepare students for their professional career? If yes, I encourage the authors to re-consider framing stress as not necessarily just as a possible negative influence on performance; but as an unavoidable consequence, or part of these students' potential work life that needs to be embraced and controlled.
Response to Reviewer comment No. 3: Thanks for your comment. We do agree that extensive demands are often placed on nurses in their actual workplaces that can lead to high rates of stress and burnout, which thus have a vast array of negative consequences for the patient, the health care organization, the nursing profession, and the mental and physical health of the nurses as an individual. There is no doubt that stress management and resilience facilitation may assist nurses and nursing students to manage the demands of the healthcare environment and to build resilience. However, although a certain level of stress is unavoidable during assessments/trainings, if the stressors cannot be properly adjusted or controlled, it is likely to affect the subsequent enthusiasm for the nursing profession, job satisfaction in the future practice, and physical and mental health in the process of career development. That is why we aimed to investigate physiological and psychological stress and its relationship with performance at the very beginning of their undergraduate nursing study. This is also one of the important implications of our findings on nursing education. Evaluating physiological and psychological stress may form the basis on which the decision was made to incorporate stress management and resilience facilitation into nursing programmes to assist students to manage the stressors of undergraduate nursing study and future clinical practice., thus promoting occupational mental health. 
4. Line 199: please elaborate more on how these ranges were selected. It seems that medium-performing students occupy a significantly smaller range of scores. Also, it seems that no student failed this mock assessment; is that true? I would appreciate an overview of what percentage of the participants scored in which category.
Response to Reviewer comment No. 4: Thank you for your comment. The levels and score ranges are identified by the programme director, course coordinator and education committee of the school. It has been widely used in various nursing courses in the researchers’ nursing school and as an evaluation standard for nursing students’ performance. We added the details in the Methods part. Please refer to page 12, lines 218-220.
Moreover, it’s true that medium-performing students occupy a significantly smaller range of scores, and no student failed this mock assessment in our study. Based on students' knowledge mastery and performance in previous years, their mock assessments were generally at an average level. The real meaning of the mock assessment is to let students understand their current mastery degree and thus improve their shortcomings accordingly before the actual assessment.
The percentages of the participants in each category could be found in Table 1. Please refer to page 16. Students with high, medium, and low performance accounted for 22.22% (n = 20), 48.89% (n = 44), and 28.29% (n = 26), respectively. We also added one sentence to point out the overview of the results to avoid repeating the results in the table. Please refer to page 18, lines 326-327.
5. Line 280 and line 354: It seems that lower HRV (higher stress) is positively correlated with higher performance. However, the authors only address this observations from a single angle: higher stress causes higher academic performance. However, one may argue that the expectations of (generally)high-performing students can cause an increase in their stress measurements before and during an assessment. In simple words, students who expect themselves to do well in an assessment tend to have increased anxiety due to their own expectations. On the contrary, students who were not as well prepared, or simply do not care about their grades as much, showed lower stress for the respectively opposite reasons. I believe that this correlation is not necessarily a one-way causal relationship (as discussed in the paper) but a two-way relationship instead.
Response to Reviewer comment No. 5: Thanks for your comments. We do agree that a two-way causal relationship between HRV and performance may exist. However, our current research data could only reflect the one-way relationship, that is higher stress is positively correlated with higher performance. The two-way relationship deserves further exploration in larger-sample studies. We added this as a further research direction in the implications part. Please refer to page 30, lines 551-555.
6. I believe that the discussion section lacks a critical, well, discussion of the obtained results. Most of the discussion rotates around previous relevant studies and whether the results illustrated validate or contradict them. I encourage the authors to perform a fair, critical evaluation of their results. For example, the last paragraph of discussion is devoted to the relationship of gender and stress, however, this study showed that there is no such (significant) relationship. That being said, the discussion on this topic feels more like a literature review. In my opinion, it does not necessarily add any value to the study. Moreover, related to my previous point, the HRV-performance relationship seems to be borderline (statistically) insignificant, and could certainly be discussed in more detail. What is the p-value of both points' significance tests? A p-value of, for example, <=0.1 indicates a near-significant finding, which still deserves to be discussed.
Response to Reviewer comment No. 6: Thanks for your comments. We rewrote the discussion part according to our findings more critically. Please refer to pages 21-31. 
In addition, we defined the statistical significance of all tests as a p-value < 0.05 (two-sided) in our study, which could be found on page 15, lines 276-277. A p-value greater than 0.05 means that deviation from the null hypothesis is not statistically significant, and the null hypothesis is not rejected. We agree that the possible reasons for the insignificant differences could be discussed critically according to the research data. Therefore, we discussed more on the HRV-performance relationships. Please refer to pages 23-24, lines 422-423, 427-430, 440-444. 
With regard to the discussion on gender and stress, as one of our important objectives was to examine the differences in perceived anxiety, HRV and performance between female and male students across the mock skill competency assessment. Previous studies also indicate gender is a potential influencing factor on students’ stress and performance. We also did the analysis, although no significant differences were found between male and female students. However, interesting findings were that female students experienced lower levels of perceived anxiety and HRV-measured stress than male students before and after the assessment, but showed higher levels of HRV-measured stress than male students during the assessment, and the mean score of the female perceived anxiety after the assessment was a little bit higher than those before the assessment, although these results were insignificant. We rephrased the statements on the gender difference and did some critical analysis for the non-significant results. More studies are warranted to further investigate the gender difference on this topic, which may provide insights into nursing education based on gender. Please refer to pages 26-27, lines 484-507.
7. Minor points: a box appears in the .pdf version around line 165. Also, would you consider adding the tables to the main text instead of the appendix?
Response to Reviewer comment No. 7: Thanks for your comments. We carefully checked the MS Word document of the manuscript and ensured that no other box appeared around line 165. Please refer to page 9.
In addition, we added the tables directly after the paragraph in which they were first cited rather than at the end of the manuscript. Please refer to pages 16-21.
Response to Reviewer #2:
This paper addresses an interesting topic. Although the theoretical motivation for this paper is relatively sound, major revisions are necessary before publication. 
Below I highlight issues to be addressed:
Response: Thank you very much for your thorough review. Our answers are as follows:
1. Formatting issues need to be corrected (e.g. a square appears in particular places where a hyphen should be instead).
Response to Reviewer comment No. 1: Thank you for comment. We carefully checked the formatting issues throughout the Word document and used a standard hyphen, ensuring no square appearing. 
2. Thorough revision of the manuscript is necessary for correction of grammatical mistakes. Initially, the manuscript was relatively well written, but as it progressed, I came across more and more mistakes, especially in the results section (where there were also issues with reporting) and discussion. This is just one example: "The results indicated that high performers were physiological more stressful during and after the assessment. > physiologically more stressed.
Response to Reviewer comment No. 2: Thank you for your comment. We apologise for the poor language of our manuscript. The revised manuscript was sent for professional editing to improve the use of English, especially the results and discussion parts. We really hope that the flow and language have been substantially improved. Please refer to the whole text.
3. p. 5. "If a person is under stress, the sympathetic activity will increase and at the same time, the vagal activity of the heart will decrease, resulting in an increase in heart rate (HR) and also a decrease in HRV (Traina et al., 2011). Several studies have found that when compared with non-academic occasions such as during the semester (Dimitriev et al., 2008), during holidays (Tharion et al., 2009) and after holidays (Melillo et al., 2011), university students exhibited lower HRV than before or during examintaton." >> If according to Traina et al., 2011, stress is associated with a decreased HRV, then the information in the second sentence does not follow. To clarify, you mean to say that HRV is lower during or before exams? If so, then the second sentence needs to be corrected.
Response to Reviewer comment No. 3: Thank you for your comment. We apologise for the confusion by the previous version of the manuscript. Yes, we agree that the second sentence in the text did not follow the first sentence from Traina’s research. We corrected the description of the second sentence accordingly. Please refer to page 6, line 107.
4. Why is it relevant to mention that participants did not meet the WHO physical activity guideline? And the mean time of getting out of bed? Would not the average hours of sleep make more sense? Also, how do hours of sleep influence HR & HRV?
Response to Reviewer comment No. 4: Thank you for your comment. According to WHO physical activity guideline, adults aged 16-64 years should do at least 150–300 minutes of moderate-intensity aerobic physical activity throughout the week. Physical activity has significant health benefits for hearts, bodies and minds, reduces symptoms of depression and anxiety, enhances thinking, learning, and judgment skills, and improves overall well-being. The lack of adequate intensity of physical exercise also partly indicated that nursing undergraduates are experiencing physiological and psychological stress. As the average time of sleep was not the research focus of this research. As such, we delete this information in the results part to avoid misleading. Please refer to page 15, line 284-285. We may consider exploring the influencing factors of HRV by regression analysis in further studies. 
5. In terms of performance, since there were different parts to the examination, and perhaps students performed better in some than in others, this might lead to more insightful analyes and conclusions.
Response to Reviewer comment No. 5: Thank you for your comment. Although the final assessment included a 2-hour written examination and a skill competency examination. The performance in this study was only referred to the mock skill competency assessment scores. In addition, although the mock skill competency examination contained three aspects: assessments and planning skills, implementation skills, and evaluation skills on performing a wound dressing, investigating the overall performance in the mock skill competency assessment was our research objective, not the performance of other dimensions of the examination. We indeed believe that students may perform diversely in different parts of the examination. This provides us with a further research direction to investigate and compare the students’ performance and HRV in different parts of the examination, which will enrich the findings and conclusions. We added this implication in the text. Please refer to page 30, lines 555-560. 
6. In the methods section, please further elaborate on how HRV/ RRI is calculated.
Response to Reviewer comment No. 6: Thank you for your comment. We further added the details of the data generation and analysis of HRV/RR interval in Methods part. When students were asked to wear the earphones, the HRV could be directly recorded using the ActivHeartsTM dynamic heart rate sensing technology in the earphone device according to the guidelines of the task force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology. Please refer to page 11, lines 200–203.
7. p. 14 -"The mean HRV as measured by RRI at 10 minutes before, during and 10 minutes after assessment were 688.73(ms) (SD = 116.98), 537.62(ms) (SD = 94.82) and 714.67(ms) 266 (SD = 267 119.68), respectively. " I am not sure I understand these values - what is "ms" an abbreviationf for? I am used to it representing milliseconds.
Response to Reviewer comment No. 7: Thank you for your comment. Yes, ‘ms’ is an abbreviation for ‘milliseconds’, which is the unit of RR interval. We wrote out the full term when ‘ms’ was firstly used. Please refer to page 14, line 268.
8. p. 15 You only report that there is a difference somewhere between the 3 times HRV was measured, but you do not report the output of the Friedman test nor post-hoc tests to demonstrate where the differences are significant.
Response to Reviewer comment No. 8: Thanks for your comment. We agree that the Kruskal Wallis Test and the Friedman text were only the first steps to indicating the significant differences amongst the three groups. We indeed should add the post hoc test to further identify the differences. The current results could not show more detail whether any two groups in the three groups show any differences. Thus, we first added the chi-square values of the Friedman test, and we further did the post hoc multiple pairwise comparisons and added the results of significant differences between any two groups. Please refer to pages 17-18, lines 318-323, pages 18-19, lines 338-345, and supporting information (S1-3 Table, S1-3 Fig).
9. Remove the title for the section: "Different performers and their perceived anxiety and HRV" as it falls under the previous section already. Since you have values presented in tables, I would suggest just reffering to the table instead of repeating them in a text.
Response to Reviewer comment No. 9: Thanks for your comments. We agree that the contents below the subheading ‘Different performers and theirs perceived anxiety and HRV’ belong to the previous section. Thus, we deleted this subheading. Please refer to page 18, line 329.
Moreover, we agree that Table 2 could well represent the results of HRV in different three levels of performers at three-time points. We shortened the description by referring the Table 2 rather than repeating the results. Please refer to page 18, lines 330-335.
10. Since the assessment had 3 components, it might have been relevant to measure HRV separately for those 3 components.
Response to Reviewer comment No. 10: Thank you for your comment. Although the mock skill competency examination contained three aspects: assessments and planning skills, implementation skills, and evaluation skills on performing a wound dressing, investigating the overall performance in the mock skill competency assessment was our research objective. We indeed believe that students may perform diversely in different parts of the examination. This provides us with a further research direction to investigate and compare the students’ performance and HRV in different parts of the examination, which will enrich the findings and conclusions. We added this implication in the text. Please refer to page 30, lines 555-560. 
11. Since you are reporting results of non-parametric tests, you should be reporting medians and not means.
Response to Reviewer comment No. 11: Thanks for your comment. We revised and reported the medians (P25, P75) for anxiety scores, HRV, and performance. Please refer to pages 16-19.
12. Use abbreviations/ terminology consistently. nishihSometimes you use RR interval, and sometimes you use RRI.
Response to Reviewer comment No. 12: Thanks for your comments. We apologise for the confusion generated by the previous version of the manuscript. We checked all the abbreviations throughout the whole text and used them consistently. Specifically, we replaced ‘RRI’ with ‘RR interval’ in the text to make them consistently used. 
13. Discussion: p. 18 "This study also showed that high-performing students had lower average HRV." Remove this sentence, since in the subsequent sentence you indicate that the difference was not significant.
Response to Reviewer comment No. 13: Thanks for your comments. We deleted this sentence. We agree that the subsequent sentence could represent our research finding. Please refer to Page 23, line 418. 
14. The discussion should not include numbers/ statistics, but rather should be interpreting what was reported in the Results section.
Response to Reviewer comment No. 14: Thanks for your comments. We agree that the discussion should not include numbers/statistics or repeat much information on the results part. We deleted the statistics in the Discussion, avoided restatement of the results, and pay more attention to interpreting the possible reasons for the research findings. Please refer to pages 21-28.
15. I find it interesting that higher performance was correlated with lower HRV. This demonstrates that stress (as measured by lower HRV) seems to be beneficial. You discuss optimal levels of stress and differences between individuals in terms of their performance, yet it is not clear whether and how your conclusions are/can be supported by your data (refer to p. 19: "Therefore, students with stronger autonomic nervous system responses (i.e., greater reductions in HRV and parasympathetic activity in response to assessments), and, suggestively, greater autonomic flexibility, have been shown to be positively associated with higher performance (Mathewson et al., 2010)" > How can you make this conclusion based on your data / analyses?)
Response to Reviewer comment No. 15: Thanks for your comments. We apologise for the confusion of your reading. Research from Mathewson et al. 2010 could be a shred of evidence to help explain why students with lower HRV had higher performance in our study. We did not make this conclusion but refer to this as a possible reason to support our finding that is aligned with the finding from Yoo et al., 2021. We revised the related statements and added a detailed discussion. Please refer to page 24, lines 440 to 447.
16. p. 20 "Nonetheless, our findings also highlighted a dynamic changing trajectory that three distinct groups of performers experience stress levels simultaneously, which may help predict the variation of physiological stress throughout the mock assessment in nursing freshmen and provide inspiration on psychological support during nursing education. " > You only compute the average HRV, so how are you highlighting a dynamic changing trajectory? What do you mean by "experience stress levels simultaneously?"? "and provide inspiration on psychological support" > this is vague
Response to Reviewer comment No. 16: Thanks for your comments. As we measured the average level of HRV at three time points: 10 minutes before, during, and 10 minutes after the assessment, we would like to reflect a dynamic changing process throughout the mock skill assessment process at the three time points. Certainly, fewer time points limited us showing a more concrete changing process. Adding more time points is suggested in further studies to reflect a concrete dynamic process. Please refer to page 23, line 432.
What we meant to say ‘experience stress levels simultaneously’ referred to that high, medium, and low performers showed a changing curve of HRV, respectively. We revised the related interpretation in the text. Please refer to page 25, lines 458-459.
In addition, we further added more details on ‘provide inspiration on psychological support’. Please refer to page 25, lines 461-463.
17. I would remove the discussion on gender differences, particularly since this was something that was not controlled for, nor theoretically motivated in the introduction.
Response to Reviewer comment No. 17: Thanks for your comments. As one of our important objectives was to examine the differences in perceived anxiety, HRV and performance between female and male students across the mock skill competency assessment. Previous studies also indicate gender is a potential influencing factor on students’ stress and performance. We also did the analysis, although no significant differences were found between male and female students. Thus, we reserved and revised the discussion on gender differences in our study to analyse possible reasons. Please refer to pages 26-28, lines 484 to 507. We also added more descriptions of the supportive evidence and potential mechanism of gender differences in stress and performance in the background part. Please refer to page 5, lines 94-96, and page 6, lines 111-113. 
18. Implications for further studies were rather shallow and could be discussed in a more critical manner.
Response to Reviewer comment No. 18: Thank you for your comments. We rewrote the implications part critically. Please refer to pages 29-31. 
Response to Reviewer #3:
Dear authors,
Thank you for this interesting manuscript. I can 100% imagine how these skill tests must be nerve wrecking.
Response: Thank you very much for your thorough review. Our answers to each question are as follow.
1. Firstly, I strongly recommend to provide full statistical information, and not only p values. Also, figures are much easier to interpret when you have data like this than providing numbers in texts of tables. E.g. line graphs with CI95% or SE bars. If you say there are significant differences (e.g. page 15, line 284-285), also please tell the reader what the differences were (e.g its much better to say that Lisa is taller than Jenny, than to say the two girls are of different height). Again, figures make it much easier to then 'see' what that looks like.
Response to Reviewer comment No. 1: Thank you for your comment. We checked carefully and added the Z values of the Mann-Whitney U test and Wilcoxon Signed Rank test and the chi-square value of the Friedman test to ensure provide full statistical information.
In addition, we do agree that figures are much easier to interpret the research findings. As the data in our study were not normally distributed, the interquartile range (IQR) may be better to reflect their probability distribution than 95%CI. In this case, box plots were added to compare the changes of the perceived anxiety and HRV in males and females and in three groups of performers throughout the mock skill assessment process. Please refer to Figs 1 and 2. 
Moreover, we agree that the statements of the significant differences were not unclear. We rephrased the statements for the significant differences. For the HRV of the high, medium and low performers, as the Kruskal-Wallis Test was the first step to see whether the three groups showed significant differences. If we would like to see whether any two groups amongst the three groups show significant differences, a further step is needed – selecting all pairs for multiple pairwise comparisons. To make the results show more details, we added the results of the post hoc test after Kruskal-Wallis Test to further indicated any significant differences between the two groups. Please refer to pages 17-18, lines 318-323, pages 18-19, lines 338-345, and supporting information (S1-3 Table, S1-3 Fig).
2. page 16, section Correlations amongst perceived anxiety, HRV, and mock skill competency assessment score: You don't have to write out the whole correlation table....
Response to Reviewer comment No. 2: Thank you for your comment. We agree that the text should not repeat all the results in the table. We shortened the summary of the correlation results and highlighted the key points of Table 3 in the text. Please refer to pages 20-21, lines 364-379.
3. Page 17, line 313, you mean self-reported anxiety?
Response to Reviewer comment No. 3: Thank you for your comment. We agree that ‘subjective anxiety’ means ‘self-reported anxiety’/‘perceived anxiety’. We revised the ‘subject anxiety’ into ‘perceived anxiety’ in the text. Please refer to page 21, line 388.
4. What is meant on page 21 at the following alinea? IF it wasn't significant, there was no 4 difference? And if I remember right there are hardly any gender differences found right?
399 Interestingly, female students experienced higher levels of perceived anxiety after the
400 assessment compared to their pre-assessment scores, despite statistically insignificance was
401 reported.
Response to Reviewer comment No. 4: Thank you for your comments. We apologise for the confusion generated by the previous version of the manuscript. Yes, no significant differences across gender were found in the scores of the perceived anxiety and HRV before and after the assessment. However, interesting findings were that female students experienced lower levels of perceived anxiety and HRV-measured stress than male students before and after the assessment, but showed higher levels of HRV-measured stress than male students during the assessment, and the mean score of the female perceived anxiety after the assessment was a little bit higher than those before the assessment. Although these results were insignificant, we would like to discuss the nuances, suggesting further exploration in future studies. We rephrased the statements on the gender difference and did some critical analysis for the non-significant results. Please refer to pages 26-28, lines 484-507.
5. I don't agree with the implications for further research. Your study did not show " the importance of the mock assessment" and also, how does it show that anxiety should be considered? If anything, your study suggests that yes, ofcourse like always, assessments cause some anxiety, but they don't cause problems right?
Response to Reviewer comment No. 5: Thank you for your comments. Yes, we agree that our research findings did not mainly highlight the importance of the mock assessment and anxiety issue. Instead, our findings would like to indicate the importance of HRV-measured stress in undergraduate nursing students and the acceptability of HRV measurement by a wearable earphone device using ActivHeartsTM dynamic heart rate sensing technology in undergraduate nursing students. This could be applied in future nursing research and provides insights into stress management for undergraduate nursing students in nursing education programmes. We rewrote the implications for future research and practice. Please refer to pages 29-31. 
6. Oerall: the discussion can be more concise.
ALso, there are some small errors (often missing a word or e.g. missing an 'a' in front of a word, for example line 325 "previous study showed" instead of "A previous study" and "students may not be sure what to be expected" or "The difference likely be explained" (I am not going to note all mistakes, a careful editing will take care of them). Overall the writing is clear though.
Response to Reviewer comment No. 6: Thanks for your comments. We revised the discussion part and sincerely hope that the discussion part is now better, please refer to pages 20-31.
We apologise for the poor language of our manuscript. We have now checked the whole text and corrected the small errors. The revised manuscript was sent for professional editing to improve the use of English. We really hope that the flow and language level have been substantially improved.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0293509.r003Decision Letter 1
UsecheSergio A.Academic Editor© 2023 Sergio A. Useche2023Sergio A. Usechehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
30 May 2023

PONE-D-22-31368R1Nursing students’ perceived anxiety and heart rate variability in mock skill competency assessmentPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Wong,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process. Although the paper has been substantially improved by you, there are some issues still needing your attention. Below, you will find a set of comments (most of them relatively simple) raised by our Reviewer # 2 during their second review of the manuscript. Please make sure to address all of them with all rigor possible, and to provide satisfactory responses to all the points delivered.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jul 14 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Sergio A. Useche, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #2: Partly
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #2: No
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #2: The authors have considerably improved the manuscript, but there are still some points to be addressed:
Line 39: space missing (10min)
Line 62: “Stress is a situation”. Revisit this definition – stress is not a situation. Definitions of stress and anxiety could be further elaborated upon/ contextualized.
Line 94: “Additionally, evidence suggests that female students are more likely to focus their perceived stress on academic performance than male students [21].” This sentence is unclear. Are they more likely to attribute their stress to academic performance? Please clarify. In your response letter, you state gender differences to be a primary goal of your study – yet you do not discuss it much in depth in the introduction. What might be reasons for this gender difference? In what other domains can a gender difference be found. Also – are you referring to gender or sex differences? I presume the latter?
Line 97: “Alternatively” seems to be the incorrect connector. Alternatively to what?
On page 6, you motivate the importance of this study in terms of incorporating stress measurement as a part of the assessment. What would be ethical implications of this? Would knowing that stress levels are being measured also possibly lead to increased anxiety?
Line 137: “Monitoring physiological HRV-based stress in undergraduate nursing 8 138 students before the actual assessment may help build evidence on new ways to evaluate 139 students’ performance and overall professional qualities in nursing programmes.” In line with my previous comment, what are the ethical considerations of this statement?
Line 305: I believe mean should be medians? The same goes for line 375. Wherever the statistics used were nonparametric, you should be reporting medians. Otherwise, Means and SDs.
Formatting: (p > 0.05) (Table 2) >> (p > 0.05, Table 2)
In the discussion, 2nd parapgrah, you discuss the fact that there were no differences between anticipatory stress and stress during/ after the assessment. No differences were present between different levels of performers and anticipatory stress. Would the fact that this was a mock exam, with no real consequences, have led to these null results? I would be interested if there is any more literature out there on anticipatory stress, and possibly interactions with trait anxiety, for example.
When you say that previous research has yielded inconsistent findings, reiterate how they have been inconsistent ( rather than referring to studies).
Line 440 – “Testing HRV helps confirm the autonomic nervous system activity and sympathetic nervous system/parasympathetic nervous system balance.” This sentence is unclear. What do you mean by confirm?
Line 445: “Therefore, students with stronger 445 autonomic nervous system responses (i.e., more significant reductions in HRV and 446 parasympathetic activity in response to assessments), and, suggestively, greater autonomic 447 flexibility, have a positive effect on higher performance [56].”
Line 447: future studies
Line 551 – “First, the current findings 552 could only indicate the one-way possible causal relationship between HRV and performance; 553 that is, higher stress (lower HRV) could contribute to higher performance.” If you only tested for differences in groups, how can the relationship be causal?
Line 559 – “Further studies may dig data into analysing” – dig data?
A clarification/ discussion of what “optimal” stress levels is necessary.
In terms of the scientific and societal motivation of this study, I find the view presented is at times to narrow. I think it is important how these findings might generalize elsewhere. Instead of focusing so much on how this is relevant for nursing assesment, I think it is also important to motivate the importance of your study from a more fundamental perspective.
With regards to my point concerning findings pertaining to gender in the discussion – I still suggest you remove any speculation, especially considering your findings were insignificant.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0293509.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
28 Jun 2023

Response to reviewers
We thank the Editor and Reviewers for their time and consideration. We have modified the manuscript in response to the comments. For your convenience, the line and page numbers referenced below refer to the corresponding line and page numbers in the revised manuscript. The changes are highlighted in red in the manuscript, except for the part on changes resulting from editing.
Response to Editor:
Thank you very much for your comments. Our answers are as follows:
1. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Response to Editor comment No. 1: Thanks for your comments. We carefully checked the reference list and ensured that no retracted papers were cited. The reference list is complete.
Response to Reviewer #2:
The authors have considerably improved the manuscript, but there are still some points to be addressed:
Response: Thank you very much for your thorough review. Our responses are as follows:
1. Line 39: space missing (10min)
Response to Reviewer comment No. 1: We have now added the space between ‘10’ and ‘minutes’. Please refer to page 2, line 38.
2. Line 62: “Stress is a situation”. Revisit this definition – stress is not a situation. Definitions of stress and anxiety could be further elaborated upon/ contextualized.
Response to Reviewer comment No. 2: We have now revised the definition of stress. Further elaboration on students’ stress and anxiety was also added. Please refer to page 4, lines 61-70.
3. Line 94: “Additionally, evidence suggests that female students are more likely to focus their perceived stress on academic performance than male students [21].” This sentence is unclear. Are they more likely to attribute their stress to academic performance? Please clarify. In your response letter, you state gender differences to be a primary goal of your study – yet you do not discuss it much in depth in the introduction. What might be reasons for this gender difference? In what other domains can a gender difference be found. Also – are you referring to gender or sex differences? I presume the latter?
Response to Reviewer comment No. 3: We have now revised this sentence. Please refer to page 6, line 99.
As our secondary objective was to investigate the differences in perceived anxiety, HRV and performance between female and male students across (before, during and after) the mock skill competency assessment, we have now added more interpretations on sex differences. Please refer to page 6, lines 100-104.
Besides, we referred to sex differences in our study rather than gender differences. We have now revised the description. Please refer to page 7, line 121.
4. Line 97: “Alternatively” seems to be the incorrect connector. Alternatively to what?
Response to Reviewer comment No. 4: We have now revised the description. Please refer to page 6, line 105. 
5. On page 6, you motivate the importance of this study in terms of incorporating stress measurement as a part of the assessment. What would be ethical implications of this? Would knowing that stress levels are being measured also possibly lead to increased anxiety?
Response to Reviewer comment No. 5: We agreed that it might lead to increased anxiety if students know that stress levels are being measured, especially when self-reported questionnaires are heavily relied on for measuring stress. As such, we attempted to analyse and interpret the changes in the cognitive and psychological states of students during the examination process by measuring the physio-psychological reactions. Physio-psychological response is an objective indicator, which can explain the state of the object under investigation at various levels without undue interference or influence on learning/examination. As an index to evaluate the physiological adaptability of the participants to a changing environment in skill assessment, the test of heart rate variability is recognised as useful and scientific in confirming the autonomic nervous system activity and balance level in objectively evaluating the psychological and emotional states of an individual [1]. In addition, students were required to arrive at the assessment venue 30 minutes before the assessment. They rested for at least 20 minutes before the measure, breathing spontaneously without talking. 
Nonetheless, we have added the limitation and ethical implications due to the observational and monitoring effects of this study. Please refer to page 29, lines 527-528. “Fourth, it is possible that the Hawthorne effect [2] might have influenced the student’s anxiety and stress levels due to observational and monitoring effects”.
1. Yoo HH, Yune SJ, Im SJ, Kam BS, Lee SY. Heart Rate Variability-Measured Stress and Academic Achievement in Medical Students. Med Princ Pract. 2021;30(2):193-200. doi: 10.1159/000513781.
2. Sedgwick P, Greenwood N. Understanding the Hawthorne effect. BMJ. 2015;351:h4672. doi: 10.1136/bmj.h4672.
6. Line 137: “Monitoring physiological HRV-based stress in undergraduate nursing 138 students before the actual assessment may help build evidence on new ways to evaluate 139 students’ performance and overall professional qualities in nursing programmes.” In line with my previous comment, what are the ethical considerations of this statement?
Response to Reviewer comment No. 6: Thank you for noting this. We have now added the limitation and ethical implications due to the observational and monitoring effects of this study. Please refer to page 29, lines 527-528. 
7. Line 305: I believe mean should be medians? The same goes for line 375. Wherever the statistics used were nonparametric, you should be reporting medians. Otherwise, Means and SDs.
Response to Reviewer comment No. 7: We have now changed ‘mean’ to ‘median’ in which nonparametric tests were used for data not normally distributed. Please refer to page 17, lines 311 and 313, page 18, line 335, and page 20 lines 368 and 371, page 21, line 373 and 376.
8. Formatting: (p > 0.05) (Table 2) >> (p > 0.05, Table 2)
Response to Reviewer comment No. 8: Thanks for noting this. We carefully checked the formatting issue and revised it accordingly. Please refer to page 17, lines 318-319, and page 20, line 362. 
9. In the discussion, 2nd paragraph, you discuss the fact that there were no differences between anticipatory stress and stress during/ after the assessment. No differences were present between different levels of performers and anticipatory stress. Would the fact that this was a mock exam, with no real consequences, have led to these null results? I would be interested if there is any more literature out there on anticipatory stress, and possibly interactions with trait anxiety, for example.
Response to Reviewer comment No. 9: Thank you for highlighting this. We do discuss that no significant differences were reported 10 minutes before the assessment, however, significant differences were shown between the three groups during and 10 minutes after the assessment. Concerning the similar levels of anticipatory stress, we can find that the mock skill assessment stress exists and there are significant differences between the three groups during and 10 minutes after the assessment. We added further discussion about the potential reasons for the non-significant anticipatory stress between the three groups before the mock skill assessment. Please refer to page 23, lines 419-423.
10. When you say that previous research has yielded inconsistent findings, reiterate how they have been inconsistent (rather than referring to studies).
Response to Reviewer comment No. 10: Thank you for your comment. We have now added specific descriptions of the inconsistent findings from previous studies. Please refer to pages 24, lines 427-431. 
11. Line 440 – “Testing HRV helps confirm the autonomic nervous system activity and sympathetic nervous system/parasympathetic nervous system balance.” This sentence is unclear. What do you mean by confirm?
Response to Reviewer comment No. 11: We have now further elaborated on this point. Please refer to pages 24-25, lines 443-453.
12. Line 445: “Therefore, students with stronger 445 autonomic nervous system responses (i.e., more significant reductions in HRV and 446 parasympathetic activity in response to assessments), and, suggestively, greater autonomic 447 flexibility, have a positive effect on higher performance [56].”
Response to Reviewer comment No. 12: Thanks for your comments. We further revised this sentence to make it clearer and coherent within the context. Hope the revised version with further elaborations can ease your concern. Please refer to pages 24-25, lines 446-453.
13. Line 447: future studies
Response to Reviewer comment No. 13: We have now revised the description. Please refer to page 25, line 453. 
14. Line 551 – “First, the current findings 552 could only indicate the one-way possible causal relationship between HRV and performance; 553 that is, higher stress (lower HRV) could contribute to higher performance.” If you only tested for differences in groups, how can the relationship be causal?
Response to Reviewer comment No. 14: We have now deleted ‘causal’ for the relationship between HRV and performance. Please refer to page 30, line 557.
15. Line 559 – “Further studies may dig data into analysing” – dig data?
Response to Reviewer comment No. 15: We have now revised the description. Please refer to page 31, line 564.
16. A clarification/ discussion of what “optimal” stress levels is necessary.
Response to Reviewer comment No. 16: Thanks for your comments. A clarification of an optimal stress level was added. Please refer to page 31, lines 567-570. We also highlighted the significance of an optimal level of stress in the Background. Please refer to page 7, lines 123-127.
17. In terms of the scientific and societal motivation of this study, I find the view presented is at times too narrow. I think it is important how these findings might generalize elsewhere. Instead of focusing so much on how this is relevant for nursing assessment, I think it is also important to motivate the importance of your study from a more fundamental perspective.
Response to Reviewer comment No. 17: We do agree that highlighting the importance of this study is needed, not only from the perspective of highlighting the importance of HRV measurement applied in nursing curriculums. Hence, we not only highlighted the importance of developing wellness initiatives (e.g. stress management and resilience promotion) in health professional education programme (page 29, lines 536-541), but we also added implications to help understand the mechanism of stress response in student population. Please refer to page 30, lines 549-555. 
18. With regards to my point concerning findings pertaining to gender in the discussion – I still suggest you remove any speculation, especially considering your findings were insignificant.
Response to Reviewer comment No. 18: Thank you for highlighting this. We have now deleted the discussion on non-significant sex differences in perceived anxiety and HRV before and after the assessment.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0293509.r005Decision Letter 2
UsecheSergio A.Academic Editor© 2023 Sergio A. Useche2023Sergio A. Usechehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
16 Oct 2023

Nursing students’ perceived anxiety and heart rate variability in mock skill competency assessment
PONE-D-22-31368R2
Dear Dr. Wong,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Sergio A. Useche, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
The remaining changes made by the authors are OK. I can accept the paper in its current status.
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0293509.r006Acceptance letter
UsecheSergio A.Academic Editor© 2023 Sergio A. Useche2023Sergio A. Usechehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
18 Oct 2023

PONE-D-22-31368R2 
Nursing students’ perceived anxiety and heart rate variability in mock skill competency assessment 
Dear Dr. Wong:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Sergio A. Useche 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE