Environ Health Perspect253envhperEnvironmental Health Perspectives0091-67651552-9924American Chemical SocietyPMC1241176PMC1241176.1124117612411761192974110.1289/ehp.02110s2297sc271_5_18351Research ArticleFrom asthma to AirBeat: community-driven monitoring of fine particles and black carbon in Roxbury, Massachusetts.
LohPennSugerman-BrozanJodiWigginsStandrickNoilesDavidArchibaldCeceliaAlternatives for Community & Environment, Inc., Roxbury, Massachusetts, USA.42002110Suppl 2122669297301010420020811200504092018Asthma is an ongoing environmental justice concern in Roxbury, an urban neighborhood of Boston, Massachusetts. Residents, especially local youth, were the first to investigate the potential links between high asthma rates and air pollution, particularly from diesel buses and trucks. A youth-led march for clean air and community air monitoring projects drew governmental and media attention to these problems. In 1998, a collaboration of environmental justice, government, and research groups came together to develop a real-time air pollution monitoring system known as AirBeat. This community-based participatory research project was designed to answer community questions about whether there are pollution "hot spots" in Roxbury and the degree to which diesel emissions are contributing to health problems. AirBeat measures and reports levels of PM2.5 (particulate matter with a mass median aerodynamic diameter < or= to 2.5 microm), ozone, and black carbon on an hourly basis. These data are accessible via a website, telephone hotline, and a flag warning system. AirBeat is successful because community residents and organizations participate as equal partners with an equitable share of funding. The project also promotes a community sense of ownership and pride. Dozens of youth have developed leadership and scientific skills. The media have extensively covered the project as a community victory. The data support the claim that Dudley Square in Roxbury is a hot spot for air pollution. This information is now being used to advocate for alternative fuel transit buses and other clean air measures. Finally, this project has strengthened community partnerships with research and governmental institutions.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlyyespmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes
 Environmental Health Perspectives * VOLUME 110 | SUPPLEMENT 2 | April 2002 297
Background
In this article we describe the AirBeat project
and analyze this community-based research
effort from the perspective of the commu-
nity-based participants. AirBeat is a real-time
air monitoring system that measures levels of
PM2.5 (particulate matter with a mass
median aerodynamic diameter 2.5 m),
black carbon, and ozone and reports these
through a website, telephone hotline, and
flag warning system. The AirBeat partners
include Alternatives for Community &
Environment (ACE), Harvard School of
Public Health (HSPH), Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP), Northeast States for Coordinated Air
Use Management (NESCAUM), and Suffolk
County Conservation District (SCCD).
Asthma and Environmental Justice
The AirBeat project was initiated to address
concerns in Roxbury, Massachusetts, about
high asthma rates and other respiratory ill-
nesses related to air pollution. Roxbury is a
predominantly low-income community of
color located in the heart of Boston. Like
many inner-city communities, there is wide
recognition among residents that asthma is
affecting families in epidemic proportions.
Asthma hospitalization rates in 1997 in this
neighborhood of 60,000 people were the
highest in the state--almost 5 times the state
average (1). In March 2001, two young
people 12 and 16 years of age from the com-
munity died in the same week as a result of
acute asthma attacks (2) (Figure 1).
Though asthma has been a problem for
many years, it is only in the last 5 years that
asthma has been framed as a problem of envi-
ronmental health and environmental justice.
Our organization, ACE, has been part of a
growing grassroots environmental justice
movement in Boston that has expanded the
asthma issue from a medical problem for the
individual to an environmental problem for
the whole community. A number of environ-
mental justice issues have been driven by
concerns over asthma, including excessive
traffic and automobile emissions, particularly
from diesel vehicles, substandard housing,
poor air quality in schools, and limited access
to quality health care. Based in Roxbury,
ACE has been building the power of lower
income communities and communities of
color in Greater Boston to eradicate environ-
mental racism and to achieve environmental
justice since 1993.
Youth, especially, have been key envi-
ronmental justice leaders in Roxbury.
Through ACE's Roxbury Environmental
Empowerment Project (REEP), youth iden-
tify and solve environmental and public
health problems in their communities
through an in-school curriculum and after-
school internship program. It was REEP
youth, after learning about high asthma
rates, who began to ask why Roxbury and
surrounding neighborhoods were suffering
so much from this disease.
In 1996, REEP youth at several schools
began mapping various sources of air pollu-
tion in Roxbury, including nail and hair
salons, solid waste facilities, and bus and
truck depots. One of the major findings was
that there were more than 15 bus and truck
depots garaging more than 1,150 diesel
buses and trucks within 1.5 miles of Dudley
Square, a major commercial and residential
hub in Roxbury (3). Though they also found
a high concentration of other polluting facil-
ities, these students chose to focus on diesel
buses and trucks for several reasons. First,
diesel vehicles are among the dirtiest pol-
luters on the road and are especially high
emitters of fine PM, which can penetrate
deeply into the lungs and trigger asthma
attacks. Another reason was that diesel tran-
sit buses are operated by a government
agency, which can be held accountable to
the community.
This work culminated in an "Anti-Idling
Day" in October 1997. Working with ACE
lawyers, the youth learned that there was a
Massachusetts law limiting engine idling to
only 5 min. More than 75 students from
Nathan Hale Elementary, Greater Egleston
Community High School (GECHS), and
Community Academy (a high school)
This article is part of the monograph Advancing
Environmental Justice through Community-Based
Participatory Research.
Address correspondence to P. Loh, Alternatives
for Community & Environment, Inc., 2343
Washington St., 2nd Fl., Roxbury, MA 02119
USA. Telephone: (617) 442-3343. Fax: (617) 442-
2425. E-mail: penn@ace-ej.org
This work was made possible by a collaborative
grant from the Environmental Monitoring for
Public Access and Community Tracking
(EMPACT) program of the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (sorting code 98-NCERQA-S1).
The authors are grateful for all of the support pro-
vided by our partners in the AirBeat project, in par-
ticular M. Goode of the Suffolk County
Conservation District, G. Allen of the Harvard
School of Public Health, L. Alter of Northeast States
for Coordinated Air Use Management, and J.
Sheehan of the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection. The authors also thank
T. Greene of the JSI Research and Training Institute
for her technical assistance and the Science in the
Community program of the Massachusetts Cultural
Council, which provided additional funding.
Received 13 August 2001; accepted 11 January
2002.
Environmental Justice
Asthma is an ongoing environmental justice concern in Roxbury, an urban neighborhood of
Boston, Massachusetts. Residents, especially local youth, were the first to investigate the potential
links between high asthma rates and air pollution, particularly from diesel buses and trucks. A
youth-led march for clean air and community air monitoring projects drew governmental and
media attention to these problems. In 1998, a collaboration of environmental justice, govern-
ment, and research groups came together to develop a real-time air pollution monitoring system
known as AirBeat. This community-based participatory research project was designed to answer
community questions about whether there are pollution "hot spots" in Roxbury and the degree to
which diesel emissions are contributing to health problems. AirBeat measures and reports levels
of PM2.5 (particulate matter with a mass median aerodynamic diameter 2.5 m), ozone, and
black carbon on an hourly basis. These data are accessible via a website, telephone hotline, and a
flag warning system. AirBeat is successful because community residents and organizations partici-
pate as equal partners with an equitable share of funding. The project also promotes a community
sense of ownership and pride. Dozens of youth have developed leadership and scientific skills.
The media have extensively covered the project as a community victory. The data support the
claim that Dudley Square in Roxbury is a hot spot for air pollution. This information is now
being used to advocate for alternative fuel transit buses and other clean air measures. Finally, this
project has strengthened community partnerships with research and governmental institutions.
Key words: asthma, black carbon, community-based participatory research, environmental justice,
particulate matter. Environ Health Perspect 110(suppl 2):297-301 (2002).
http://ehpnet1.niehs.nih.gov/docs/2002/suppl-2/297-301loh/abstract.html
From Asthma to AirBeat: Community-Driven Monitoring of Fine Particles and
Black Carbon in Roxbury, Massachusetts
Penn Loh, Jodi Sugerman-Brozan, Standrick Wiggins, David Noiles, and Cecelia Archibald
Alternatives for Community & Environment, Inc., Roxbury, Massachusetts, USA
decided to educate their community about
the law, which was not enforced. They
marched in the street, handing out pollution
"tickets" to educate drivers about the law
and about how idling affects health. This
action drew significant newspaper and televi-
sion coverage and the support of top-level
environmental officials. Anti-Idling Day also
launched a new effort, the Clean Buses for
Boston coalition, to advocate for the replace-
ment of the public transit system's diesel bus
fleet with cleaner, alternative-fueled buses.
Particulate Air Monitoring
in Roxbury
At the same time that these youth brought
attention to the link between asthma and air
pollution, other community groups were also
working with ACE to address these issues. In
spring 1997, ACE worked with several com-
munity groups in Greater Boston to conduct
pilot fine-particulate monitoring projects.
With technical support and equipment from
HSPH and NESCAUM, ACE trained resi-
dents to collect particulate samples. Residents
of the Egleston Square Neighborhood
Association (ESNA) conducted an all-day
monitoring project collecting simultaneous
samples of PM10 (particulate matter with a
mass median aerodynamic diameter 10
m) and PM2.5 at a busy intersection and in
a resident's backyard off the main street. As
expected, the data showed that the levels of
PM at the busy intersection were higher than
those in the backyard. But the residents
gained much more than just a day of data.
They learned how particulate pollution is
monitored and gained confidence in develop-
ing their own hypothesis that air pollution
"hot spots" might be contributing to high
rates of asthma.
The youth Anti-Idling Day and
community monitoring projects captured
the attention of state environmental offi-
cials in several ways. First, demands were
made directly to state officials to enforce
the idling law. Second, newspaper and tele-
vision coverage elevated the issue to a com-
munity priority. Third, community groups
sought to collaborate with environmental
officials at the city, state, and federal levels
as well as with academic and research insti-
tutions that lent scientific credibility. Thus,
in late 1997, the DEP approached ACE,
ESNA, and the Committee for Boston
Public Housing to ask for our assistance in
siting a PM2.5 monitor in Roxbury as part
of a new network to determine the state's
compliance with the PM2.5 standards of the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(U.S. EPA) set earlier that year. Before then,
there were no official state air monitors in
Roxbury. After examining several sites, the
DEP chose to site its monitor in Dudley
Square, one block from the busiest bus sta-
tion in the public transit system. This deci-
sion to site a monitoring station in
Roxbury, along with the relationships devel-
oped in the process, led to the formation of
the AirBeat project team.
AirBeat: More than a Monitor
AirBeat Team
The AirBeat team was convened in early
1998 and includes ACE, DEP, HSPH,
NESCAUM, and SCCD. This collaboration
applied for and successfully received funding
for a 2-year project from the U.S. EPA
Environmental Monitoring for Public Access
and Community Tracking (EMPACT) pro-
gram. The project was titled "Time-Relevant
Communication of Ozone and Particulate
Air Pollution Data: A Pilot Project to Raise
Public Awareness and Promote Exposure
Reduction" (4).
As described above, all the partners
except for SCCD had already developed suc-
cessful working relationships. SCCD had
been working with ACE on a community
mapping project but had not previously
worked with the other partners. SCCD com-
prises five elected residents of Suffolk
County serving on a voluntary basis and has
an office in Roxbury.
SCCD was the lead agency in the appli-
cation to the U.S. EPA and assumed
responsibility for project management.
ACE was the lead partner in community
education and outreach. HSPH and DEP
were responsible for setting up and operat-
ing the monitors. NESCAUM developed
the data management center and the web-
site for the project.
The development of the proposal itself
took more than 6 months, with the part-
ners meeting at least monthly, often at
ACE's office in Roxbury. During this pro-
posal-writing period, further trust was
developed, and ground rules were estab-
lished for how to work together. The com-
munity-based partners ACE and SCCD
demanded that the project provide equi-
table resources, especially for the public
education and communication components
of the project, to ensure that the data
would be accessible by residents. A website
as the only means of data access was not
acceptable, given the lower rates of com-
puter ownership in the community. SCCD
Environmental Justice * Loh et al.
298 VOLUME 110 | SUPPLEMENT 2 | April 2002 * Environmental Health Perspectives
Figure 1. Asthma hospitalization rates across Boston's neighborhoods, 1994-1996. Rates are average annual
rates per 1,000 people. Data represent the number of hospital discharges with the diagnosis of asthma. Data
from Boston Public Health Commission (11).
1.1-2.6
2.6-4.1
4.1-5.7
5.7-7.2
7.2-8.7
Asthma rate
Jamaica
Plain
Roxbury
North
Dorchester
South
Dorchester
2 0 2 Miles
in particular emphasized the need for the
project to build capacity in the community,
including ownership of the monitors and
the training and hiring of local residents
and youth where possible. ACE pushed the
project to focus on research questions that
were already established by youth and com-
munity groups. These questions included
the following:
* To what extent are diesel vehicle emissions
contributing to high asthma rates and
other health problems?
* Does Dudley Square have elevated levels of
air pollution compared with other areas of
Boston?
Objectives
The objectives of the project, as stated in the
final proposal, were to
* deploy a reliable configuration of real-time
monitors for PM, ozone, and black carbon
(a marker of diesel emissions);
* develop a data management center to
aggregate, standardize, and archive the data
from the monitors and to provide quality
assurance;
* develop multiple communication venues
to ensure widespread access to these data;
* promote use of these data by community
residents to improve daily decisions to
reduce harmful effects of air pollutants;
* strengthen partnerships among community
institutions receptive to learning about and
using air quality data, such as schools,
community health centers, and housing
developments; and
* bolster the community's effectiveness in
shaping local policies for transportation,
development, and construction projects
affecting air pollution.
Results
Monitoring and Data Management
System
Monitors that continuously measure
ozone, PM2.5, and black carbon were suc-
cessfully installed and are now operating
on the monitoring site (5). In addition,
there is a meteorologic station as well as
other DEP monitors for carbon monoxide,
sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, PM2.5, and
particulate speciation. The data from the
monitors are downloaded via modem to a
computer at NESCAUM's office in down-
town Boston, subjected to quality assur-
ance, and stored for use by the data
communication venues. The AirBeat mon-
itors are now maintained as part of the
DEP's regular operations at the site. DEP
technician Damon Chaplin is a local resi-
dent of the community who regularly gives
tours of the site to curious passersby and to
students from area schools.
Communication Venues
Website. Three systems for disseminating the
data from the AirBeat monitors were devel-
oped, while a fourth is still being pursued.
The first is the website (6).
This website reports data on a daily,
weekly, and monthly basis. It also is linked
to a live "hazecam" photo of downtown
Boston. Except for black carbon, the data are
reported using the U.S. EPA Air Quality
Index (AQI) rather than in absolute concen-
trations (Figure 2). The site also contains
related information on regional ozone,
adverse health effects, pollution sources,
actions to reduce exposure, and links to
other websites. In spring 2001, the site
received an average of 42 hits per day.
Telephone. The second system is a tele-
phone hotline (617) 427-9500. Callers first
hear the current AQI for ozone and PM2.5.
Using the telephone keypad, callers can
obtain the specific index level as well as the
worst levels for today and yesterday. The
voice of the hotline is that of Cecelia
Archibald, an 18-year-old ACE youth intern.
Third, ACE's youth interns and students
from GECHS designed and established their
own Air Quality Flag Warning System. Flags
matching the colors of the U.S. EPA AQI
(7) are hoisted in Dudley Square and
Egleston Square each morning. The color of
the flag indicates the AQI for PM2.5 or
ozone, whichever is higher. Red corresponds
to an AQI of 100 or above, meaning
unhealthy for sensitive groups or unhealthy
for all. A yellow flag corresponds to an AQI
between 50 and 100, meaning moderate. A
green flag indicates an AQI from 0 to 50
and means that the air quality is healthy or
good. More than 25,000 people pass
through Dudley Square bus station each day,
which is across the street from the air quality
flag. In Egleston Square the flag is visible
from a major school bus stop and school
dropoff and loading area.
The fourth venue for data dissemination
is through local radio and television weather
reports. Although none of the stations have
yet to integrate AirBeat data into their
weather reports, we have approached the
major stations and have initial interest from
the local cable news channel. We chose to
develop this venue based on an initial youth
survey in 1999 of about 80 residents in
Dudley Square. The survey found a high
level of concern about air pollution and
asthma but only limited understanding
about the sources of air pollution (8).
Although 50% of respondents had family
members with asthma, only 10% were aware
that the state had installed an air monitor in
the area, and only 33% knew what PM was.
The survey also found that almost three
quarters would like to learn about air quality
data from the television.
Community Education
One of the most important results was
raising the level of knowledge within the
community of air pollution levels and health
impacts. One of the premises of AirBeat was
that data are only useful to the community if
they are widely accessible and residents have
the knowledge to interpret them. Through
AirBeat, educational programs were designed
for various audiences.
Youth education and training. Youth are
often the most impassioned and articulate
spokespeople for community issues. On the
basis of REEP's past experience, youth are
Environmental Justice * From asthma to AirBeat: community air monitoring
Environmental Health Perspectives * VOLUME 110 | SUPPLEMENT 2 | April 2002 299
Figure 2. Graph of AirBeat data from April 10 through May 9, 2001 (6).
150
100
50
9
6
3
Unhealthy
Moderate
Good
Air quality index
Air quality index
150
100
50
Ozone
PM2.5
Black carbon
Unhealthy
Moderate
Good
Concentration
(g/m3)
Apr
10
Apr
11
Apr
12
Apr
13
Apr
14
Apr
15
Apr
16
Apr
17
Apr
18
Apr
19
Apr
20
Apr
21
Apr
22
Apr
23
Apr
24
Apr
25
Apr
26
Apr
27
Apr
28
Apr
29
Apr
30
May
01
May
02
May
03
May
04
May
05
May
06
May
07
May
08
May
09
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
highly effective at educating their community
on asthma and air quality issues. For this pro-
ject, REEP integrated the AirBeat system
into its curriculum on air pollution and
health. The curriculum includes workshops
on how air pollution is produced, the adverse
health effects of different types of pollution,
and a focus on particulates and asthma. This
curriculum was delivered to more than 300
students from five area schools. These stu-
dents also toured the monitoring site, guided
by DEP staff person Damon Chaplin.
By intensively training a group of youth,
we expanded the ability of the project team
to do more outreach. As detailed below,
youth played leading roles in reaching out to
all of the other audiences. But more impor-
tant, the youth themselves became active
members of the project team and developed
entirely new communication venues that
were not part of the original proposal.
GECHS students conceived and developed
the flag warning system. The REEP interns
added the AirBeat monitoring site to their
environmental justice tours of Roxbury. This
site is a powerful example of what the com-
munity can achieve and is in stark contrast
to the other sites on the tour, which include
a major diesel bus garage, a former electro-
plating facility, and a run-down public park.
Community leaders and general public.
The project also promoted broad awareness of
AirBeat through two public events that were
well covered by the local media. The first was
the public launch of AirBeat in November
1999. The second event was the unveiling of
the flag system in Dudley Square in June
2000. This second event was held across from
Dudley bus station, which allowed more
passersby to learn about the monitoring sys-
tem. This was an intentional strategy we
employed to build more community sense of
ownership over the system. More than 150
people attended these events. The numerous
government agency and elected officials who
attended these events helped further the pub-
lic awareness of the project.
Local resident outreach. Youth have also
been the main conveyors of information on
AirBeat for other Roxbury residents.
Workshops, flyers, and surveys have all been
used to inform and educate the local commu-
nity. The youth survey in 1999 was conducted
not only to ascertain what people knew about
air quality but it was also an opportunity to
inform people that an air monitoring station
had been sited in the community (8). The
interns also developed a single-page flyer about
AirBeat, advertising its existence, purpose, and
ways to access the data.
AirBeat was also integrated into more
than 50 workshops conducted in the com-
munity by ACE staff and youth. These
workshops were conducted with tenants at
local housing developments in the Dudley
Square area, students in area schools, com-
munity health center programs, and at com-
munity conferences.
Disputes over message. In the process of
communicating AirBeat's purposes and its
data to the public, the project team experi-
enced tensions around communicating the
links between asthma and outdoor air pollu-
tion. Some of the research partners felt that
the community partners and the media over-
stated the degree to which diesel pollution
contributed to or caused asthma. They felt
the public was being misled into believing
that diesel pollution was the main source of
the asthma problem. Although ACE was
always careful to state that outdoor air pollu-
tion and diesel emissions trigger asthma
attacks and that there is no scientific cer-
tainty about the causes of asthma, the media
message often did not reflect that distinc-
tion. As a result, many residents that we
talked to did not make a distinction between
cause and exacerbation of asthma.
This tension, however, helped community
and research partners learn valuable lessons. As
a community organization accountable to resi-
dents, we learned that we have to be responsi-
ble in our communication of risk and that we
had to include other major factors such as
smoking and indoor air pollution in the
asthma problem in our communications. The
research partners learned more about how resi-
dents actually perceive the problem and that
these perceptions should not be minimized or
dismissed. Community residents are not so
much interested in conclusive scientific proof
of a causal link between asthma and diesel
emissions as they are about acting to decrease
public health threats.
Application of Data to Community
Problem Solving
In addition to people using the data for
daily decision making, one of the objectives
of AirBeat is to provide data for community
problem solving on air pollution. ACE staff
and youth compiled an air quality factsheet
that analyzes the data available so far and
provides background information on air
pollution (9).
The average PM2.5 concentration for the
15-month period from September 1999 to
December 2000 was 14.9 g/m3 (9). This
level is just under the U.S. EPA average
annual standard of 15 g/m3. In terms of the
combined AQI for PM2.5 and ozone, air qual-
ity was "good" (AQI 50) for 58% of the
time and "moderate" for the other 42% (9).
These data are also helping to answer the
question of whether Dudley is a local air pol-
lution hot spot. Many residents believe that
diesel bus and truck emissions are a signifi-
cant factor in Dudley's air quality. We com-
pared data from AirBeat with data from
identical PM2.5 and black carbon monitors
at HSPH, just over a mile away from
Dudley (Figure 3). Preliminary analysis
shows that PM2.5 levels in Dudley are
15-20% higher than those at the Harvard
site, whereas black carbon levels are about
22% higher in Dudley (9). During morning
and afternoon rush hours, black carbon lev-
els are 25-30% higher (9). These data begin
to confirm suspicions that Dudley is a hot
spot for PM2.5 and that diesel emissions sig-
nificantly increase the pollution levels.
This information was presented by REEP
interns David Noiles and Stanley Wiggins to
more than 30 community residents and city
officials at a workshop on the city-sponsored
Dudley Square Transportation and Air
Quality Study in January 2001. After this pre-
sentation, David and Stanley provided recom-
mendations to the study team for decreasing
air pollution. Many of their recommendations
were adopted in the final study, including
enforcement of the anti-idling law in Dudley
Square, conversion of diesel transit buses to
compressed natural gas, relocation of a local
transit bus yard, and upgrading of transit
service to Dudley Square (10).
Long-Term Outcomes
Harder to measure and quantify, but per-
haps the most important benefits of this
project, are the long-term outcomes. These
include the growth of the individuals
involved in the project, the perceptions
within the community of its own strength,
and the lasting partnerships among the
project team.
Environmental Justice * Loh et al.
300 VOLUME 110 | SUPPLEMENT 2 | April 2002 * Environmental Health Perspectives
Figure 3. Graph comparing black carbon soot levels measured in Dudley Square and HSPH.
Total daily
average
AM rush hour
average
PM rush hour
average
Winter daily
average
Summer daily
average
1,600
1,400
1,200
1,000
800
600
400
200
0
Black
carbon
soot
concentration
(ng/m
3
)
Dudley Square
HSPH
Youth Empowerment
Perhaps of all the participants in this project,
the ones who benefited the most were the
youth. The four REEP interns at ACE and
the several classes from GECHS involved in
this project not only became knowledgeable
about air pollution and monitoring, but exer-
cised key leadership skills such as public
speaking, strategizing, and educating others.
They were recognized by government officials
and the media for their leadership role and
expertise. In effect, this project helped them
become the local experts.
According to Cecelia Archibald, 18 years
old:
What I'm most proud of is I learned a lot about
air pollution and what I learned can really help
the community. Even people without computers
can call and find out what the air quality is and
choose how to spend their day.
Stanley Wiggins, 18 years old, says,
I consider the air monitor to be our greatest
accomplishment because it gives us concrete,
visual evidence as to why Roxbury is overbur-
dened by air pollution.
Frederick George, 20 years old, reflects
on his experience in AirBeat:
We have done great work so far, but now it is
time to take it to the next level. Now it is time to
really reduce the sources of pollution in our
neighborhood and lower the asthma rates in
Roxbury once and for all.
Community Ownership and Pride
The project also has long-term outcomes
affecting the way community residents view
their own community. All too often,
Roxbury and other urban neighborhoods are
portrayed negatively as crime-ridden areas
about which no one cares. This project
emphasized the community's leadership role.
Residents saw their own youth as the
experts. Well-respected community organi-
zations received funding and played central
roles in the project. These successes were
then applauded and held up as models by
the U.S. EPA, locally elected officials, and
other government officials. At the site itself,
the chief technician is a community resident.
There is immense pride that Roxbury was
able to develop a resource that no one else has.
This pride is rooted in the perception that the
project is "owned" by the community, rather
than a project that is brought in by outside
entities. This pride is itself a resource for the
community in other struggles.
According to Matthew Goode, the
AirBeat project's principal investigator and
commissioner of SCCD:
An additional benefit of the AirBeat project is its
potential as a vehicle for transfer of technology to
members of urban communities. Involvement of
high school youth is an important point of
departure for this goal.
Community-Research Partnerships
Finally, the project has strengthened the
relationships among the project team mem-
bers. This project was possible only because
of the relationships and trust that had been
developed in the years leading up to the
actual project. Now this trust is magnified
by the success of the project. Trust, which is
very difficult to build and very easy to lose, is
one of the key long-term benefits of AirBeat.
Lessons Learned for
Community-Based
Participatory Research
On the basis of our experience in this
project, we have learned there are many val-
ues to community-based participatory
research that extend far beyond the immedi-
ate research results. The most important out-
comes are the increased capacities of
individuals and organizations in the commu-
nity to understand the complexities of the
problem and to organize and advocate for
policy changes that will result in real health
and environmental benefits. Participating in
setting the research questions and guiding
the project as equal partners help promote a
greater sense of ownership over the problem.
Rather than seeing themselves as victims
requiring an outside savior, they begin to see
themselves as the key change agents.
In our work, we defined the problem as
excessive adverse health effects of asthma due
to poor air quality. Instead of only seeking
more health care, we also focused on chang-
ing the underlying environmental conditions.
The community-based research partnerships
that we pursued were built on this definition
of the problem. AirBeat helped and is contin-
uing to support our hypothesis that Roxbury
has areas of relatively high air pollution and
that diesel emissions are a major contributor
of air pollution in Dudley Square.
AirBeat was successful as a community-
based research project for two key reasons.
First, the relationships we established were
equitable from the start, which developed the
trust necessary for productive collaboration.
The research partners understood their role
as resources to help educate the community
about the links between air pollution and
health. The project and the research ques-
tions were not conceived first by researchers
but by the community. When a proposal was
developed and funding sought, the commu-
nity partners were equal participants and
received an equitable share of the funding.
The second key reason for AirBeat's
success was the degree to which we promoted
community ownership of the project. The
outreach and education components of the
project were conducted by respected and
well-established community groups. Local
youth were trained and became an important
part of the project team. The media were
used to portray the project as a community
victory. Even the state agency's main staff
person for maintaining the site was a local
resident. All these strategies helped to
counter the negative impressions that resi-
dents often have about research projects con-
ducted in the community by predominantly
White researchers. In fact, the project is now
a source of pride for the community.
On the basis of these lessons learned, we
have several recommendations for researchers
pursuing community-based partnerships:
* Community-based organizations must be
equal partners in all phases of the research
project, especially in the definition of the
research agenda, and receive an equitable
share of funding.
* Community education and outreach
should be integrated into project from the
beginning and, to the extent possible, be
delivered by community-based institutions,
so equal value can be given to local knowl-
edge and residents can be educated about
the purpose of the project.
* Projects should seek to involve technical
people from the community and/or
researchers of color to help bridge the gap
between researchers and community and
to serve as role models for youth.
* Projects should be made visible in the
community and through the media to
spark interest in the project and help com-
munity take ownership of the project.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. Massachusetts Division of Health Care Finance and
Policy. 1997. State of Massachusetts Asthma
Preventable Hospitalizations FY1996-1997. Boston,
MA:Executive Office of Health and Human Services.
2. Barnard A. Asthma Deaths Highlight Dangers. Boston
Globe. Metro/Region Section, p. A1, March 31, 2001.
3. Alternatives for Community & Environment. Unpublished
map from internal survey. Roxbury, MA:ACE, September
1997.
4. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Environmental
Monitoring for Public Access and Community Tracking.
Available: http://www.epa.gov/empact/ [accessed 11
July 2001].
5. Technical specifications for these monitors are available
from Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection, Jerry Sheehan, Chief of the Air Assessment
Branch. Telephone: (617) 727-9015, ext. 309.
6. U.S. EPA/Massachusetts Dept. of EPA. Available:
http://www.airbeat.org [accessed 9 May 2001].
7. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Air Quality Index
Overview. Available: http://www.epa.vic.gov.au/aq/
abindex.htm [accessed 11 July 2001].
8. Wiggins S, Davis T, Noiles D. Air Pollution Survey.
Roxbury Environmental Empowerment Project,
Alternatives for Community & Environment. Roxbury,
MA:ACE, November 1999.
9. Alternatives for Community & Environment. Roxbury Air
Quality Factsheet. Roxbury, MA:ACE, January 2001.
10. Boston Redevelopment Authority. Dudley Square
Transportation and Air Quality Study. December 2001.
11. Boston Public Health Commission. Office of Research,
Health Assessment, and Data Systems. Boston, MA, 1999.
Environmental Justice * From asthma to AirBeat: community air monitoring
Environmental Health Perspectives * VOLUME 110 | SUPPLEMENT 2 | April 2002 301