pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS One1932-6203PLOSPMC12091819PMC12091819.112091819120918194039292110.1371/journal.pone.0322521PONE-D-24-309641Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyMedical MicrobiologyMicrobial PathogensViral PathogensImmunodeficiency VirusesHIVMedicine and Health SciencesPathology and Laboratory MedicinePathogensMicrobial PathogensViral PathogensImmunodeficiency VirusesHIVBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsVirusesViral PathogensImmunodeficiency VirusesHIVBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsVirusesImmunodeficiency VirusesHIVBiology and life sciencesOrganismsVirusesRNA virusesRetrovirusesLentivirusHIVBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyMedical MicrobiologyMicrobial PathogensViral PathogensRetrovirusesLentivirusHIVMedicine and Health SciencesPathology and Laboratory MedicinePathogensMicrobial PathogensViral PathogensRetrovirusesLentivirusHIVBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsVirusesViral PathogensRetrovirusesLentivirusHIVPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsGender GroupingsTransgender PeopleMedicine and Health SciencesEpidemiologyMedical Risk FactorsPeople and placesGeographical locationsNorth AmericaCanadaMedicine and Health SciencesDiagnostic MedicineVirus TestingPeople and placesGeographical locationsNorth AmericaCanadaOntarioMedicine and health sciencesDiagnostic medicineHIV diagnosis and managementResearch and Analysis MethodsResearch DesignQualitative StudiesSexually transmitted and blood-borne infections in transgender and non-binary people in Canada: A scoping review
Sexually transmitted and blood-borne infections in transgender and non-binary people in Canada: Scoping reviewhttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-2929-4252BigioJacobConceptualizationInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing ButlerMeganInvestigationMethodologyValidationVisualizationWriting – review & editing SoodSwatiMethodologyWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7041-1556CoxJosephWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0009-0003-0265-4841JacksonBethWriting – review & editing MarshallZackWriting – review & editing AhoJosephineConceptualizationSupervisionWriting – review & editing 1
Sexually Transmitted and Blood-Borne Infections Surveillance Division, Public Health Agency of Canada, Montreal, Québec, Canada2
Library Services Division, Health Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada3
Department of Epidemiology, Biostatistics & Occupational Health, McGill University, Montreal, Québec, Canada4
Health Equity Policy Directorate, Public Health Agency of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada5
Department of Community Health Services, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada6
School of Social Work, McGill University, Montreal, Québec, CanadaDemantDanielEditor files.

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the manuscript and its files.

## Introduction
Canada was the first country in the world to provide census data on transgender and non-binary people [ ]. In the 2021 census, 100,815 people in Canada aged 15 and older identified as transgender or non-binary, accounting for 0.33% of the population [ ]. One of the priorities of the Federal 2SLGBQTI+ Action Plan, released in 2022, is to strengthen data and evidence-based policy making by improving data collection, analysis, research, and knowledge on Two-Spirit, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, intersex and other people who identify as part of sexual and gender diverse (2SLGBQTI+) communities in Canada [ ]. In February 2024, the Government of Canada’s Sexually Transmitted and Blood-Borne Infections (STBBI) Action Plan for 2024–2030 was released [ ], guided by the earlier Pan-Canadian STBBI Framework for Action [ ]. The STBBI Action Plan notes that STBBIs do not affect all people equally and that contextual factors, like the social determinants of health, and legal, political and historical factors, influence vulnerability and resilience to STBBIs [ ]. The STBBI Action Plan identifies several key populations affected by STBBIs in Canada, including transgender and non-binary people.
On a global scale, the World Health Organization (WHO) describes transgender and gender diverse people as a key population at risk of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and other STBBIs [ ]. The WHO highlights the role of stigma and discrimination in reducing access to testing, prevention, and treatment services; in creating barriers to safer sex and safer injecting; and in leading to increased risk exposures, including unprotected sex, among transgender and gender diverse people [ ]. Systematic reviews of global data show that transgender people are disproportionately burdened by HIV [ ], hepatitis B virus (HBV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) [ ] and that data on other STBBIs are limited [ ]. Other systematic reviews have shown that transgender people experience high levels of stigma and discrimination in healthcare settings [ ] and that stigma increases the vulnerability of transgender women to HIV [ ]. However, almost none of the studies included in these systematic reviews were conducted in Canada.
In this scoping review, we explore the evidence published in the past ten years on STBBI prevalence; risk exposures; treatment for STBBIs; testing for STBBIs; and use of healthcare and prevention services, among transgender and non-binary people in Canada.

## Methods
We conducted a scoping review of the literature to identify publications relating to STBBIs in transgender and non-binary people in Canada corresponding to five topic areas:
STBBI prevalence
Sexual and injection drug use-related risk exposures
Testing for STBBIs (including barriers and facilitators to accessing testing)
Treatment for STBBIs (including barriers and facilitators to accessing treatment)
Use of prevention and other healthcare services (including pre-exposure and post-exposure prophylaxis)
We compiled a list of 21 STBBIs and related conditions: bacterial vaginosis; chlamydia; epididymitis; gonorrhoea; granuloma inguinale; HIV/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS); hepatitis A virus (HAV); HBV; HCV; herpes simplex virus (HSV); human papillomavirus (HPV); human T-lymphotropic virus (HTLV); molluscum contagiosum; pelvic inflammatory disease; phthirus; proctitis; scabies; syphilis; trichomoniasis; urethritis; and vaginitis.
We did not publicly register a review protocol. We report our review according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses Extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR) [ ].

## Search strategy
In consultation with a librarian (SS), a search strategy was developed to identify relevant literature in six databases (MEDLINE (Ovid); Embase; CAB Abstracts; Global Health; PsycInfo; and SCOPUS) using terms relating to transgender and non-binary people, the 21 STBBIs listed above and Canada. The search was limited to results published between January 1, 2013 and September 1, 2023, with no language filters applied. The search period was chosen to focus on estimates of STBBI prevalence, and data on the other topic areas, that are relatively up-to-date. We also conducted a grey literature search of information published on the 10 provincial and three territorial public health department websites and on the websites of eight relevant community organisations (Action Canada for Sexual Health & Rights; BC Hepatitis C Network; Canadian Aboriginal AIDS Network; CATIE; Community-Based Research Centre; Gay Men’s Sexual Health Alliance; Ontario HIV Treatment Network; and REACH Nexus) which are all prominent organisations we identified through our searching. We searched each public health and community organisation website using the advanced search function on google.ca. Each web address (e.g., www.albertahealthservices.ca or www.catie.ca) was entered using the “site:” function and was searched using terms relating to transgender people and the 21 STBBIs. Up to 60 results for each search were assessed, as this corresponded to the first page of results on the advanced search function on google.ca. Full search terms and details of the grey literature search are given in ( ).

## Study selection
Search results were imported into Covidence (Covidence, Melbourne, Australia) for screening, which automatically de-duplicates results. Two reviewers (JB and MB) then independently conducted title/abstract and full-text screening. One reviewer (MB) conducted the grey literature search, flagging potentially relevant webpages which were then reviewed by the second reviewer (JB). A pre-defined set of inclusion and exclusion criteria were created to guide the assessment of each article or webpage, though the criteria were refined during the screening process in line with standard practice for scoping reviews. Conflicts at each stage were resolved through discussion between the two reviewers. One reviewer (MB) also screened the reference lists of all included studies for relevant papers and screened reference lists and other data sources mentioned in the grey literature for relevant information. Potentially appropriate sources were then reviewed by the second reviewer (JB).
We did not prespecify our own definitions of “transgender” and “non-binary” but used the terms as they were presented in the literature. We included qualitative, quantitative and mixed-methods studies relating to the five topic areas mentioned above, including theses and dissertations. We excluded articles or webpages that were published before 2013; were not about transgender or non-binary people; did not contain disaggregated data on transgender or non-binary people; did not contain disaggregated data on Canada; were editorials or commentaries with no quantitative or qualitative data; did not include outcomes relating to the five topic areas mentioned above; or were case studies or short case series (with fewer than ten participants). We also excluded literature reviews and other forms of evidence synthesis identified through title/abstract screening after screening their reference lists for relevant studies. Conference or poster abstracts for which a full article from the same study was already contained in our search were excluded as duplicates. If the full article was not located in our search, we attempted to find one or locate the full poster and contacted authors for further details. When further details could not be retrieved, we excluded the abstract.

## Data extraction
Data were extracted using a standardised form created in Microsoft Word (Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA, USA). Data extraction for each included study was performed by one of the two reviewers (JB and MB) and checked by the other reviewer. Extracted data included study location; study name; study time period; study design; population characteristics; STBBI-related findings; and notes on the definition of transgender and non-binary people or other relevant terms used in the paper. For some grey literature results from provinces and territories, a custom extraction form was created corresponding to the nature of the available data.

## Data synthesis
Extracted data were summarised in descriptive tables. Due to substantial heterogeneity between study settings and outcome measures, no quantitative data syntheses were undertaken. Included studies used different terminology when referring to populations of men who have sex with men. For consistency, we have used the term gay, bisexual and other men who have sex with men (GBMSM) throughout this manuscript. For other populations, we used terminology as presented in the studies.

## Expert interviews
Alongside our scoping review, we also interviewed a convenience sample of 18 experts on how STBBIs affect transgender and non-binary people in Canada. The aim of the interviews was to understand their views on the state of the field and to learn about recent and ongoing research on the topic. Twelve (67%) of the experts were academic researchers, five (28%) worked with transgender-focused community organisations and one (6%) worked in government. Around half of the experts identified as transgender or non-binary.
Interviews were semi-structured. We asked the experts for their views on the state of STBBI research and surveillance among transgender and non-binary people in Canada; about data gaps in the field; about recent and ongoing research in the field; and for suggestions for future work they thought would be valuable. We prepared an interview guide that asked broadly about these topics but discussions were largely guided by the responses of the experts towards the topics they felt were most important in the field. We chose this interview strategy because it mirrored the search strategy of our scoping review, which was deliberately broad and exploratory, aiming to identify data on a range of factors affecting STBBI epidemiology and care in these populations without pre-specifying precise outcomes we were searching for. Interviews were conducted by two authors (JB and MB), in some cases in conjunction with a third author (JA), between December 2023 and April 2024. Interviews lasted between 30 and 60 minutes and were conducted virtually.

## Results
After deduplication of search results from databases, 310 unique records were identified for screening. Of these, 248 records were excluded after title/abstract screening, leaving 62 records (of which 13 were conference abstracts). Sixteen of the 62 records met our eligibility criteria for inclusion. Of the 46 excluded records, the main reasons for exclusion were duplicate (n = 14), a lack of data on our topics of interest (n = 12), a lack of disaggregated data on Canada (n = 5) and a lack of disaggregated data on transgender or non-binary people (n = 5). The full list of reasons for exclusion is given in the PRISMA flowchart shown in .
 In addition, 259 records were identified through the grey literature searches, citation searching and through requesting further details from the authors of conference abstracts. Of these, five studies and five provincial reports met our eligibility criteria for inclusion, resulting in a total of 26 included publications. The 21 studies and three of the provincial reports were published in English, while two of the provincial reports were published in French. Full details on reasons for exclusion for the studies identified via databases are given in ( ). Reasons for exclusion were not recorded for studies identified via other methods.

## Main characteristics of included publications
Of the 26 included publications, 21 were studies and five were provincial surveillance reports, three from the province of Ontario [ – ] ( ) and two from the province of Quebec [ , ] ( ). The province of Ontario reported on gonorrhoea, syphilis and chlamydia [ – ]. The province of Quebec reported on HIV [ , ].
 Of the 21 included studies, five described results from the Trans PULSE Ontario study (which was conducted in 2009–10, but met our inclusion criteria as many of the resulting papers were published in 2013 or later) [ – ] ( ), three described results from the Montreal Toronto Trans Study (conducted in 2018–19) [ – ] ( ), two described results from Sex Now surveys conducted in 2015 [ ] and 2018 [ ] ( ) and 11 described results from other studies [ – ] ( ).
 Of the studies that included transgender people, six (29%) included the overall transgender population, six (29%) included only transgender men who identified as GBMSM and nine (43%) included only transgender women (without limiting participation to those with specific sexual orientation or activities). Three publications (14%) included non-binary people. Nineteen (90%) of the studies had data collection in Ontario, 10 (48%) had data collection in British Columbia (BC), 11 (52%) had data collection in Quebec and six (29%) had data collection in other provinces and territories. 15 (71%) of the studies were cross-sectional studies, three (14%) were retrospective chart reviews, two (10%) were cross-sectional studies nested within cohort studies and one (5%) was a cohort study.
Nineteen (90%) of the studies reported on HIV or outcomes in people living with HIV (PLHIV), of which 12 (57%) reported only on HIV and no other STBBIs. Four studies (19%) reported on HCV [ , , , ], two (10%) reported on HBV [ , ], one (5%) reported on gonorrhoea, chlamydia, syphilis, HBV and HPV [ ], one (5%) reported on Mpox [ ] and one (5%) reported on sexual health service or primary healthcare use among transgender people in general without specifying any particular STBBI [ ]. Fourteen (67%) of the studies collected only quantitative data, six (29%) collected only qualitative data and one (5%) employed a mixed-methods approach. The population type, STBBIs examined, and study location of included studies is shown in .
 

## STBBI prevalence
Three studies provided prevalence estimates for the overall transgender population, rather than subgroups of the transgender population. Abramovich 2020, a cross-sectional study of service use in Ontario, found that the diagnosed prevalence of HIV was much higher in 2,085 transgender people attending four outpatient clinics (1.6%) than in 10,425 age-matched presumed cisgender people in the general provincial population (0.1%) (p-value: < 0.001) [ ]. In Scruton 2014, a cross-sectional online survey of transgender people in all provinces and the Northwest Territories, 0.8% of 460 participants self-reported being HIV positive, with 17.9% unaware of their HIV status and 1.9% preferring not to answer [ ]. Cardinal 2021, a retrospective study of data from 11 clinical cohorts of PLHIV in five provinces, found that 36–45% of the 56 transgender PLHIV had ever been co-infected with HCV [ ].
In surveillance data, the province of Ontario reported 36 cases of gonorrhoea, 18 cases of syphilis and 46 cases of chlamydia among transgender people in 2021; 32, 12 and 33 cases, respectively, in 2020; and 39, 13 and 32 cases, respectively, in 2019 [ – ]. In surveillance data, the province of Quebec reported seven newly diagnosed cases of HIV in transgender people in the period 2002–2021 [ , ].
Three studies provided prevalence estimates for transgender women. Armstrong 2023, a retrospective chart review of 1,495 transgender women attending seven endocrinology or HIV primary care clinics in Montreal and Toronto (the Montreal Toronto Trans Study), found that 5.8% had a positive HIV test on file, 40.0% had a negative HIV test on file and 54.2% did not have results on file [ ]. Lacombe-Duncan 2023, which was a sub-analysis of data relating to 1,059 of the same transgender women, found that 1.7% had a past history of HBV and 2.8% had a past history of HCV, though data were missing for 46.7% and 41.6%, respectively [ ]. Scheim 2017b, which was a sub-analysis of data from the Trans PULSE Ontario study focusing on 171 transgender women, found that 1.2% (95% confidence interval (CI) 0.0–3.0%) of participants self-reported as living with HIV while 23.6% (12.7–34.6%) did not know their status or preferred not to answer [ ].
Three studies provided prevalence estimates for transgender GBMSM, one of which also provided estimates for non-binary people who identified as GBMSM or as having had sex with another man in the past five years. National data from the in-person Sex Now 2018 survey published by Rutherford 2021 found that 5.1% of 296 transgender GBMSM self-reported having ever been diagnosed with HIV, 1.4% had ever been diagnosed with HCV and 9.8% had been diagnosed with chlamydia, gonorrhoea or syphilis in the past year. The same survey found that 5.3% of 150 non-binary GBMSM had ever been diagnosed with HIV, 2.0% had ever been diagnosed with HCV and 12.0% had been diagnosed with chlamydia, gonorrhoea or syphilis in the past year. These figures for transgender and non-binary GBMSM were not statistically different from those of cisgender GBMSM in the same survey. One hundred and six participants identified as both transgender and non-binary, so the findings of those groups overlapped [ ]. National data from the online Sex Now 2015 survey published by Ferlatte 2020 found that 5.7% of 209 transgender GBMSM and 15.1% of 743 cisgender GBMSM self-reported having been diagnosed with a sexually transmitted infection (STI) in the past year, giving an adjusted odds ratio (aOR) of 0.35 (0.20–0.64), though statistically significantly fewer transgender GBMSM had tested in the past year [ ]. Scheim 2017a, which was a sub-analysis of data from the Trans PULSE Ontario study focusing on 158 transgender GBMSM, found that no participants self-reported as being HIV positive while 17.2% (7.4–27.1%) did not know their status or preferred not to answer [ ].

## Sexual and injection drug use-related risk exposures
In the Trans PULSE Ontario study, HIV-related sexual risk in the past year was categorised as high, low or no risk. High HIV-related sexual risk was defined as “unprotected (fluid exposed) sex outside of a HIV-seroconcordant monogamous relationship”, low risk was having had sex but not according to the high risk conditions and no risk was having not had sex in the past year. Thirty-seven percent (29–46%) of 433 transgender people surveyed had no HIV-related sexual risk, while 12% (7–18%) had high HIV-related sexual risk in the past year [ ]. However, there was variation between subgroups of the transgender population, which were examined in separate papers: Scheim 2017a found that only 15.0% (6.3–23.7%) of transgender GBMSM in the study had no HIV-related sexual risk while 10.0% (1.5–18.6%) had high HIV-related sexual risk [ ]. By contrast, Scheim 2018 found that 41% (29–53%) of transgender women in the study had no HIV-related sexual risk and 21% (12–30%) had high HIV-related sexual risk [ ]. In Scruton 2014, 10% of 460 transgender people had had unprotected sex with a high-risk partner or a partner who does not know their HIV status in the past 12 months. No definition of the term “high-risk partner” was given. Thirty-four percent had had no sex in the past 12 months [ ]. In Arps 2021, a sub-analysis of data on 2,369 transgender and non-binary participants aged ≥16 years from the Trans PULSE Canada study, which recruited transgender and non-binary people online and in-person in six provinces, 6% reported having engaged in sex work in the past year [ ].
The Sex Now 2015 survey, published by Ferlatte 2020, asked about sexual activity in the past year. Transgender GBMSM had higher odds of not being sexually active than cisgender GBMSM (aOR 3.82 [2.67–5.46]) and lower odds than cisgender GBMSM of having had casual sex partners (aOR 0.34 [0.25–0.45]), fuck buddies (aOR 0.49 [0.37–0.66]), group sex (aOR 0.24 [0.15–0.39]) and 20 + sex partners (aOR 0.19 [0.09–0.41]). Transgender GBMSM also had lower odds than cisgender GBMSM of having had intercourse without condoms in the past year with a partner with the same HIV status (aOR 0.50 [0.37–0.66]), with a partner with unknown HIV status (aOR 0.43 [0.28–0.66]) and with a partner with different HIV status (aOR 0.23 [0.10–0.56]) [ ].
In Lacombe-Duncan 2023, the sub-analysis of the Montreal Toronto Trans Study, 10.5% of 1,059 transgender women reported ever engaging in sex work, with missing data for 85.3% of participants [ ].
Of the 460 transgender people in Scruton 2014, 0.4% reported sharing needles in the past 12 months [ ]. In Lacombe-Duncan 2022, a sub-analysis of the Montreal Toronto Trans Study that focused on 86 transgender women living with HIV (WLWH), 8.1% of participants reported a history of injection drug use, with missing data for 54.7% [ ].

## Testing for STBBIs
Arps 2021 compared outcomes between transgender and non-binary people who engaged in sex work in the past year, and those who did not. Of the 2,236 transgender and non-binary people in the survey who were not current sex workers, 21% had tested for HIV in the past year and 51% had never had an HIV test. Of the 133 current sex workers in the survey, 50% had tested for HIV in the past year and 29% had never had an HIV test. For non-HIV STI tests, 27% of non-sex workers had tested in the past year and 40% had never tested, while 73% of sex workers had tested in the past year and 13% had never tested [ ]. In Scruton 2014, of the 262 transgender people for whom data were available, 25% had tested for HIV within the past year and 39% had never tested for HIV [ ].
Scheim 2017a found that 18.7% (9.2–28.3%) of transgender GBMSM had been tested for HIV in the past year and 39.3% (26.4–52.2%) had never been tested for HIV [ ]. In the Sex Now 2015 survey, published by Ferlatte 2020, transgender GBMSM had lower odds than cisgender GBMSM of having been tested for HIV (aOR 0.64 [0.49–0.85]) and other STIs (aOR 0.70 [0.53–0.92]) in the past year [ ]. In the Sex Now 2018 survey, published by Rutherford 2021, 59.8% of transgender GBMSM had tested for STIs in the past year and 15.5% had never tested for STIs. Of the non-binary GBMSM in the survey, 62.0% had tested for STIs in the past year and 13.3% had never tested for STIs. These figures for transgender and non-binary GBMSM were not statistically different from those of cisgender GBMSM in the same survey. 60.5% of transgender GBMSM and 62.7% of non-binary GBMSM had ever tested for HCV and 70.9% of transgender GBMSM and 72.7% of non-binary GBMSM had ever tested for HIV and again these figures were not statistically different from those of cisgender GBMSM in the same survey [ ].

## Treatment for STBBIs
Cardinal 2021 found that, of the 56 transgender people in the study (who were grouped together separately from the categories of women and men), 58.9% had a suppressed viral load within a year of starting antiretroviral therapy (ART) and no viral load rebound within a year of suppression. This compared with 66.0% of the 1,771 cisgender women in the study and 80.4% of the 8,728 cisgender men in the study, though no measures of association were given comparing the groups [ ].
Lacombe-Duncan 2019, a cross-sectional study of 50 transgender WLWH nested within a larger cohort study of cisgender and transgender WLWH in BC, Ontario and Quebec, presented data on the HIV care cascade. 92% of the transgender WLWH had ever accessed HIV care, 78% of those who had accessed care were currently using ART, 67% of those using ART had ≥ 95% ART adherence and 89% of those using ART were virally suppressed [ ]. In Lacombe-Duncan 2022, the sub-analysis of the Montreal Toronto Trans Study focusing on 86 transgender WLWH, 93.0% of participants were currently using ART, of whom 82.6% had a suppressed viral load, 5.8% had an unsuppressed viral load and data were missing for 11.6% [ ].

## Barriers to accessing testing and treatment for STBBIs
Two studies found that discrimination and stigma experienced in healthcare encounters were barriers to transgender women accessing testing and treatment for STBBIs: Lacombe-Duncan 2021, a qualitative study of 26 transgender women in Vancouver, Toronto and Montreal [ ], and Munro 2017, a qualitative sub-study of the Trans PULSE Ontario study involving semi-structured interviews with 14 transgender WLWH on barriers to healthcare utilization and 10 service providers who work with trans WLWH [ ].
Participants in four studies focusing on different subpopulations noted that service providers often lacked knowledge about the specific sexual health needs of transgender and non-binary people: Lacombe-Duncan 2021 [ ]; Rich 2017, a qualitative sub-study about sex-related HIV risk among 11 transgender GBMSM recruited from the longitudinal Momentum Health Study cohort in Metro Vancouver [ ]; Scheim 2017c, a qualitative survey of 40 transgender GBMSM in Ontario [ ]; and Stewart 2022, a sub-analysis of qualitative data relating to 13 transgender, non-binary or Two-Spirit GBMSM from a larger cross-sectional qualitative study of STI testing experiences of cisgender and transgender GBMSM in Ontario [ ].
In Stewart 2022, participants also described exclusionary policies such as gender segregated clinic hours as barriers to accessing STBBI testing as they “relied on cisnormative expectations that clients identified with one gender, or that clients would automatically know which hours to attend if they were trans” [ ].
In Lacombe-Duncan 2019, the study of transgender WLWH, the most commonly cited barrier to ART use was concerns about interactions between ART and feminising hormones [ ].

## Facilitators to accessing testing and treatment for STBBIs
Two studies with transgender women noted that the provision of trauma-informed transgender-specific and transgender-inclusive services could act as facilitators to accessing testing and treatment for STBBIs: Everhart 2022, which analysed qualitative data from a survey of 76 transgender women in five provinces [ ], and Lacombe-Duncan 2021 [ ].
Participants in Munro 2017 [ ] and Everhart 2022 [ ] also highlighted integrated services that provide support in navigating the healthcare system as facilitators to access. This was similar to a facilitator to access identified by participants in Scheim 2017c: the integration of STBBI testing with monitoring services for hormone therapy [ ].

## Use of healthcare and prevention services (including pre-exposure and post-exposure prophylaxis)
Abramovich 2020 found that the mean number of primary care provider visits in four outpatient clinics in Ontario from January 2012 to December 2016 was 22.55 (standard deviation (SD) 27.15) for the 2,085 transgender people and 13.18 (SD 19.62) for the 10,425 presumed cisgender people, with no statistically significant difference in the number of visits between the groups (p = 0.40) [ ]. Arps 2021 found that 74% of 133 transgender and non-binary sex workers had a primary healthcare provider, compared with 81% of 2,236 transgender and non-binary non-sex workers (p = 0.038) [ ].
In the Sex Now 2018 survey, published by Rutherford 2021, 76.4% of transgender GBMSM had a regular healthcare provider, compared with 71.7% of cisgender GBMSM (aOR 1.82 [1.30–2.57]). Fewer transgender GBMSM (4.1%) than cisgender GBMSM (12.3%) were taking HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) (aOR 0.56 [0.28–1.00]) while more transgender GBMSM (4.4%) than cisgender GBMSM (2.6%) had ever taken and stopped HIV PrEP (aOR 2.96 [1.45–5.65]). More transgender GBMSM (38.2%) than cisgender GBMSM (30.6%) were vaccinated for HPV (aOR 1.51 [1.08–2.12]) but vaccination rates against HBV were not statistically different between the groups (58.4% and 67.9% of transgender and cisgender GBMSM, respectively). For all these outcome measures, estimates for non-binary GBMSM in the study were not statistically different from those of cisgender GBMSM [ ].
Gilbert 2023 was a cross-sectional online survey of Mpox vaccine uptake among clients of an STI clinic in Vancouver. The survey found that 10/19 (52.6%) of transgender people, 120/174 (69.0%) of cisgender people and 7/13 (53.8%) of people with other gender identifies or who preferred not to say their gender identify received the Mpox vaccine among those eligible [ ].

## Findings from expert interviews
All experts agreed that more data are needed on STBBIs in transgender and non-binary people in Canada. A common theme discussed across interviews was the lack of STBBI surveillance data disaggregated by gender identity at the national and provincial and territorial levels. As a result, most prevalence data and other epidemiological information come from research studies focusing on transgender people, studies which were not designed to produce generalisable prevalence estimates and which are highly limited both geographically and in terms of sample size. In several interviews, experts also noted a data gap relating to how STBBI risk is affected by sexual anatomy and gender-affirming surgery and by the intersection of physiology, identity, social determinants of health and sexual behaviour.
One expert suggested that sexual inactivity is relatively common in transgender communities in Canada and that future surveys in these populations should have behavioural entry criteria such as having had sex in the past six months. Some experts thought that existing transgender-specific studies conducted in Canada, such as Trans PULSE Ontario, did not sufficiently capture the subpopulations most at risk of STBBIs, and advocated for future studies focusing on these subpopulations. However, opinions varied on the subpopulations most at risk. Some saw transgender women, transgender GBMSM and transgender and non-binary people who are part of gay sex networks as being at particular risk. Others thought that transgender people with experience of sex work or those with intersecting marginalised identities, such as Black transgender women, were most at risk. Additionally, several experts noted that most studies on transgender and non-binary people in Canada were conducted in large metropolitan areas and advocated for studies focusing on these populations in rural communities, about which little is known. No experts were aware of completed research projects corresponding to our inclusion criteria that we had not already identified through our scoping review search.

## Discussion
It is difficult to quantify the prevalence of any STBBI among transgender and non-binary people in Canada. In this comprehensive scoping review of published data, provincial and territorial reports and the websites of relevant community organisations, we found only one source that provided national-level estimates of the prevalence of any STBBI among the general population of transgender people in Canada: an online survey conducted in 2013–14 in which 0.8% of participants self-reported as living with HIV and 17.9% did not know their status [ ]. No sources provided such estimates for non-binary people. The only other study with HIV estimates among the overall transgender population used data collected between 2012 and 2016 in outpatient clinics in three cities in Ontario, finding an HIV prevalence of 1.6%, much higher than in age-matched presumed cisgender people in the general provincial population [ ]. Data from both studies should be interpreted with caution, however, as the online survey had an unclear sampling frame and it is hard to know whether patients attending clinics in the three cities were representative of the general population of transgender people in Ontario, or whether transgender PLHIV were particularly likely to seek care at these clinics with expertise working with transgender populations. Either way, these results are not recent, with data collection ending ten and eight years ago, respectively.
More STBBI prevalence data in the peer-reviewed literature are available for subgroups of the transgender population such as transgender women and transgender GBMSM. Estimates of HIV prevalence among transgender women ranged from 1.2% in the Trans PULSE Ontario study (conducted in 2009–10) [ ] to 5.8% in the Montreal Toronto Trans Study (conducted in 2018–19) [ ]. The higher HIV prevalence in the Montreal Toronto Trans Study is expected as it utilised electronic medical record data from primary care clinics providing HIV care. For transgender GBMSM, national data from the in-person Sex Now 2018 survey found that participants self-reported an HIV prevalence of 5.1%, statistically non-different from the prevalence for cisgender GBMSM, though significantly fewer transgender GBMSM had ever been tested for HIV [ ].
Of the studies mentioned so far in this discussion, most were not designed to produce estimates of prevalence that are generalizable to broader transgender populations. However, they are the best available data because most provinces and territories do not publish surveillance data on STBBIs that is disaggregated by gender identity. Quebec has been publishing annual HIV case counts among transgender people since 2002 [ , ], and Ontario began publishing gonorrhoea, chlamydia and syphilis case counts among transgender people in 2019 [ – ]. Beyond these two provinces, we found no published provincial, territorial or national surveillance data for STBBIs in transgender and non-binary people.
Several studies included in this review suggest that a substantial proportion of transgender people are not sexually active. In the Trans PULSE Ontario study, 37% of the general transgender population had not had sex in the past year [ ], with sub-analyses of the same dataset showing variation between different population subgroups: 15% of transgender GBMSM [ ] and 41% of transgender women [ ] had not had sex in the past year. These findings are complemented by the Sex Now 2015 survey, which found that transgender GBMSM had substantially higher odds of not being sexually active than cisgender GBMSM [ ]. Again, these data are either geographically limited to a single province or are limited to a subgroup of the transgender population. However, other work in Canada has shown that transgender people are often excluded from the world of dating [ ] and one of the experts we interviewed, who worked for a transgender-focused community organisation, suggested that sexual inactivity is common in the communities they interact with. No data were available on the sexual activity of non-binary people and few data are available on injection drug use-related risk in either transgender or non-binary people.
For the testing of STBBIs, studies provided both quantitative and qualitative data. Quantitatively, in Sex Now 2015, transgender GBMSM had significantly lower odds than cisgender GBMSM of having been tested for HIV and other STIs in the past year. However, as transgender GBMSM in the study were significantly less likely to have been sexually active over the same time period, this is probably unsurprising [ ]. In Sex Now 2018, statistically similar proportions of transgender and cisgender GBMSM had ever tested for HIV and HCV [ ]. No data were available on STBBI testing in the general transgender or non-binary populations. For the treatment of STBBIs, two studies examined cascades of care relating to HIV treatment in small populations of transgender PLHIV [ ] and transgender WLWH [ ], respectively, with neither group meeting the then-current UNAIDS target of 90% of those receiving ART achieving viral suppression [ ].
In four qualitative studies focusing on subgroups of the transgender population in different parts of Canada, participants felt that providers lacked knowledge about the specific sexual health needs of transgender people [ – , ]. Two studies found that transgender women encountered direct discrimination and stigma when accessing testing and treatment for STBBIs [ , ] while one found that the most commonly cited barrier to ART use among transgender WLWH was concerns about interactions between ART and feminising hormones [ ]. Participants in a survey of transgender GBMSM in Ontario called for the integration of STBBI testing with monitoring for masculinising hormone therapy [ ] while participants in a study of transgender women in five provinces also saw integrated services as a facilitator to access for STBBI testing and treatment [ ]. Two studies of transgender women called for the provision of trauma-informed transgender-specific and transgender-inclusive services to facilitate STBBI testing and treatment [ , ]. No studies examined qualitative experiences of accessing STBBI testing and treatment among non-binary people.
Data on the use of healthcare and prevention services by transgender and non-binary people are limited and varied. The study in outpatient clinics in three cities in Ontario found no statistically significant difference in the number of visits between the transgender and presumed cisgender people [ ]. By contrast, the Sex Now 2018 survey found that transgender GBMSM had higher odds of having a regular healthcare provider than cisgender GBMSM [ ]. In the same survey, transgender GBMSM were less likely than cisgender GBMSM to be currently taking HIV PrEP but were more likely to have taken it in the past and later stopped. The reasons for stopping PrEP were not explored in the survey. Estimates for non-binary people in the survey (who all identified as GBMSM or as having had sex with another man in the past five years, as well as being non-binary) were not statistically different from those of cisgender GBMSM [ ].
We conducted this scoping review and interviewed experts to understand the available data relating to how STBBIs affect transgender and non-binary people in Canada. The overwhelming consensus of the experts was that more data are needed on STBBIs in transgender and non-binary people in Canada, a view backed up by the findings of this scoping review. More robust and inclusive data would help to better guide resources, treatment and prevention efforts and to improve the development of evidence-based, inclusive policy making, in line with the priority of the Federal 2SLGBQTI+ Action Plan mentioned in the Introduction [ ].
Several experts noted a data gap relating to how STBBI risk is affected by sexual anatomy and gender-affirming surgery and by the intersection of physiology, identity, social determinants of health and sexual behaviour. We found no data on how gender-affirming surgery affects STBBI risk. Additionally, the studies we included in this review did not provide data disaggregated on intersecting aspects of identity such as race and ethnicity, disability and age that may affect STBBI risk, and did not collect detailed data on sexual behaviour. Collecting more data on these topics in Canada would be valuable.
The findings of this review suggest that different sub-populations of transgender and non-binary people have different levels of risk of contracting STBBIs, in part because they have different levels of sexual activity, and access testing, treatment and prevention services at different rates. However, none of the studies we found collected STBBI prevalence data alongside data relating to behavioural risk exposures and engagement in prevention and care, making it difficult to determine precisely how sexual risk exposures impact STBBI risk in these populations. Bio-behavioural surveillance of STBBIs is conducted with other key populations in Canada and would provide valuable information if conducted with transgender and non-binary people.
Additionally, as illustrates, substantially more research has been conducted with some transgender sub-populations in Canada than others. Most of the papers we found focused on the general transgender population, or on transgender women, transgender GBMSM and non-binary people who also identify as GBMSM. We found no papers focusing on heterosexual transgender men and only one paper focusing on non-binary people who did not specifically identify as GBMSM. The experiences of STBBIs among heterosexual transgender men and non-binary people of a range of sexual orientations would be valuable topics of future study.
To our knowledge, this is the first published scoping review focusing on STBBIs in transgender and non-binary people in Canada. The main strengths of our scoping review are the broad scope of our search, involving both a database search and a substantial grey literature search in English and French, and the broad scope of our inclusion criteria and extracted data, incorporating qualitative, quantitative and mixed-methods data corresponding to five topic areas covering a range of factors affecting STBBI epidemiology and care. The main limitation is the potential for publication bias, as is the case for any evidence synthesis.
In summary, the available evidence on STBBIs in transgender and non-binary people in Canada is variable and scarce. It is not possible to make specific recommendations for public policy based on the evidence as it currently exists. Responding to this knowledge gap would help to better understand the burden of STBBIs and associated determinants of health in these populations in Canada, and to promote health equity in line with the Federal 2SLGBQTI+ Action Plan [ ].

## Supporting information
S1 File

## Details of database and grey literature searches.
(DOCX)
S2 Table

## Reasons for exclusion for studies identified via databases.
(DOCX)
S3 Checklist

## PRISMA checklist.
(DOCX)

 10.1371/journal.pone.0322521.r001Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version0
29 Jul 2024

10.1371/journal.pone.0322521.r002Decision Letter 0
Rios-GonzálezCarlosAcademic Editor© 2025 Carlos Rios-González2025Carlos Rios-Gonzálezhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
22 Aug 2024

PONE-D-24-30964
Sexually Transmitted and Blood-Borne Infections in Transgender and Non-Binary People in Canada: A Scoping Review
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Bigio,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Oct 05 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org . When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols . Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols .
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Carlos Miguel Rios-González, Ph.D
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. We note that your Data Availability Statement is currently as follows: All relevant data are within the manuscript and its Supporting Information files.
Please confirm at this time whether or not your submission contains all raw data required to replicate the results of your study. Authors must share the “minimal data set” for their submission. PLOS defines the minimal data set to consist of the data required to replicate all study findings reported in the article, as well as related metadata and methods (https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-minimal-data-set-definition).
For example, authors should submit the following data:
- The values behind the means, standard deviations and other measures reported;
- The values used to build graphs;
- The points extracted from images for analysis.
Authors do not need to submit their entire data set if only a portion of the data was used in the reported study.
If your submission does not contain these data, please either upload them as Supporting Information files or deposit them to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. For a list of recommended repositories, please see https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/recommended-repositories.
If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially sensitive information, data are owned by a third-party organization, etc.) and who has imposed them (e.g., an ethics committee). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent. If data are owned by a third party, please indicate how others may request data access.
3. Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information. 
4. We note that this manuscript is a systematic review or meta-analysis; our author guidelines therefore require that you use PRISMA guidance to help improve reporting quality of this type of study. Please upload copies of the completed PRISMA checklist as Supporting Information with a file name “PRISMA checklist”.
5. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Strength of Manuscript: The article addresses a relevant and topical issue on STBBIs (sexually transmitted infections and other reproductive tract infections) in transgender and non-binary people in Canada. The study incorporates a scoping analysis, which was complemented by interviews with 18 experts, including researchers and people working in transgender community organizations. The methodological approach is comprehensive and appropriate for the topic.
Relevance of the Data and Conclusions: The data collected is consistent and supports the conclusions presented. The authors highlight the need for more robust and inclusive data to improve resources, treatment and prevention efforts for these populations, which is in line with the guidelines of the 2SLGBQTI+ Federal Action Plan. In addition, the analysis identifies significant gaps in the current literature, most notably the lack of disaggregated data that considers intersectional aspects such as race, ethnicity, disability and age, which can affect the risk of STBBI.
Recommendations for Improvement: The article could be strengthened with a more detailed analysis of sexual behaviors and their impacts on the health of transgender and non-binary subpopulations. In addition, the inclusion of data on the effects of gender affirmation surgery and other intersections between social identity and health would help to further refine the conclusions. It would also be beneficial if the authors included specific recommendations for public policy and health practices based on the study's findings.
Ethical Considerations and Conflicts of Interest: The article declares no conflicts of interest among the authors, which suggests an unbiased analysis. There is no indication that the study involved the need for ethical approval, presumably because the data was collected secondarily or through non-clinical interviews.
In summary, the manuscript is technically sound and offers significant contributions to the field. With minor revisions and expansions, it could become an essential piece to guide future health policies and practices for transgender and non-binary people in Canada.
Translated with DeepL.com (free version)
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #1: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/ . PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org . Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0322521.r003Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version1
5 Oct 2024

We thank the reviewer for their helpful comments.
Review Comments to the Author
Reviewer #1: Strength of Manuscript: The article addresses a relevant and topical issue on STBBIs (sexually transmitted infections and other reproductive tract infections) in transgender and non-binary people in Canada. The study incorporates a scoping analysis, which was complemented by interviews with 18 experts, including researchers and people working in transgender community organizations. The methodological approach is comprehensive and appropriate for the topic.
Relevance of the Data and Conclusions: The data collected is consistent and supports the conclusions presented. The authors highlight the need for more robust and inclusive data to improve resources, treatment and prevention efforts for these populations, which is in line with the guidelines of the 2SLGBQTI+ Federal Action Plan. In addition, the analysis identifies significant gaps in the current literature, most notably the lack of disaggregated data that considers intersectional aspects such as race, ethnicity, disability and age, which can affect the risk of STBBI.
Recommendations for Improvement: The article could be strengthened with a more detailed analysis of sexual behaviors and their impacts on the health of transgender and non-binary subpopulations.
We agree that such an analysis would be valuable but due to limitations in the data we found, we cannot comment on how sexual behaviours impact STBBI outcomes. In the discussion, we have added the second sentence below to make this clear: “The findings of this review suggest that different sub-populations of transgender and non-binary people have different levels of risk of contracting STBBIs, in part because they have different levels of sexual activity, and access testing, treatment and prevention services at different rates. However, none of the studies we found collected STBBI prevalence data alongside data relating to behavioural risk exposures and engagement in prevention and care, making it difficult to determine precisely how sexual risk exposures impact STBBI risk in these populations.”
In addition, the inclusion of data on the effects of gender affirmation surgery and other intersections between social identity and health would help to further refine the conclusions.
Unfortunately, we did not find any data on the effects of gender-affirming surgery on STBBI risk. We have added the following sentence to the discussion to make this clear: “We found no data on how gender-affirming surgery affects STBBI risk.” Also, we are unable to comment on the effects of other intersections between social identity and health because, as we had written, “the studies we included in this review did not provide data disaggregated on intersecting aspects of identity such as race and ethnicity, disability and age that may affect STBBI risk.”
It would also be beneficial if the authors included specific recommendations for public policy and health practices based on the study's findings.
We thank the reviewer for the helpful prompt to consider how the evidence synthesised in this scoping review can inform public health. The available evidence is insufficient to make specific recommendations, but this is an important conclusion of our review. We have added the following sentence to the summary paragraph: “It is not possible to make specific recommendations for public policy based on the evidence as it currently exists.” We have added the same sentence to the abstract to highlight its importance and consequently edited the abstract to stay within the word count.
Ethical Considerations and Conflicts of Interest: The article declares no conflicts of interest among the authors, which suggests an unbiased analysis. There is no indication that the study involved the need for ethical approval, presumably because the data was collected secondarily or through non-clinical interviews.
This is correct, we did not require ethical approval for this work.
In summary, the manuscript is technically sound and offers significant contributions to the field. With minor revisions and expansions, it could become an essential piece to guide future health policies and practices for transgender and non-binary people in Canada.
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

We’ve made changes based on these requirements.
2. We note that your Data Availability Statement is currently as follows: All relevant data are within the manuscript and its Supporting Information files.
Please confirm at this time whether or not your submission contains all raw data required to replicate the results of your study. Authors must share the “minimal data set” for their submission. PLOS defines the minimal data set to consist of the data required to replicate all study findings reported in the article, as well as related metadata and methods (https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-minimal-data-set-definition).
For example, authors should submit the following data:
- The values behind the means, standard deviations and other measures reported;
- The values used to build graphs;
- The points extracted from images for analysis.
Authors do not need to submit their entire data set if only a portion of the data was used in the reported study.
If your submission does not contain these data, please either upload them as Supporting Information files or deposit them to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. For a list of recommended repositories, please see https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/recommended-repositories.
If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially sensitive information, data are owned by a third-party organization, etc.) and who has imposed them (e.g., an ethics committee). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent. If data are owned by a third party, please indicate how others may request data access.
Yes, the submission contains all raw data required to replicate the results of our study. The submission is a scoping review. All included papers or grey literature are publicly available, including all the data we extracted as part of our review, and we have included the full search terms we used in the Supporting Material.
3. Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information.
This has been done.
4. We note that this manuscript is a systematic review or meta-analysis; our author guidelines therefore require that you use PRISMA guidance to help improve reporting quality of this type of study. Please upload copies of the completed PRISMA checklist as Supporting Information with a file name “PRISMA checklist”.
This has been done.
5. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
We have checked the reference list, which is complete and correct, and we also checked and confirmed that none of the papers have been retracted.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0322521.r004Decision Letter 1
BernerAlison MayAcademic Editor© 2025 Alison May Berner2025Alison May Bernerhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
3 Jan 2025

PONE-D-24-30964R1Sexually Transmitted and Blood-Borne Infections in Transgender and Non-Binary People in Canada: A Scoping ReviewPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Bigio,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
==============================Many thanks for this revised manuscript which is of high quality and meets publication criteria. I would recommend a further minor revision in line with Reviewer 2's comments to include the interviews of 18 experts in the methodology and results, and if applicable, expanded in the discussion. This would allow the reader to understand how these fit with the data and if further work from this is planned.
==============================
Please submit your revised manuscript by Feb 17 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org . When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols . Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols .
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Alison May Berner
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: If the authors have answered all the questions, the manuscript should be considered for publication.
Reviewer #2: This article is incredibly well thought out and strategically planned in order to capture and meet its aims of understanding the available data relating to STBBIs in transgender and non-binary people in Canada. It not only clearly identifies and analyses the data that is available but also importantly identifies gaps in research and publication that can be used to guide future research and data collection that could be used to inform care and sexual health services in a deliberate and meaningful way to serve people with gender expansive identities. Notably there is a clear identification of a scarcity of disaggregated data and therefore, the limitations in application of some the current data. The analysis of the differences in patterns of behaviours of people with different gender identities and sexual orientations along where there are gaps in this data was done with inclusion of the nuances and specifics that can shape this.
The article is insightful and relevant. The scoping analysis is comprehensive and appropriate and demonstrates methodology that is well fitting in exploring this topic where there are such inconsistencies and variations in how data is collected and defined. I commend the authors highly and acknowledge the dedication and quality of this work.
The data collected is put into perspective and linked clearly with the conclusions and discussions and where this fits with future work.
In the discussion section there was a very useful section regarding the interviews with 18 experts which brought important framing to the current climate for transgender and non-binary people in the context of sexual health, however, I wonder why these interviews were not mentioned throughout the article, specifically in the methodology or results and only feature in the discussion as a few sentences. They could be expanded and put into conversation with the data collected in this article or it be indicated how the data from these interviews could be used for additional work on this topic.
Irrespective of this, I think this is a formidable piece of work that could be pivotal in guiding future work for the promotion of improved sexual health outcomes for gender expansive individuals navigating differing intersections of unmet need.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/ . PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org . Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0322521.r005Author response to Decision Letter 2
Submission Version2
17 Feb 2025

Thank you for your kind comments.
We have followed your advice and included more details of the interviews in both the methods and results sections.
In the methods section, we have written:
“Alongside our scoping review, we also interviewed a convenience sample of 18 experts on how STBBIs affect transgender and non-binary people in Canada. The aim of the interviews was to understand their views on the state of the field and to learn about recent and ongoing research on the topic. Twelve (67%) of the experts were academic researchers, five (28%) worked with transgender-focused community organisations and one (6%) worked in government. Around half of the experts identified as transgender or non-binary.
Interviews were semi-structured. We asked the experts for their views on the state of STBBI research and surveillance among transgender and non-binary people in Canada; about data gaps in the field; about recent and ongoing research in the field; and for suggestions for future work they thought would be valuable. We prepared an interview guide that asked broadly about these topics but discussions were largely guided by the responses of the experts towards the topics they felt were most important in the field. We chose this interview strategy because it mirrored the search strategy of our scoping review, which was deliberately broad and exploratory, aiming to identify data on a range of factors affecting STBBI epidemiology and care in these populations without pre-specifying precise outcomes we were searching for. Interviews were conducted by two authors (JB and MB), in some cases in conjunction with a third author (JA), between December 2023 and April 2024. Interviews lasted between 30 and 60 minutes and were conducted virtually.”
In the results section, we have written:
“Findings from expert interviews
All experts agreed that more data are needed on STBBIs in transgender and non-binary people in Canada. A common theme discussed across interviews was the lack of STBBI surveillance data disaggregated by gender identity at the national and provincial and territorial levels. As a result, most prevalence data and other epidemiological information come from research studies focusing on transgender people, studies which were not designed to produce generalisable prevalence estimates and which are highly limited both geographically and in terms of sample size. In several interviews, experts also noted a data gap relating to how STBBI risk is affected by sexual anatomy and gender-affirming surgery and by the intersection of physiology, identity, social determinants of health and sexual behaviour.
One expert suggested that sexual inactivity is relatively common in transgender communities in Canada and that future surveys in these populations should have behavioural entry criteria such as having had sex in the past six months. Some experts thought that existing transgender-specific studies conducted in Canada, such as Trans PULSE Ontario, did not sufficiently capture the subpopulations most at risk of STBBIs, and advocated for future studies focusing on these subpopulations. However, opinions varied on the subpopulations most at risk. Some saw transgender women, transgender GBMSM and transgender and non-binary people who are part of gay sex networks as being at particular risk. Others thought that transgender people with experience of sex work or those with intersecting marginalised identities, such as Black transgender women, were most at risk. Additionally, several experts noted that most studies on transgender and non-binary people in Canada were conducted in large metropolitan areas and advocated for studies focusing on these populations in rural communities, about which little is known. No experts were aware of completed research projects corresponding to our inclusion criteria that we had not already identified through our scoping review search.”
We have also made some minor changes to the discussion to avoid repetition and expand on some points.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response_to_Reviewers_auresp_2.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0322521.r006Decision Letter 2
DemantDanielAcademic Editor© 2025 Daniel Demant2025Daniel Demanthttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
25 Mar 2025

Sexually Transmitted and Blood-Borne Infections in Transgender and Non-Binary People in Canada: A Scoping Review
PONE-D-24-30964R2
Dear Dr. Bigio,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager®  and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Daniel Demant, PhD, MPH, GradCertHEd, BAppSocSc
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: I appreciate the authors for carefully revising the manuscript and incorporating the provided suggestions. The additions to the methods and results sections clarify the conduct and findings of the interviews, strengthening the understanding of gaps in STBBI surveillance among transgender and non-binary people in Canada. Additionally, the revisions in the discussion improve the text’s flow and avoid repetition. I consider that the issues raised in the previous review have been adequately addressed.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #1: No
**********
10.1371/journal.pone.0322521.r007Acceptance letter
DemantDanielAcademic Editor© 2025 Daniel Demant2025Daniel Demanthttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.PONE-D-24-30964R2
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Bigio,
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
If revisions are needed, the production department will contact you directly to resolve them. If no revisions are needed, you will receive an email when the publication date has been set. At this time, we do not offer pre-publication proofs to authors during production of the accepted work. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few weeks to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps.
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access.
Kind regards,
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Daniel Demant
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE