Environ Health Perspect253envhperEnvironmental Health Perspectives0091-67651552-9924American Chemical SocietyPMC1469372PMC1469372.1146937214693721Environews: ForumGreening the Olympic Games
0619961046131327597598010619960106200602062006pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightyespmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articleyespmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes
 
Forum 
 
Greening the Olympic Games 
 
The International Olympic Committee 
(IOC) is now a champion of the environ- 
ment. In 1991 the IOC, with the United 
Nations Environment Programnme (UNEP), 
amended the Olympic charter to include a 
policy that requires each canididate for host- 
ing future Olympic ganmes to incltide an 
environmental plan as part of its bid. 
 
"It is natural that the Interniational 
Olympic Committee, as leader of a world- 
wide humanistic movement, shotild be con- 
cerned with the integration of the activities 
of the Olympic movement with the well- 
being of the world in which we live," said 
Richard W. Pound, an IOC execLtitie board 
member, in the IOC's 01ympic Messaige in 
March 1993. "The IOC ntist seek a balance 
between the needs of otur generation and 
those of the next and succeeding generations. 
It is, after all, the Vouth of the world who 
will inherit the earth whichi we leave them." 
 
Lillehammer, home of the 1994 Winter 
Olympic Games, was awarded the games 
before the environmentatl plan requirement 
was passed, but was the fir.st city to voluntari- 
ly address environmental issLIes, and pro- 
claimed the 1994 events the first 'Green 
Games." Environmental activist groups were 
highly involved in the planining anid imple- 
mentation of the games. 'I'he city empha- 
sized environmental protection in land use 
and venue constrtiction, as wNell as dtiring the 
games through programs SuLch as recycling 
and composting. 
 
This year's Olx'mpic Games host, 
Atlanta, Georgia, was awvarded the games in 
1990, also before the I(C envrironmental 
requirement went into effect. The Atlanta 
Committee for the Olvmpic Ganmes 
(ACOG) is not proclaiming the Atlanta 
events as the second green games, but is coIn- 
centrating instead on being knowvn as the 
"Centennial Games." The conmmittee has, 
however, taken measures to be environmen- 
tally friendly. 
 
On 13 July 1995, ACOG presented an 
environmental policyx statement detailing 
ACOG's efforts on behallf of the environ- 
ment to the IOC at the World Conference 
on Sport and the Environment held in 
Lausanne, Switzerland. Early in the planning 
for the games, ACOG developed the 
Olympic Environmental Stipport GrotIp 
(OESG), a citizen advisory grotip of 23 peo- 
 
ple, to educate and 
advise ACOG on envi- 
ronmental issues and 
recommend environ- 
mentally responsible 
decisions on Olympic 
issues. The group assist- 
ed in setting environ- 
mental guidelines for 
venue sites, making rec- 
ommendations for solid 
waste management and 
recvcling, and develop- 
ing ACOG's environ- 
mental policy state- 
ment. 
 
Environmentally 
friendly measures taken 
include constructing 
the new Olympic stadi- 
 
um on the site oft the parking lot for the 
Fulton County stadium, which will be used 
during the games and then torn down. The 
asphalt and concrete from the old parking lot 
and stadium will be used as filler in con- 
structing a new parking lot. In addition, the 
new stadium's capacity will be reduced after 
the games from 85,000 seats to 45,000. The 
materials removed will be reused or recycled, 
including the Olympic track surface, which 
will be placed at a local university. 
 
ACOG has also tried to avoid unneces- 
sary waste in construction. According to the 
committee's statement, many of the venues 
will use rented equipment and furniture to 
avoid consuming excess resources and gener- 
ating construction debris. For example, at a 
rowing/canoeing venue on Lake Lanier, spec- 
tator seating will be rented and placed on a 
temporary, platform on the lake to avoid 
clearing trees on a nearby hill for spectators, 
as was originally planned. ACOG has also 
reduced the number of outdoor trap and 
skeet shooting ranges at the Wolf Creek 
shooting venue in order to minimize the 
impact of lead shot deposit on nearby wet- 
lands. ACOGC is advocating the use of alter- 
native shot in future games because of the 
environmental damage caused by lead shot. 
In the area of transportation, ACOG will 
encourage the use of Atlanta's mass transit 
system rather than automobiles. Two hun- 
dred of the 2,000 buses designated for the 
games are powered by natural gas. 
 
In late 1995, ACOG hired an environ- 
mental consulting firm, CH2M HILL, as an 
advisor to assist with activities such as waste 
management services. According to CH2M 
HILL, one of the major accomplishments of 
the Atlanta games will be waste management. 
"The Atlanta games should establish some 
new benchmarks in solid waste management 
at a sporting event of this magnitude," said 
Bill Wallace, CH2M HILL's Olympic pro- 
 
1j110 ' 
Atlantal996 
 
Stadium sunrise. Parts of a new stadium built for the 1996 Olympic games, 
including the track surface, will be reused after the games. 
 
gram manager. According to Bill Steiner, an 
EPA consultant to ACOG, the committee 
estimates that athletes and fans will generate 
about 9,000 extra tons of garbage over the 
30-day period of the games, not including 
waste from venue construction. ACOG will 
attempt to divert about 85% of the waste 
away from landfills through recycling and 
composting, Steiner said. For example, horse 
manure from the equestrian sites will be com- 
posted for fertilizer. 
 
Local environmental groups seem satis- 
fied with the way ACOG has handled envi- 
ronmental protection in planning for the 
Olympics. Carolyn Hatcher, president and 
CEO of the Georgia Conservancy, a non- 
profit environmental advocacy group, served 
as co-chair of the OESG. She said, "AGOG 
officials were eager to be responsive on envi- 
ronmental concerns, but they were working 
within . . . budgetary and timetable [con- 
straints]. They did a good job, considering 
the constraints they were operating under. 
They weren't able to do everything they 
would've liked to have done, but they did 
many very positive things." 
 
Marcia Bansley, executive director of 
Trees Atlanta, a nonprofit organization that 
plants and conserves trees, agrees. "ACOG is 
doing the best they can with limited 
resources," she said, pointing out that these 
Olympics are being funded entirely through 
private sources, without tax dollars. 
Therefore, many private groups are helping 
to foot the bill on behalf of the environment 
during the games. Trees Atlanta has raised 
$4.5 million to plant trees around the city. 
"This will be an environmental improve- 
ment," Bansley said. "We have a terrible pol- 
lution problem when it's extremely hot, and 
downtown is the hottest part of the city. 
Trees are the best way we can cool the area 
off. If we can cool this area down, we can 
help our air quality. Trees also help stop 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Volume 104, Number 6, June 1996 597 
 
Forum 
 
ii / 
 
Q%6Q 
 
Sportsmanlike conduct Organizers are working to protect the 
environment at the site of the Olympic Winter Games of 2002. 
 
runoff from nonpoint source pollution." 
 
The Atlanta Bicycle Campaign (ABC) is 
also taking measures to help control air pol- 
lution during the games by encouraging the 
use of bicycles for transportation. ACOG 
and the city of Atlanta are helping the group 
with publicity and parking, and ABC will 
staff the bicycle parking lots. "Our goal is to 
provide access to the Olympics by bicycle," 
said Dennis Hoffarth, director of ABC's 
Olympic Bicycle Access Project. "Atlanta 
already has a severe air pollution problem, 
and this campaign will help with pollution 
control. 
 
Salt Lake City is also facing the challenge 
of protecting the environment when it hosts 
the Winter Olympics in 2002. "The envi- 
ronment has always been a contentious issue 
[here] because the small mountains around 
the city contain delicate watersheds," said 
John Hoagland, a winter sports and resorts 
specialist for the U.S. Forest Service, and a 
member of the Environmental Advisory 
Committee of the Salt Lake Olympic 
Organizing Committee. 
 
During preliminary planning, the orga- 
nizing committee selected two major 
canyons outside the city to serve as ski 
venues, but environmental groups protested 
and the committee withdrew the proposal. 
"Withdrawing the venues from those 
canyons calmed down the environmental 
community," Hoagland said. "Now the 
community is more supportive of the 
Olympics." 
 
The organizing committee is cooperating 
with environmental groups through repre- 
sentatives on the advisory committee. A pre- 
liminary environmental platform is now in 
place in which the organizing committee says 
it "intends to carry on and improve on the 
environmental progress initiated in Lilleham- 
mer." Plans indude requiring contractors to 
guarantee that the environment will be 
restored after the games, ensuring that cul- 
tural events such as the opening ceremony 
have an environmental theme or message, 
 
educating students and the com- 
munity on the importance of a 
healthy environment to human 
health, mandating that specta- 
tors use mass transit, and con- 
tracting with green vendors and 
green hotels. "The city has 
always been sensitive to the 
environment," Hoagland said, 
"and Lillehammer cranked up 
the heat a litde bit." 
 
598 Volume 104, Number 6, June 1996 * Environmental Health Perspectives