379blackwellopenFamily ProcessFam ProcessPMC1165908611659086116590863900982410.1111/famp.13036Elevating Black fathers' experiences in the National Fatherhood Initiative: Strengths and areas for improvement of 24/7 Dad® curriculum and case management services
VoithLaura A RussellKatie N WithrowAshley KearneyJennifer XiaTian ColemanDarrell 
1
Jack, Joseph, and Morton Mandel School of Applied Social Sciences, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, USA
2
Center on Trauma and Adversity, Cleveland, Ohio, USA
3
Passages: Connecting Fathers and Families, Cleveland, Ohio, USA*

Correspondence
, 
Laura A. Voith, Jack, Joseph, Morton Mandel School of Applied Social Sciences, Case Western Reserve University, 11235 Bellflower Rd., Cleveland, OH 44106, USA. 
Email: lav41@case.edu

✉Corresponding author.
157202463419261926–194621122024© 2024 The Author(s). Family Process published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Family Process Institute.This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for commercial purposes.

## Abstract
The Healthy Marriage and Responsible Fatherhood grant program is one of the most robust mechanisms supporting fatherhood programming in the United States, with the gold standard of care including fatherhood curriculum (e.g., 24/7 Dad®) and case management services. Despite the fact that fatherhood in the United States is not a monolith and Black fathers make up over 40% of those served through Responsible Fatherhood (RF) program, little research explicitly centers the lived experiences of low‐income Black fathers. The current study used focus groups with fathers (n = 23) and staff (n = 8) enrolled in a RF grantee program. Thematic analysis was used to determine programmatic mechanisms supporting these fathers' success and areas for improvement. Our findings highlight that the creation of a “safe space” by facilitators and the power of the group dynamic were essential elements for fathers' success overall. We also identified numerous programmatic mechanisms supporting Black fathers' success specific to fathering, healthy relationships, and economic stability. Finally, we highlighted important limitations that may impede the success of low‐income, Black fathers related to the 24/7 Dad® curriculum, engagement efforts, and economic stability, and discuss related practice, policy, and research recommendations.
Keywords: 24/7 Dad®, Black fathers, fatherhood, National Fatherhood Initiative

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2024 Jun 3; Received 2023 Sep 17; Accepted 2024 Jun 5; Issue date 2024 Dec.

Father involvement with their children is positively associated with multiple domains of children's lifespan and the wellbeing of fathers (e.g., employment, mental health; Adamsons & Johnson,  ). Studies have found associations ranging from toddlerhood (e.g., higher cognitive skills such counting and vocabulary; Baker et al.,  ) to adolescence (e.g., lower risky behavior such as alcohol use, physical fights, risky sex; Nepomnyaschy et al.,  ), and into adulthood (Sarkadi et al.,  ). A lack of father engagement, however, is linked with an abundance of negative child‐outcomes, ranging from social–emotional development and risky behaviors (Ermisch et al.,  ; McLanahan et al.,  ) to increased risk of infant mortality, child abuse/neglect, incarceration, and poverty (Wilson et al.,  ). Given fathers' potential for a profound impact on children across the lifespan, significant resources have been invested in fatherhood programs to increase father involvement and promote healthy relationships (Lewin‐Bizan,  ).
Fatherhood and family formation in the U.S. is not a monolith, however. African American families have disproportionately higher rates of “father‐absent” homes (57.6%), compared to Hispanic (31.2%) and White, non‐Hispanic (20.7%) households (Vespa et al.,  ). Historical deleterious structural forces have shaped the circumstances of contemporary Black fatherhood and nuclear family formation, including economic policies (e.g., deindustrialization, globalization), social welfare policies (prerequisite changes for Temporary Assistance for Needy Families), criminal justice policies (the “War on Drugs”, disproportionate sentencing across race and class) and mass incarceration (e.g., privatizing prisons; Alexander,  ). Given these realities, fatherhood programs must center contemporary Black families and the nonresident role of Black fathers to understand the complex factors shaping their success and barriers.

## Literature Review
The U.S. federal government supports the development and sustainability of fatherhood programs through the Healthy Marriage and Responsible Fatherhood (RF) grant program, allocating up to $150 million per year since 2005 (Hawkins & Simpson,  ; Office of Family Assistance,  ). Approximately 2 million fathers have enrolled in fatherhood programming to date (Rhoades et al.,  ), with low‐income, Black fathers representing over 40% of participants in fatherhood programs (Hawkins & Simpson,  ).
Of the fatherhood initiative standardized curricula, 24/7 Dad® is the most commonly used, with over 430 organizations implementing it across 45 states (Hawkins & Simpson,  ; National Fatherhood Initiative,  ). The curriculum focuses on helping fathers develop in three focus areas: engaged fatherhood, healthy relationships, and economic stability (National Fatherhood Initiative,  ). There are two versions of the 24/7 Dad® curriculum: the “A.M.” version covers basic fathering skills and topics while the “P.M.” version elaborates further on topics (National Fatherhood Initiative,  ). Sessions span a variety of topics, such as “What it Means to be a Man,” “Children's Growth,” “Working with Mom and Co‐Parenting” and “Dads and Work.” In individual or group settings, classes typically meet in 2‐h sessions over 12 weeks (National Fatherhood Initiative,  ).

## Fathering
A nascent body of evidence suggests 24/7 Dad® may promote positive father engagement. One study of predominantly Black, unemployed men (n = 409) found that fathers increased self‐awareness and fathering/parenting skills using a pre‐post non‐randomized design (Wilson et al.,  ). In a report of a non‐randomized study with a small sample (n = 32) of primarily socioeconomically disadvantaged people of color, fathers improved confidence in parenting roles and parental self‐efficacy post‐program (Lewin‐Bizan,  ), though another study with a larger sample did not (Perry,  ). In a technical report, Perry ( ) tested whether fathering outcomes (i.e., parenting knowledge, parenting self‐efficacy, conflict resolution skills, and co‐parenting relationship quality) differed significantly from pre‐ to post‐test with a sample of predominantly Black, nonresidential fathers (N = 508) who completed a program using the 24/7 Dad® curriculum. The results indicated parenting knowledge and conflict resolution skills had significantly increased, and had respective moderate (Cohen's d = 0.69) and small effect sizes (Cohen's d = 0.16). This emerging area of study suggests some positive effects related to parenting among low‐income Black fathers and fathers of color; however, fathers' perspectives of the underlying mechanisms facilitating these changes remain under‐researched. This gap warrants further research on soliciting the perspective of Black fathers and program staff.

## Healthy Relationships
Fatherhood programming has a relatively small, but measurable effect, on healthy relationships that is commonly and narrowly conceptualized through co‐parenting. A recent meta‐analysis of 30 studies involving low‐income, nonresidential fathers, found that fatherhood‐programming had the strongest effect size for co‐parenting relationship skills (d = 0.167, p < 0.05) compared to other outcomes with significant effects, including parenting and father involvement (Holmes et al.,  ). Findings from a qualitative study of majority Black, low‐income fathers (n = 87), indicate that the primary barrier to fatherhood engagement was their strained relationship with the child's mother (Holcomb et al.,  ). This barrier identified by fathers, the small effects of fatherhood programming on co‐parenting, and the narrow scope of how healthy relationships are conceptualized warrants further exploration with Black fathers and program staff into the mechanisms influencing change in healthy relationships for men enrolled in fatherhood programs.

## Economic stability
There is significantly less literature examining the efficacy of fatherhood programming on economic stability. Holmes et al. ( ) meta‐analysis examined the effects of fatherhood programming on employment among six controlled trials included in the study (N = 30 independent studies), finding no significant effects. Employment is an important indicator of economic stability; however, this sole conceptualization may be too narrow. Qualitative research with fathers has linked financial stability with being a good man and therefore a good father, suggesting men's financial struggles may negatively influence their perceptions of meeting expectations of being a good father (Holcomb et al.,  ). Understanding what works to support economic stability from fathers' and program staff's perspective may uncover important elements for more effective programming.

## Theoretical Framework
Intersectionality was first used to explain how Black women, as members of two marginalized groups, experience compounded discrimination when both aspects of their identities were considered in concert rather than singularly (Crenshaw,  , pp. 139–140). This concept has further developed, suggesting that all social divisions, such as race, class, gender, sexuality, disability, citizenship status, and age, operate together rather than as discrete and mutually exclusive entities to shape one's “social location” (Collins & Bilge,  , pp. 4–15). This paradigm shift provides a more comprehensive perspective to understanding the ways in which someone's social locations, outside forces, and power structures interact to shape the human experience, particularly with historically oppressed and marginalized populations, such as low‐income, Black men (Bauer et al.,  ). For example, criminal justice policies systematically targeting African Americans (Pettit & Gutierrez,  ) concurrent with declines in manufacturing and blue‐collar employment, contributed to mass incarceration of young Black men, limiting educational attainment, separating men from their intimate partners and children (Lu et al.,  ; Western,  ), widening the inequality gap in health (Wildeman & Wang,  ), and contributing to a prevalent stereotype associating Black men with fatherlessness (Coles & Green,  ). These men's social locations uniquely affect their success and barriers to fathering, healthy relationships, and economic stability.

## Current Study
Centering Black fathers' perspectives on their experiences of striving to be engaged fathers, to have healthy relationships, and to attain economic stability is essential to add depth to the intervention research focused on fatherhood programs broadly. The lack of Black fathers' voices in this literature is a significant gap. The current study explores the experience of low‐income, Black fathers and program staff engaging in the leading model for fatherhood support in the United States. We explore what programmatic factors promote success and what challenges are relevant for these men as fathers, partners, and providers, guided by the following research questions:
What are the key factors in fatherhood programming (i.e., 24/7 Dad® with case management services) that promote low‐income Black men's success relative to engaged fatherhood, healthy partnerships, and economic stability?
What misalignments, if any, exist between low‐income, Black fathers needs and fatherhood programming?

## METHOD

## Study Design
We applied a transformative paradigm to understand the mechanisms of impact for the gold standard of care for fatherhood programming (i.e. 24/7 Dad® and case management) from the perspective of fathers and staff. The transformative paradigm asserts that knowledge acquisition is not neutral, but rather reflects power dynamics and social relationships within society (Creswell & Poth,  ). Applying this paradigm, this study aimed to explicitly address the potential power differentials impacting program effectiveness from the perspective of the low‐income predominantly Black fathers being served and with the goal of minimizing disparities and enhancing their success (Creswell & Poth,  ).

## Data Collection

## Site
The study site was a non‐profit with a mission to encourage and assist families by working with fathers and father figures to enhance skills and economic stability. The organization offers free fatherhood programming across three neighboring counties in a Midwestern state. Approximately 200 fathers, majority Black (69%) and low‐income, receive the 24/7 Dad® programming each year. Fatherhood coaches (i.e. case managers) worked with participants on individualized case management needs outside of the group programming time, including individualized development plans, assistance with access to children, child support, and basic needs. Group facilitators delivered the AM version of 24/7 Dad® content, facilitated in‐class group work in an online setting, and served as employment coordinators for interested fathers (e.g., resume development, employment readiness, and employment opportunities).

## Procedures
Semi‐structured focus groups were conducted by multiple members of the research team, in teams of two. These doctoral trained researchers used Zoom, a web‐based meeting software, for the focus groups with program staff members and fathers voluntarily enrolled in fatherhood programming between July and December 2021. Fathers were recruited following a regularly scheduled fatherhood session after the program facilitator left and received a $25 gift card for participation. Staff were recruited via email and did not receive an incentive. Developed in concert with program administrators, focus group questions (see ) explored programmatic features promoting positive change and potential programmatic areas of improvement related to engaged fatherhood, healthy relationships, and economic stability. Each focus group was recorded and transcribed verbatim. Pseudonyms were applied to all participants to promote confidentiality. All study procedures were IRB approved by Case Western Reserve University.

## Participants
A total of seven father focus groups (N = 23) and two staff focus groups (N = 8) were conducted. All of the fathers in this study were Black (100%), and most were never married (60.9%), employed (60.8%), and had a GED or higher (86.8%). The average participant was 40 years old with two children (see Table  ). All fatherhood coaches and group facilitators (100%) and 26 of 29 (89.7%) eligible fathers participated in the study. Notably, 3 participants identifying as non‐Black were dropped from the analysis resulting in N = 23 fathers. Demographic information was not collected from staff at the time of the focus groups, and due to turnover, is incomplete. Staff demographics included 3 Black men, 2 White men, 2 White women, and 1 bi‐racial woman; and an age range of 18–54. In alignment with the Trauma‐Informed and Socially Just Research Framework (Voith et al.,  ), Table  reports demographics of the research and writing team to increase transparency of our own social locations that shaped the analysis.
 

## Measures
Program satisfaction data were collected from participants using four items assessing for program helpfulness, on a scale from 1 = not at all helpful to 5 = extremely helpful, with an additional option of “not addressed by this program.” Items included asking about overall how helpful was the program “to you”, “to your parenting”, “to helping you work together as parents with the mother or mothers of your child/children”, and “your financial well‐being”. Notably, no data were collected on the program's helpfulness with healthy romantic relationships.

## Analytic Strategy
Thematic analysis was used to identify, analyze, and report themes or patterns that effectively represent the content of the entire data set (Braun & Clarke,  ). Using a three‐person coding team (1 masters‐ and 2 doctoral‐trained coders), each stage of analysis was completed in Dedoose and systematically vetted by another doctoral‐trained coder and three Community Scholars. Community Scholars are low‐income, Black fathers who previously participated in fatherhood programming at the focal site. At the final stage of analysis, a visually‐depicted thematic coding structure was developed and vetted until consensus was reached. Data from fathers and staff were analyzed together initially and then each theme and subtheme of the final structure was re‐examined for congruence or divergence between fathers and staff. Descriptive statistics (mean, standard deviation, range) were calculated with survey data on fathers' report of program satisfaction. A sum score was created by summing the scores for all four items.

## Rigor
To account for reflexivity, the research team and Community Scholars applied principles from the Trauma Informed Socially Just Research Framework throughout each stage of the study (Voith et al.,  ) using journals and regular team meetings. For example, the study team examined what systems of privilege and oppression (such as their own identities, see Table  ) could affect aspects of the study, and how these might affect the dynamics of healing centered engagement when collecting and analyzing data. The Community Scholars were invaluable members of the research team who enhanced the trustworthiness and application of the transformative paradigm by centering the community perspective at all stages of data analysis and interpretation (Creswell & Poth,  ), and contributing to triangulation (Johnson et al.,  ). During data collection, thick and rich descriptions were generated, due in part to prolonged observation across the nine total focus groups (Johnson et al.,  ).

## RESULTS
Overall, fathers in the current study reported strong scores of satisfaction with the program with an average program helpfulness sum score of 17.71 (SD = 2.21) of a possible 20. Across different domains, fathers reported the program's highest score for helpfulness with parenting with a mean of M = 4.81 out of 5 (SD = 0.68), followed by overall helpfulness, co‐parenting, and financial wellbeing (see Table  ). Data for all fathers in the program at the time of the study are similar, though notably fathers included in the current study scored higher on average.
 We identified mechanisms promoting positive change for low‐income, Black fathers specific to engaged fatherhood, healthy relationships, and economic stability, and the program generally. “Mechanisms of impact” were defined as program qualities or characteristics that fostered positive change. We also identified misalignments (“areas of improvement”) between needs of low‐income, Black fathers across different aspects of programming, with the majority related to economic stability. Misalignments were defined as elements of the program that did not meet the needs or expectations of fathers. The results indicate whether the subsequent themes or subthemes were supported by fathers and/or staff (see Table  ), and quotes designate the speaker's role as father or staff.
 

## Mechanisms of Impact: Factors affecting Positive Change

## Engaged Fatherhood
Engaged fatherhood was promoted through three mechanisms identified by fathers and staff: empowerment (i.e., ways the program promoted fathers to make positive change in their fathering), skill building and parenthood psychoeducation (i.e., teaching and promoting mastery of skills for fathering), and case management (i.e., activities and structure provided by case managers to guide father towards personal goals). “Engaged fatherhood” was described as “having a presence in their [children's] life, not just [being there] physically …[but] you're involved in their activities, you know the things they like, that they don't like” (Adam).
To promote engaged fatherhood, first, program staff emphasized the critical message that fathers “are important to their families” (Michelle, staff), and fathers described a sense of empowerment from this messaging. Roman (father) said: “[it] gets you so riled up…that you want to go out and be great. You want to go and be a better brother, a better father, or better mentor.” Second, fathers highly valued the program's skill building and parenthood psychoeducation, such as with healthy discipline. For example, Derek (father) described his new understanding of discipline as an opportunity to teach rather than punish: “[discipline is] you teaching someone…the right and the wrong.” Another father, Winston, described how what he and other fathers learned was instrumental to overcoming challenges: “And it was real difficult. And how what we was learning helped [fathers] kind of…not overcome it, but give them the tools to learn how to overcome that situation.” Skill building was frequently described as important for fatherhood engagement, particularly for problem‐solving, empathy‐building, and communication (with communication being the most frequently cited). One father, Allen, described advancing his communication skills with his children, to “just really talk to them, hear them out, and hear them talk about their issues and what they got going on.” Finally, case management was a mechanism for fatherhood engagement by providing accountability and barrier removal. Staff member, Jessica, noted “we do a checklist of when they have specific things that they want to do with their children even if that's as simple as having a conversation with them about school a couple times a week.” Barrier removals were unique to each father, but the most common barrier for engaged fatherhood was custody. Derek (father) reported that informing the judge that he voluntarily enrolled in fatherhood programming “was like a signature for me to get a visit.”

## Healthy Intimate Relationships
Three mechanisms that promote healthy relationships among fathers were described. “Creative methods” were defined as engaging program activities related to romantic relationships. “Psychoeducation and skill building specific to healthy relationships” was defined as teaching and promoting mastery of skills for romantic relationships. “Therapeutic elements” were defined as activities promoting healing to support healthy romantic relationships.
The program applied creative methods to engage fathers' learning using strategies like interpersonal modeling between group members, a female staff member's perspective, and media. These creative methods were strategically used to help men open up and reflect on relationships. For example, Jason (staff) described his use of a video depicting negative views of relationships to help men discuss societal and personal beliefs about relationships.
It's about a guy who is miserable in his marriage and he's giving money to his kids and his wife and the dog comes by and he gives the dog money. And it's like, what was the picture of marriage there? And, so, it kind of creates the space [for men to talk].
Once fathers were engaged in discussion, facilitators promoted interpersonal modeling via fathers giving and receiving advice from other fathers and facilitators. This sharing along with healthy modeling exposure helped fathers learn a variety of productive responses to multiple contexts with intimate partners. Lenny said: “I got to hear the good relationships too you know, and what it takes to be in a good relationship, in a healthy relationship.”
Second, psychoeducation and skill building promoted men's healthy relationships with intimate partners, including helping men become aware of and identify “healthy green flags” and “unhealthy red flags” in relationships. Fathers were also taught how to de‐escalate potential domestic violence and foster healthy relationships, particularly through communication and self‐control. One staff member stated, “In almost every lesson we talk about communication in some way, shape or form and just doing the right thing, being a good person, making that effort to speak with your spouse or your child's mother in the best way possible.” Fathers described the impact of this new knowledge:
I'm listening more and I'm not so quick to jump down [my partner's] throat. (Joseph) [This program] makes me communicate better [with my partner]. (Derek)

Third, fathers described how therapeutic elements promoted positive change for them. Fathers described that “this class is more of a therapy” (Kyle) at times and helped them practice relaxation, self‐awareness, and identify their strengths. Archie stated, “It calmed me down and relaxed me.” Together with the psychoeducation and skill building, the therapeutic dimensions of the program helped fathers work on developing and using empathy. Joseph (father) described developing his empathetic skill set: “to take her point of view, whether it was right or wrong, at least be open to what her point of view might have been.” Interpersonal modeling was also closely tied to the therapeutic effects fathers benefited from, as Taylor (father) describes:
Being able to talk to other men…even if it's not solving the problem, it's this whole mind, body, soul thing that you go through to where [talking to other men] makes it a little bit more understandable. It's tolerable. It just makes it better. It doesn't make it OK to where your problems disappear. But, it definitely, because we're human, we get to talk about being a father. That means our minds for that moment is on our kids or the baby momma or something, that we're focusing on being a father or being a man or being a dad or being a husband or boyfriend. So, it definitely helps. Just being human and being able to talk about these things.

## Economic Stability
Fathers and staff described two mechanisms that promoted economic stability among fathers, including career support (i.e., activities or actions promoting employment) and financial assistance (i.e., support to obtain monetary stability), which was primarily offered through case management. Each father received an employment assessment and follow‐up support based on each father's interest and need level. One father, Adam, described “they didn't ask about jobs but did mention to me, before I started classes, that if I ever needed help with a resume, job assistance, applications, different things like that.” One staff member, Michelle, described specific employment support offered “I can give them tools for budgeting, for increasing their credit score, [and] referring them to our employment coordinators.” Employment coordinators were in place to help interested fathers find and apply for jobs; however, staff noted that this opt‐in procedure based on fathers expressing interest/needs may have made this service less visible than other supports. Financial assistance was a critical mechanism to reaching economic stability. Richard (father) described this financial assistance in the form of “helping out with child support and coming up to date with your child support.” Financial incentives in the form of gift cards were also provided for completing different aspects of the program. Joseph (father) explained how the incentives helped him provide economically for his children.
We get incentives to participate in this program…we're not only getting knowledge and experience from each other's past and futures because we all got different stories but [we] also get incentives [which] helps. My daughter, my youngest child is two years old, so to get on here and build on, have real great dialogue with these gentlemen, and also get an incentive to be able to go get my daughter a pack of diapers is appreciated.

## Overall Program Strengths
Fathers and staff also described universal facilitators to fathers' success that were impactful for all focal areas: creating a safe space (i.e., group dynamic that gives fathers ability to build trust and camaraderie), team‐orientation (i.e., aspects of staff working together to support fathers), and skills (i.e., teaching and promoting mastery of skills broadly). These universal factors are closely tied to how the staff delivered services.
First, fathers and staff described that creating a safe space for fathers was especially salient across all outcome areas. One father, Jamal, described the value of this safe space: “Hearing everybody's different experiences and nobody's judging nobody was kind of soothing in the world where every time you turn around and do anything or say anything, you can be judged.” Facilitators created a safe space by modeling vulnerability through sharing personal experiences to complement the 24/7 Dad® curriculum:
I add my own personal experiences to it, you know, things that I know that these guys relate to, because I'm talking to real dads who are having real problems. So, I'm not going to give them a bunch of smoke, I'm not going to give them a bunch of fluff. If I think that it is pertinent to whatever today's session is, then that's the experience that I share with these guys, because they can relate, 10 times out of 10. And I think that is super important to them to know that the facilitator is not somebody who is just teaching them, but is somebody who can relate. (Austin, staff)

Staff member, Jason, described that a safe space promotes openness among dads: “[it] creates the space to not just go into the same [thought] pattern all the time.” This openness primed fathers for genuine interpersonal learning, as described by Dominic (father): “I'm learning as much as I can from them, and they probably learn things from me, so it's good to be out here sharing our stories.” Interpersonal learning related to the general group dynamic, which fathers described as an important component facilitating positive change. For instance, Richard (father) noted,
We had some great conversations and debates about a lot of things. But for the most part, you just gotta be willing to take into consideration what y'all saying or you know, opinions are about a lot of things, so everybody in that group was willing to listen for the most part, and put a foot forward towards those steps to start their journey. Cause when I first started the group, I was excited after the first day because the conversations went good. You know, I felt like I kinda knew everybody once everybody got to telling their stories, I don't know but for some odd reason, it just seemed like everybody in the group connected after we told our stories and all that. After that, it was just awesome.
Fathers also described that “camaraderie” increased their social support systems and motivated them. One father, Roman, called the program “a venue for brothers.” Another father, Adam, stated, “a lot of it was just like having camaraderie, being able to bounce ideas off of people.” Other fathers, noted that this camaraderie provided a sense of motivation to improve (David) and enhanced their learning (William):
David: I was just being lazy about it, but now I'm actually gonna put myself out there to get stuff done
William: Where I learned from was listening to all my other brothers deal with their situations, you know what I'm saying. Yeah, the textbook is gonna be straight up and down, but I need real life experience, the real sh** that really goes on out here
Additionally, the staff's team‐orientation was described to help overcome numerous systemic barriers faced by fathers. For instance, staff member, Robert, noted the importance of staff teamwork in linking fathers with resources “we've got to work together, the linkage has to happen.” In particular, staff's navigation of systems, commonly including child support and housing, getting necessary documentation, and identifying additional resources (i.e., legal assistance, medical assistance, transportation, substance abuse treatment) was key to fathers' success. Father, Jeremy, explained that the staff's support was vital in navigating system barriers to basic needs (i.e., access to transportation) resulting from delinquent child support payments: “they're going to help me get my license because, the child support situation I have going on.”
Finally, the program promoted skills that were helpful to fathers, including coping skills, goal setting, communication, problem‐solving, gaining self‐awareness, and overall relationship improvement. The research team noted these as “universal skills”, as they promoted positive change across all areas of interest, rather than just one. For instance, when discussing the problem‐solving and coping skills facilitated by the program, father, Anthony, noted, “it helped me to sit down and think and figure out. Take a different route than what I normally would take.” Ronald (father) spoke to the value of these skills, “The program is there to help me facilitate the mess that's going on in my [head] and help me sort it out, put it on paper, just making things very simple. Okay and now the rest just falls on pure execution.”

## Programmatic Areas of Improvement

## 24/7 Dad® Curriculum
Three challenges and related areas of improvement specific to the 24/7 Dad® curriculum were identified: unrelatable aspects of curriculum, desire for altered programming, and desire for more flexibility. “Unrelatable aspects of curriculum,” supported by fathers and staff, was defined as the curriculum's lack of racial and economic diversity and limited representation of family structure. For example, Candace (staff member) noted,
It is set for a specific person. It is set as if you're already married with kids and you're just needing some extra education in your family. So if we're having guys who have zero education, bad relationships, no marriage, can't see their kids, and we're giving them this curriculum, we're not even starting off from the beginning for them. We're just jumping right into something that they can't even relate to.
Kurt (father) discussed the need for more cultural representation, particularly relating to the barriers to engaged fatherhood stemming from oppression and life experiences of Black fathers. He noted, “let me say this, dealing with Black folks, my culture, they are different…and they don't go over that in the textbook stuff.” And, Darren (father) described the need for more representation in family structure,
I would just like to see a little bit more of that fleshed out about other things that could possibly happen like having a parent [who is incarcerated] or being a man that's incarcerated or even having your significant other who is incarcerated and you may be a single man because you're still married to that person or with that person, and you raising [the kids]. Or the other thing I would like to see more of is talking more about stepparenting.
A staff member, Jason, described how fathers became dismissive of the curriculum's portrayal of healthy relationships because it is presented in a narrow cultural scope.
I think there could be some dismissiveness…a hostility… by [fathers'] against portrayals of healthy relationships that are, there's an added cultural barrier, right it's a suburban picture but it's the only picture we have of a healthy relationship so…things get confused.
Considering the comments of Kurt and Darren together, fathers would like to see more representation of experiences like theirs in the curriculum overall, including Black fathers with differing intimate and co‐parenting relationship dynamics (e.g., separated, remarried), employment statuses (e.g., unemployed), and other life experiences (e.g., incarceration).
Fathers also generated ideas on how to enhance programming for their needs, i.e., “desire for altered programming.” Men suggested the use of more active forms of learning (such as role play) as described by David (below), discussion of legal situations impacting fatherhood, mentors to engage with post‐programming, and more attention to economic stability.
David: role play some of the scenes, like different scenarios in relationships. Yeah, like with some of y'all workers and some of us, like role play and go through it like that because that would probably be the best way to learn
Staff described a desire for more flexibility in the curriculum. Due to limited diversity in race, socioeconomic status, and family types represented in the curriculum, staff felt the need to adapt to better match the needs of the fathers served. However, staff expressed feeling constrained in their ability to make adjustments to the curriculum. Staff member, Jessica, noted “we're supposed to stay almost straight as the curriculum teaches it, so I think if we were allowed to have leeway, we could go off in a different way to help better suit the people we are serving but we don't have the option to do that, so it does make it a little more difficult.”

## Engagement
Despite the efforts noted above, some fathers described a desire for adjustments based on their needs, which we titled a “person‐centered approach.” For example, fathers described a need for improved handicap accessibility, time flexibility, technology assistance, more financial assistance, and making the fathers feel like a priority. Additionally, fathers and staff described a need for post‐programming, including extending support after the program ends, helping maintain the group camaraderie post‐program, and the strategic use of in‐person opportunities to complement the online group sessions. Father, Lenny, noted, “we all went through that process, and we all had that camaraderie and everything and then like there's nothing, poof it's gone.” Staff member, Candace, said that after the program “I think they just kind of go back to their old ways because they don't have that cohort anymore.”

## Economic Stability Material
Fathers and staff members described fewer aspects of the program that they felt promoted economic stability. For instance, Candace noted, “If that's something that we're supposed to be covering and it's not in our curriculum, that only leaves a little bit of time for case management to cover it.” Though the program screens fathers for employment (full/part/seeking), total income, educational background, current resume, and interest in employment support, one father (Adam), described that fathers needed a more comprehensive approach to economic stability:
Do like a pre‐survey or a pre‐programmed survey. Just on economic stability alone. And find out what needs might be. Like do they need a job or are they looking for a better job or you know anything like that. Do you have a checking? Do you have a savings? Do you have retirement, like a 401K or 403b or Roth IRA? Stocks, bonds, anything like that. You know, I would just find things out or also find out, like, if they want to know about those things, because some people want to know about it. They just don't have the avenue to go down to get the information because not everybody, not everybody's family does those things or has those things or are privy to those things.
Staff described a natural hierarchy to programming, with 24/7 Dad® being the most prominent feature of their services. Since economic stability was not explicitly covered in the 24/7 Dad® curriculum, however, it resulted in less time dedicated to employment coordination compared to other elements of programming. Jason (staff) stated:
I think that because our funding model is based on curriculum completion it kind of naturally pivots us more towards the fatherhood component because that's the bottom line is get them through the curriculum component and so it can sometimes feel that employment coordination is kind of a secondary thing.
Staff also described more limited training and programmatic support (e.g., employer connections and networks) related to economic stability. For example, Jason said: “I certainly don't feel confident to say to somebody I've got employers I can talk to and I can get you something there.” Candace (staff) also described the need for “more [staff] training or education, then maybe we could take it to a different level.” The staff's perceptions that economic stability had lower visibility to fathers in the program was corroborated by administration in follow‐up meetings, where administrative staff described trying to strike a balance between the rigor and intensity of the fatherhood curriculum with additional programming and support for economic stability.

## DISCUSSION
This study adds to a small body of research centering the intersectional identities of low‐income, Black fathers, a sizable demographic served through the U.S. fathering initiative, by identifying factors they felt supported their success through programming. Fathers and program staff reported numerous facilitators for fathers' success using the gold standard of care (case management services and the 24/7 Dad® curriculum) overall and specifically related to fathering, healthy partnerships, and economic stability. Our findings highlight that the creation of a “safe space” and the power of the group dynamic were important to fathers' journeys towards success, with 78% of fathers and 75% of staff in the current study mentioning this (see Table  ). A recent study with 40 men of mixed races also highlighted the value of peer support among fathers (Brown et al.,  ). Previous research has highlighted the critical role of the therapist in patient change (Fife et al.,  ); however, research in the fatherhood field identifying the importance of creating a safe space and exploring best practices for non‐therapists to effectively create this type of space and dynamic among low‐income, Black men is only just emerging (Ciaravino et al.,  ).
In addition to the numerous factors supporting fathers' success, we also identified several key limitations of this gold standard of care. Fathers identified important additions or amendments to fatherhood programming, including a desire for continued support post‐programming. Taken together with this study's finding that men's sense of safety, camaraderie, and even a “brotherhood” was an essential element to their success, programs should consider the added value of father‐to‐father support (e.g., mentoring) post‐programming to amplify the positive effects of programming. Few studies have examined mentorship among low‐income, Black fathers (e.g., Sheppard et al.,  ); however, research with Hispanic teens or young parents suggests this may be a promising addition to fatherhood programming (Scott et al.,  ).
In addition to numerous strengths of the 24/7 Dad® curriculum (discussed below), our study also highlighted important limitations that may impede the success of low‐income, Black fathers. The curriculum appears to be founded on the underlying assumptions of White, middle‐class values and norms (e.g., neoliberal model of success or the “American dream”; Gaudio & Bialostok,  ) and has not adapted to how institutionalized racism can affect low‐income, Black fatherhood and families (Wilson & Thompson,  ), such as changing family structure (e.g., increased rates of female heads of households, decreased marriage rates/increased separation rates, kinship models of care), barriers to child access (e.g., mass incarceration disproportionately targeting Black men, TANF requirements), and structural oppression (e.g., redlining, disinvestment in education). While fatherhood programming is not a panacea to these structural forces shaping the health and success of low‐income Black families, it would behoove fatherhood programs to make key adaptations to more effectively serve these fathers. For example, research shows that representation matters (Davis,  ). The inclusion of experiences and strengths of Black fathers in the curriculum content and revising curriculum to account for the myriad of family structures in the U.S. (e.g., step‐fathers, biological fathers, blended families, kinship care, fathers co‐parenting with multiple mothers) is a feasible and potentially powerful adjustment to make. Programs should also include fathers with varying life experiences and barriers in the curriculum, such as fatherhood post‐incarceration, navigating custody while unemployed, and difficult co‐parenting dynamics. Programs could benefit from further engaging fathers in the identification of these experiences that would be helpful to include, as well as in the development of additional support for fathers that address some of these barriers. They could do so using community‐based participatory methods to involve fathers in the identification and evaluation of new curriculum or programs.

## Fatherhood
Complementing previous research showing 24‐7 Dad increased fathering skills (Wilson et al.,  ), some low‐income Black fathers and staff in the current study identified that psychoeducation and skills training felt important to promoting engaged fatherhood. Though fathers and staff identified numerous skills that were important for promoting engaged fatherhood, communication was chief among them. This aligns with Latino fathers' report of communication as one of most important skills developed in a fatherhood program (Turner et al.,  ). Previous fatherhood research on self‐efficacy (i.e., an individual's belief in their ability to act) indicated it was not associated with fathering‐related outcomes. However, several fathers and half of staff in the current study reported that a sense of empowerment (which may parallel the concept of self‐efficacy) was important to their success. Given these mixed findings, it is possible that the belief in oneself could be a necessary but not sufficient factor to promote change among men. Our findings also point to the role of case management to support engaged fathering, highlighting the need for a team approach to provide individual skill development and to assist with navigating structural barriers. Similar to another qualitative study with low‐income Black fathers (Holcomb et al.,  ), some fathers and staff in the current study highlighted access to their children as a key barrier and how case managers supported navigating child custody barriers.

## Healthy Relationships
Fatherhood programming has incredible potential to make profound impacts in the area of healthy relationships among intimate partners for several reasons. First, fathers are motivated to gain access to and develop quality relationships with their children, and this inevitably involves the child's mother. Second, healthy (or toxic) relationships between adults (co‐parenting and/or romantic partners) have profound impacts on child development, including children's future academic success, physical well‐being, mental health, and relationship violence exposure in adolescence and adulthood (e.g., Holmes et al.,  ). Third, the presence of children has considerable influence on the quality and nature of adult intimate partnerships, regardless of the fathers' biological affiliation to the child (e.g., biological fathers, step‐fathers, father‐figures).
Developing empathy, an essential building block of healthy relationships (Coutinho et al.,  ), was valuable to promote healthy relationships among some fathers and their intimate partners in the current study. It appeared that empathy building among low‐income Black fathers was connected to group dynamics that promoted a space of vulnerability among men. Our study highlighted that creating a space where men felt safe to share their experiences and listen to and learn from other men was valued by the majority of men (78%) and staff (75%) in the current study. Therapeutic techniques, such as modeling vulnerability, relaxation techniques, building self‐awareness, and strengths‐based approaches, aided in the creation of a “safe space” for men to be vulnerable enough to experience change. Additionally, fathers described important skills gained from a domestic violence booster curriculum (e.g., ‘red flags’, ‘green flags’, de‐escalation tactics, communication and self‐control techniques). Fathers’ ability to assess the “health” of their own and other intimate relationships, and tools to navigate challenges in those relationships may be important when creating “tool‐kits” for fathers. Notably, this psychoeducation and skill building were not part of the 24/7 Dad® curriculum.

## Economic Stability
Fathers and staff described that support for economic stability was less visible in the program's service offerings, similar to previous research (Wilson et al.,  ). Applying an intersectional lens and previous research (Holcomb et al.,  ), father's identities are linked with their economic contributions. Deemphasizing economic stability in fatherhood programming may be a limiting factor to fathers' overall success. Though fathers noted that the incentives were immediately helpful to their role as fathers in the current study, these incentives are not sustainable for long term economic stability.

## Limitations
Demographics of the staff participants were incomplete, limiting the understanding of this subsample's characteristics. The sample represented in this study is not necessarily representative of all fathers in the program. The average father in the current study was more likely to be Black, employed, and earning slightly higher income (though still low‐income), and less likely to be in a romantic relationship at the time of study. Also, the current study participants were more likely to complete the program (100%) compared to all fathers in the program at the time of the current study (75.6%). However, the reported satisfaction scores of all fathers in the program (at the time of study) were similar to the current study's sample, suggesting some parity between the current study's sample and all fathers in the program. Given the limitations of qualitative inquiry, our findings are not necessarily transferable to other fatherhood settings. However, the strengths of applying the qualitative paradigm using an intersectional lens gives important areas of exploration and consideration for fatherhood programs serving low‐income, Black fathers.

## Practice and Policy Implications
This study points to several important implications for practitioners and policy makers, especially for those implementing 24/7 Dads®. First, programs and practitioners working with low‐income Black fathers should consider focusing on skill building activities, particularly developing healthy communication with children. These knowledge‐ and skill‐building activities may be more successful if paired with activities that empower fathers. For example, the use of motivational interviewing techniques and community‐building activities may aid case managers and group facilitators working with fathers. Second, programs supporting low‐income Black fathers should have staff who are trained in local custody laws, as this is a primary barrier to overcome. Third, cultivating a safe space was widely noted as important for father success. Among the little research on building safe spaces within fatherhood programs, researchers suggest facilitators promote the values of confidentiality (e.g., establishing group rules about sharing information), trust, and peer‐support (e.g., provide space for fathers to tell their own experiences; Ciaravino et al.,  ). Because low‐income Black fathers are likely to face higher rates of adversity and trauma in childhood and adulthood (Mersky et al.,  ), facilitators may consider incorporating trauma‐informed practices into groups. These practices could include training staff in the adverse childhood experiences and trauma framework (Shonkoff et al.,  ) and in identifying potential presentations of a trauma response; screening to identify high‐need clients to refer for mental health services (e.g., see Lang et al.,  for a validated 6‐item screener); building relationships with mental health practitioners, especially those who have experience with Black, Indigenous, and communities of color; and, the use of non‐clinical trauma‐focused therapies, especially those for men (e.g., see Safety, Emotions, Loss, and Failure (SELF) Model; Bloom et al.,  ). Finally, given that adult intimate relationships have a profound and direct relationship on child development, our findings suggest that programming addressing healthy relationships is valued in fatherhood programming, and may need a more pronounced presence than current curriculum models.

## Future Research
As the body of research on 24/7 Dads®, the most frequently delivered intervention supporting low‐income Black fathers, continues to develop, researchers should apply an intersectional lens when exploring the experiences and examining the effectiveness of fatherhood programming. Using mixed methods studies can help to center the narratives and experiences of low‐income Black fathers, which can then illuminate important nuances that can be examined in larger samples. For example, access to children is a key barrier among low‐income Black fathers, and effectiveness studies should consider examining outcomes among fathers with varying levels of access to their children. Researchers should partner with accomplished fatherhood practitioners to identify the most effective practices for creating safe spaces among low‐income fathers and fathers of color, to disseminate best practices for this component to fatherhood programming.

## INTERVIEW GUIDE QUESTIONS

 

Voith, L. A.
, 
Russell, K. N.
, 
Withrow, A.
, 
Kearney, J.
, 
Xia, T.
, & 
Coleman, D.
 (2024). Elevating Black fathers' experiences in the National Fatherhood Initiative: Strengths and areas for improvement of 24/7 Dad® curriculum and case management services. Family Process, 63(4), 1926–1946. 10.1111/famp.13036

Funding information

This document was prepared under Grant 90ZJ0043‐01‐00 from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), Administration for Children and Families (ACF), Office of Family Assistance (OFA), Fatherhood FIRE program.

## REFERENCES