pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC11210802PMC11210802.111210802112108023893562910.1371/journal.pone.0306072PONE-D-23-268181Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesBiomechanicsMusculoskeletal MechanicsBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyMuscle PhysiologyMusculoskeletal MechanicsPhysical SciencesPhysicsClassical MechanicsKinematicsSocial SciencesSociologyCommunicationsPhysical SciencesPhysicsClassical MechanicsMotionVelocitySocial SciencesSociologyCommunicationsSocial CommunicationResearch and Analysis MethodsResearch DesignExperimental DesignBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyBehaviorRecreationGamesSocial SciencesPsychologyBehaviorRecreationGamesResearch and Analysis MethodsMathematical and Statistical TechniquesStatistical MethodsAnalysis of VariancePhysical SciencesMathematicsStatisticsStatistical MethodsAnalysis of VarianceCommunicative modulations of early action components support the prediction of distal goals
Communicative modulations support the prediction of distal goalshttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-8366-0888DockendorffMartinConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSoftwareValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing SchmitzLauraConceptualizationMethodologySupervisionValidationWriting – review & editing VesperCordulaConceptualizationFunding acquisitionProject administrationSupervisionValidationWriting – review & editing KnoblichGüntherConceptualizationFunding acquisitionInvestigationProject administrationResourcesSupervisionValidationWriting – review & editing 1
Department of Cognitive Science, Central European University, Vienna, Austria2
Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany3
Department of Linguistics, Cognitive Science, and Semiotics, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark4
Interacting Minds Centre, Aarhus University, Aarhus, DenmarkTessariAlessiaEditor ]. Even a simple social act like shaking hands requires one to anticipate and monitor the other person’s arm and hand movements so as to make one’s palm meet the exact same spot on the other person’s hand—all this in a matter of just a few seconds [ ]. Such simple joint actions, and also more complex ones such as playing a piano duet, benefit from (and sometimes are even made possible by) our capacity to predict the outcome and timing of others’ actions while these unfold [ ], or even prior to their initiation [ ]. In order to facilitate such predictions, interacting agents will often resort to a variety of behavioral strategies, aptly known as “coordination smoothers” due to their role in simplifying coordination demands during interaction [ , ]. One such smoother involves the modulation of certain kinematic parameters of an instrumental action in order to make the action more salient and readable to an observer, who can then predict the action outcome more easily. For example, one of the pianists in the duo might lift her arms with a high amplitude right before starting to play, thus providing more explicit anticipatory information about the timing of her immediate actions to her co-performer [ ]. Crucially, such modulations are characterized by the fact that their underlying goals have a “dual nature” [ ]: the person performing the action can achieve simultaneously an instrumental goal (e.g., pressing one of the keys on the piano) and a communicative goal (e.g., informing the co-performer about the exact moment when she will start playing) [ ]. In keeping with previous research showing how such communicative modulations can be used to facilitate coordination [ ], we will refer to these as “sensorimotor communication” (henceforth ‘SMC’).
Most previous research on SMC has focused on how actors coordinate their actions by relying on communicative modulations of instrumental actions directed to proximal goals [see for a review]. Proximal goals can be understood as those goals whose achievement is the result of a single transitive or intransitive movement, like placing an object on a table or making a step to a new position in space, respectively. Proximal goals are therefore directly tied, both temporally and spatially, to the movements leading to their immediate achievement. Distal goals, on the other hand, are achieved by two or more successive movements, each with its own proximal sub-goal. Consequently, and unlike proximal goals, the early movement(s) preceding the achievement of a distal goal are both spatially and temporally separated from it by one or more intermediate movements. A well-studied example of such distal goals, and one that will be the focus of the present work, are the goals that result from a two-step action sequence, as when a grasping movement towards a piece of food (i.e. a first movement component) is followed by bringing it to one’s mouth (i.e., a second movement component) [ , ].
The present set of studies draws on two lines of research: first, research on people’s production and understanding of actions directed at distal goals, and second, research on SMC. Based on these two lines of research, we ask under which conditions observers can predict the distal goal of a two-step action sequence when observing communicative modulations of a first movement component. Before addressing this question, we will first review relevant findings in the motor control literature suggesting that acting towards distal goals leads to changes in kinematic features of early movement components [ ]. These changes in movement kinematic can be used by observers to predict distal goals of observed actions [ ]. Then, we will argue that such predictive processes play a key role in SMC, where observers use communicative modulations of instrumental actions to simulate distal goals, thereby establishing what we call “motor-iconic” relations between modulations in the kinematics of early action components and the action’s distal goal.

## Distal goals in action production and observation
A large body of research in motor control has demonstrated that the way we plan and execute simple motor acts in non-communicative contexts is highly sensitive to our upcoming actions and to the distal goals achieved by these actions [ ]. For example, a natural reaching movement towards an object is performed with different velocities depending on whether the reach is followed by a careful placing of the object or by throwing the object in a large box [ , ]. Similar effects of distal goals on early action kinematics have been found when participants are asked to reach towards an object and then place it in a target location that varies in size, position or relative distance [ ]. Specifically, in the latter study, reaching velocity was higher and maximal finger aperture was larger when the object had to be placed in a far target relative to a near one [see also , ]. Furthermore, studies on the “end-state comfort effect” report a tendency for participants to grasp objects in bio-mechanically awkward ways in order to ensure a comfortable position at the end of their movements [ , ], thus again suggesting a strong influence of distal goals on the planning and execution of early movement components.
One way researchers have sought to explain how distal goals affect early action kinematics is by appealing to the mediating role of motor or action representations [ – ]. These representations play a key role in guiding actions towards their goals while the action unfolds [ , ]. As a consequence, performing an action directed at a distal goal, like throwing an object into a basket after picking it up, can sometimes lead to visible changes in the kinematics of the early movement components (in this case, the grasping of the object) leading towards such goal (for a similar proposal in terms of “coupled planning” see [ ]). Other features of distal goals, such as their expected value (i.e., reward), can also lead to visible changes in early movements and, in turn, increase people’s motor performance [ , ].
Besides their role in guiding the performance of one’s own actions, motor or action representations are also involved in understanding and predicting other people’s instrumental actions and goals [ – ]. Crucially, these predictions often go beyond the mere online anticipation of an unfolding movement or its proximal (i.e., immediate) goal, as they can extend to the prediction of more distal goals [ ]. For example, research suggests that motor regions in the brain are differently activated depending on whether an observed reaching movement towards a piece of food is then followed by the distal goal of placing it in a container or of eating it [ ]. What makes these predictions possible is the fact that observers rely on early kinematic information contained in the movements [ , – ] but also on objects placed in the immediate vicinity of the agent [ , ].
Most research on action understanding has shown that observers can use kinematic information as a cue to infer information about the observed actor’s (both proximal and distal) goals. This has recently led researchers in the field of joint action to ask whether, in social interactions, co-actors would not only rely on each other’s kinematic information to coordinate their actions, but would also actively exaggerate their movements, thus facilitating the achievement of a joint goal by making their action goals easier to predict [ , , – ]. These situations, in which co-actors actively inform each other about their goals by modulating the kinematics of their movements, are at the core of SMC. We turn to these now.

## Proximal and distal goals in SMC
Studies on SMC have mostly focused on settings in which co-actors are required to coordinate their actions by, for example, aiming at one of three target locations either in synchrony [ ] or sequentially [ ]. Typically, the design of these studies is such that the information allowing co-actors to achieve coordination, like the location of the correct target, is allocated to one of the actors only, the “Leader”. Furthermore, participants are not allowed to speak nor gesture during the performance of these tasks. Instead, Leaders inform their naïve “Followers” by modulating key kinematic features of their instrumental actions. For example, Leaders have been shown to exaggerate the amplitude of their aiming movements in order to disambiguate between target locations [ ], or to increase or decrease their wrist height as a way of informing the Follower about the part of the object they are about to grasp [ ]. These modulations are more easily perceived by Followers, who can use them to disambiguate between various proximal goals [ , – ]. Once they are able to detect and disambiguate between different proximal goals, Followers can adapt their behavior in a timely manner, thereby leading to successful temporal and/or spatial coordination [ , ]. Thus, given that Leaders exaggerate their movements (in studies on SMC), and that these exaggerations are in turn used by Followers to facilitate their predictions of the Leader’s goals, these movements have sometimes been described as “signals” [ ], to be contrasted with the natural, non-exaggerated movements in studies on action observation, where observers rely on these movements as “cues” to predict the goals of the agent.
At the core of SMC is the capacity for Leaders to make their proximal goals more discriminable by producing kinematic modulations, and for Followers to understand such modulations as conveying anticipatory information about these goals. However, as we noted previously, the predictions made during action observation are not limited to proximal goals, but are also directed at more distal goals. Thus, this raises the question of whether communicative modulations of early action components can be used by observers to predict an agent’s distal goals.
Some of the findings on action observation we reviewed earlier provide preliminary evidence indicating that observers can derive information about distal goals when observing the initial stages of naturally performed reaching movements [ , ]. Thus, these studies indicate that observers can infer distal goals when observing instrumental movements that are not communicatively modulated by their actors. As far as we know, only two studies have directly tested whether observers can also do this for communicative modulations of actions. Donnarumma and colleagues [ ] conducted a series of computationally-guided analyses on the processes involved in the recognition of two-step action sequences. Their analyses suggest that a performing agent who actively modulates her first movement component so as to increase the similarity in its kinematic features with respect to a second movement component [by means of “coarticulation”, see ] can facilitate an observer’s early recognition of a distal goal.
In our own previous study [ ] we asked directly whether observers would be able to understand kinematic modulations of a first movement in terms of distal goals. To do so, we presented participants with animations of a box sliding at different velocities towards an intermediate target location, after which the box was automatically delivered towards one of two final, occluded target locations, far or near. Participants were then asked to select the final location towards which they thought the box had been delivered. The findings indicated that participants benefit from modulations in velocity of the sliding movement to infer the distal goal. This was indicated by their capacity to consistently map the different movements onto different target locations. Specifically, when participants observed movements with higher peak velocity they were more likely to map them onto the “far” target location, whereas movements with lower peak velocity were more likely to be mapped onto the “near” target location.
We referred to this particular relation holding between modulations in movement velocity and distal goals as “motor-iconic”, as it corresponds to a regular relationship between the velocity and distance of unconstrained aiming or grasping movements towards targets of varying distance in either one-step [ ] or two-step action sequences [ ]. In these studies, participants tend to aim with higher velocity at far compared to near targets. As a consequence, we apply the notion of “motor-iconicity”, which refers to the regular relationship between non-communicative movements and goals as found during natural performance, to the relationship between exaggerated movements and their goals in the context of SMC.

## Two mechanisms for simulating a distal goal
Given that motor-iconic relations capture a regular relationship between communicative modulations of actions and their distal goals, it is unclear how such relationship is established when observing two-step action sequences. Based on the results of Dockendorff et al. [ ], we can conclude that such relationship can be captured by establishing a “direct” link between a first movement component and a distal goal. That is, a first movement component containing sufficient kinematic information can be used to predict an upcoming distal goal without relying on a second movement component. This implies that it is sufficient to observe modulations in the initial movement component to predict distal goals. Since such a process relies on linking kinematic information from an initial movement directly to its distal goal, we will refer to it as a “movement-to-goal” simulation (see ).
 Another possibility is that a second movement component within a sequence plays an active role in the process of linking communicative modulations of first movement components to distal goals. In such scenarios, the initial movement is fed into a simulation of an ensuing movement, rather than into a direct simulation of the distal goal. Since this process involves taking into account the mediating role of the second movement component in the sequence, we will refer to it as “movement-to-movement” simulation (see ).
Note that we use the term “simulation” here to refer to the capacity observers have to link movements to distal goals. This process of linking movements and goals might rely on (online) motor mirroring, as proposed by research on action understanding and SMC [ , ]. However, in the context of our experiment, it is also possible that participants built these relations based on other processes, such as action-effect associations [ ], generalized mechanisms of statistical learning [ ] or even on Gestalt-like principles applied to action recognition [ ].
Besides the two types of simulation discussed above, it is also possible that observers do not engage in any type of simulation but that, once they identify that the movements contain some relevant kinematic information (“communicative signals”), they try to establish a stable link between them and the distal goals. This mapping is arbitrary in the sense that the observer makes a choice at the beginning of the experiment and does not engage in a simulation (and so does not necessarily choose a mapping that would be seen as motor-iconic). This form of arbitrary interpretation contrasts with a situation in which an observer disregards the communicative signals present in the movements altogether, in which case one would expect them to link the movements to their distal goals in a random fashion.
To address these different possibilities, we present three experiments in which participants needed to infer a distal goal on the basis of modulations in velocity and/or duration of a first movement within a two-step sequence. The purpose of Experiment 1 was to investigate how different kinematic information present in the first movement component of the sequence would be then fed into a simulation of a distal goal. Then, in Experiments 2 and 3 we address the question of whether participants interpret communicative modulations of a first movement component in a way that takes into account the second movement component. Thus, we were interested in determining whether participants rely on movement-to-goal simulations, or on movement-to-movement simulations (or on both).

## Experiment 1. What kinematic information is needed for a simulation of a distal goal?
The aim of the first experiment was to identify how different kinematic information present in a first movement component helps participants to simulate its distal goal. To do so, we compared two-step action sequences in which the first movement component contained continuous velocity information (Sliding-Sliding condition) or only discrete duration information (Jumping-Sliding condition). The initial movement was then followed by a continuous movement towards an occluded, and therefore unknown, target location. If the presence of velocity and/or duration information facilitates the prediction of a distal goal, participants should consistently map fast initial movements onto far targets and slow initial movements onto near targets, consistent with previous findings in motor control [ ]. Moreover, we expect participants to benefit from the exaggerations in velocity and/or duration, as such exaggerations generally facilitate the prediction of goals during SMC [ ].

## Methods

## Participants
We recruited 50 participants (29 women; Age: M = 30.8 years; SD = 9.6 years), 25 per condition, through the online testing platform Testable (https://www.testable.org/). All participants gave their informed written consent prior to inclusion in the study, in accordance with the Psychological Research Ethics Board (PREBO; reference number 2020_04). Sample size was determined using the Superpower statistical package [ ] on RStudio [ ]. The design and analyses of the study were preregistered on OSF (https://osf.io/px96b). The videos used in all experiments are publicly accessible on OSF, at https://osf.io/pv74b/. Data collection for all studies was performed between May 2021 and November 2022.

## Stimuli
The basic layout for both experimental conditions of Experiment 1 is shown in . In both conditions, participants were first presented with a stationary box with a mouse cursor attached to it. The box and cursor were displayed within a black hexagonal location on the left-hand side of the screen. During familiarization, participants also saw a grey hexagonal intermediate location in the middle of the screen and two green hexagonal target locations on the right-hand side of the screen. A black horizontal line, along which the box moved during the trials, connected the initial location to the grey hexagonal area in the middle of the screen and to the two green target locations in both conditions (see ).
 During trials, a black occluder covered different sections of the display. During the first movement component (i.e., when the box moved from the initial location to the grey intermediate target location), the occluder only covered the green target locations ( ). Right before the beginning of the second movement component (i.e., before the box started sliding from the intermediate target location towards the green target locations) the occluder was widened, thus covering the intermediate grey target and the box itself ( ). This prevented participants from seeing the initial acceleration phase of the second sliding movement, from which they could have derived information about where the box would then move (i.e., the near or far target).

## Design
The experiment consisted of a mixed 2x3 factorial design, with one between-subject factor (first movement type) and one within-subject factor (degrees of exaggeration). The between subject factor manipulated whether the movement of the box from the initial to the intermediate location was presented as a continuous, fully visible sliding movement between these two locations (i.e., Sliding-Sliding condition) or whether the same movement was presented as an invisible, discrete “jumping” movement from the origin to the intermediate location with a duration that matched the total duration of the corresponding sliding movements (i.e., Jumping-Sliding condition). The within-subject factor manipulated whether and to what degree the animated movements were exaggerated in terms of peak velocity or duration (i.e., Normal (i.e., no exaggeration), Exaggerated, Very exaggerated). The procedure used to create such movements is the same used in Dockendorff et al., [ ]. Briefly, it consisted in exaggerating two non-exaggerated movements by adding or subtracting two predefined values from their peak velocities, thus yielding a total of six movements: the two original non-exaggerated ones (i.e., Normal), a slow and a fast one (i.e., Exaggerated), and a very slow and a very fast one (i.e., Very Exaggerated). Since participants in the Jumping-Sliding condition only saw a snapshot of the movement before onset and after offset, these exaggerations were never perceived as such. Instead, participants could only rely on the differences in total duration, corresponding to the time interval between the disappearance and reappearance of the box.

## Procedure

## Familiarization and instructions
During the familiarization, participants were first presented with the complete task layout (as illustrated in ), but without the occluder covering the green target locations. Participants then saw two successive Normal movements of the box towards the middle target, where it stayed stationary for approximately 1500 ms, after which the box started sliding towards either of the two target locations (order counterbalanced across participants). After seeing the two Normal movements, participants in both conditions were asked to select the target location where the box had moved by pressing the “n” key (for near) or “f” key (for far). In the Jumping-Sliding condition, participants were also told at the very beginning of the experiment that they would “only see a snapshot of the box disappearing at the starting position and then a snapshot of it reappearing in the middle grey target. Thus, you will not see the actual sliding movement performed by the previous participant, but only the beginning and end of it.”
Next, a black occluder covered the target locations ( ) and participants were presented with two more Normal movements of the box towards the middle target (order counterbalanced). Right before sliding from the middle target to the (now occluded) target locations, the occluder became wider on the left side, thus covering the box. Participants were explicitly told that this change in occluder size indicated the onset of the second sliding movement ( ). Finally, participants were told that the movements they would see had been recorded from a previous participant, and that this participant had produced such movements “in ways that would help others guess to which green target location he/she was moving the box”.

## Experiment
Participants performed 36 experimental trials, divided into six blocks. In each trial, they were presented with an animation of the box either sliding along the black line in the Sliding-Sliding condition or disappearing from the origin and reappearing at the intermediate location in the Jumping-Sliding condition. Participants in both conditions were then prompted to answer to which target location they thought the box had been delivered. Note that in both conditions the second sliding movement was never visible to participants during the trials, but, as explicitly stated in the familiarization, its onset was indicated by the widening of the occluder. A trial was completed when participants pressed one of the two assigned keys (“n” or “f”), corresponding to either the “near” or “far” target locations. Each block contained all six degrees of exaggeration, presented in random order. Participants did not receive feedback about their performance at any point. At the end of the experiment, participants were asked to fill out a short questionnaire about their experience with the task.

## Results

## Data preparation
We categorized participants’ responses as Iconic or Non-Iconic mappings. Iconic mappings refer to trials where participants pressed the “n” key in response to movements with lower peak velocity (and thus longer total duration) and the “f” key in response to movements with higher peak velocity (and thus shorter total duration). Non-Iconic mappings, on the other hand, refer to those trials where participants reversed this association, i.e., by pressing “f” in response to movements with lower peak velocity (i.e., longer total duration) and “n” in response to movements with higher peak velocity (i.e., shorter total duration).
Two dependent variables were computed from participants’ number of Iconic and Non-Iconic mappings. Calculating the absolute difference between the total number of Iconic mappings and the total number of Non-Iconic mappings, separately for each first movement type and each degree of exaggeration, yielded a Consistency score for each participant ranging from 0 to 12. A score of 0 meant that participants mapped velocities and/or durations randomly to targets and a score of 12 meant that participants mapped with absolute consistency. Calculating the signed difference between Iconic and Non-Iconic mappings gave us the Mapping score, which could range from +12 (fully iconic mappings) to -12 (fully non-iconic mappings). A Mapping score of 0 meant that participants had no preference for any of the two mapping directions.
Participants who pressed the same key (either “n” or “f”) at least ten times in a row were excluded from further analysis. Based on this criterion, 4 participants were excluded in Experiment 1.

## Consistency score
To test whether participants benefited from the exaggerations by producing more consistent mappings, and whether such effect differed depending on whether velocity information was present in the movements, we conducted a 2x3 ANOVA with Consistency scores as dependent variable, first movement type (Sliding, Jumping) as between-subject factor and degrees of exaggeration (Normal, Exaggerated, Very exaggerated) as within-subject factor. The ANOVA yielded a main effect of degrees of exaggeration (F(2,88) = 23.4, p < .001, η2 = .19), but no main effect of first movement type (F(1,44) = 1.8, p = .18, η2 = .023). The interaction between these two factors was not significant (F(2,88) = .36, p = .7, η2 = .003) (see ). This pattern of results suggests that regardless of whether the first movement contained velocity information (i.e., Sliding) or not (i.e., Jumping), participants were able to consistently map the different movements to the target locations (M Consistency Score: Sliding-Sliding = 5.21, Jumping-Sliding = 4.22) and benefited from their exaggerations.
 

## Mapping scores
A 2x3 ANOVA was conducted with Mapping scores as dependent variable, first movement type as between-subject factor and degrees of exaggeration as within-subject factor. The ANOVA revealed a main effect of first movement type (F(1,44) = 20.1, p < .001, η2 = .22), but no main effect of degrees of exaggeration (F(2,88) = 2.3, p = .11, η2 = .02). Furthermore, we found a significant interaction between these two factors (F(2,88) = 7.6, p < .001, η2 = .06). To further explore the main effect of first movement type we conducted Bonferroni-corrected t-tests comparing the Mapping score distributions for each degree of exaggeration across the two between-subject conditions (e.g., Exaggerated in Sliding-Sliding versus Exaggerated in Jumping-Sliding). The comparison of Mapping scores across conditions between Normal movements did not reach significance (t(94) = 1.3 p = .18, d = 0.6), but the one between Exaggerated (t(94) = 4, p < .001, d = 1.2) and Very Exaggerated movements (t(94) = 5.3, p < 001, d = 1.2) did (see ). This suggests that participants benefit from communicative modulations of peak velocity (i.e., Sliding-Sliding) since they are able to map the movements to the targets in a motor-iconic fashion. Modulations in movement duration (i.e., Jumping-Sliding), however, did not lead to more motor-iconic mappings.
 

## Discussion
The general aim of Experiment 1 was to identify how different kinematic information present in a first movement component within a two-step action sequence is used by observers to infer its distal goal. We were particularly interested in determining whether the presence of continuous velocity information or of discrete duration information presented in the communicative modulation of the first movement of the sequence would enable participants to simulate the distal goal.
Participants in the Sliding-Sliding condition, who saw the box sliding with different peak velocities, were able to use the differences in velocity to simulate the distal goal of the action sequence, as indicated by the high consistency of their mappings ( ) and the fact that such mappings were motor-iconic, that is, in line with the underlying regular relation between movements and goals found in natural movement performance ( ) [ , ]. This contrasted with the Jumping-Sliding condition, in which participants were also highly consistent in their responses, but less likely to produce motor-iconic mappings. This indicates that in both conditions, participants were able to create stable mappings based on the communicative modulations present in the movements, but that they relied on motor-iconic mappings only if the first movement contained continuous velocity information. When the initial movements only contained discrete information about their total duration, as in the Jumping-Sliding condition, this was less likely to trigger the appropriate simulation process that enables the prediction of the distal goal.
One possible explanation for the lower motor-iconic mappings in the Jumping-Sliding condition is that the lack of velocity information introduces, among some participants, a more arbitrary interpretation of the relationship between movements and distal goals. Since this arbitrary relation is the result of participants simply choosing a particular link between movement duration and target location, some of them chose a link that reversed the motor-iconic mapping, thus mapping faster peak velocities to the near target and lower peak velocities to the far target. Our results of the Jumping-Sliding condition provide support for this hypothesis, given that participants are able to map the movements onto the target locations consistently (see ), but they fail, collectively, to display a unique mapping preference (see ), since they were sometimes nearly split between motor-iconic mappings and their reversal (Motor-iconic: N = 10; Reversed: N = 13; see Very Exaggerated in ).
Interestingly, what may have led participants to reverse the mapping in the Jumping-Sliding condition is an altogether different intuition about the relationship between movement duration and target distance. The intuition is nicely captured in the following description given by one of our participants in the Jumping-Sliding condition who, when asked to explain her strategy to solve the task, replied: “just assuming that [the] movement that took longer was supposed to indicate a longer journey” (italics ours). In other words, according to this intuition, longer movements (i.e., movements with longer total durations, and thus, in our task, with lower peak velocities) are more likely to travel longer distances than shorter movements (i.e., movements with shorter total durations, and thus, in our task, with higher peak velocities). As a consequence, this intuition leads to a reversal of the above specified motor-iconic mapping. This reversal has, interestingly, already been reported in previous studies on SMC in which participants used total duration to communicate information about target distance [ ]. We return to a more detailed discussion of this mapping reversal in the General Discussion.
One final explanation for the lower motor-iconic mappings in the Jumping-Sliding condition would be that participants simply fail to perceptually discriminate the differences in duration between the movements. However, the Consistency scores in that condition show that participants are able to create stable associations throughout the experiment between movement durations and target locations, regardless of how exaggerated they are. Participants could not form such stable associations if they were not able to discriminate the differences in movement duration [ ].
In sum, our findings indicate that observers rely on velocity information to infer and simulate a distal goal. However, this pattern is consistent with both types of simulation we propose (see ). Concretely, participants in the Sliding-Sliding condition may have either used the velocity of the initial movement to simulate the velocity of the upcoming one, and subsequently the distal goal (i.e., movement-to-movement simulation), or they may have disregarded the upcoming movement and simulated the distal goal directly based on the first movement only (i.e., movement-to-goal simulation). In order to gain a clearer understanding of which type of simulation is being used, we conducted Experiment 2.

## Experiment 2. What kind of simulation underlies the prediction of a distal goal?
In Experiment 2, participants saw a first sliding or jumping movement to the intermediate location (as in Experiment 1), but this time were familiarized with a second jumping movement rather than a second sliding movement as in Experiment 1. This meant that the first movement (Sliding or Jumping) was now followed by a second movement that, unlike Experiment 1, did not contain velocity information, but only duration. Accordingly, we labeled the two conditions of the present experiment Sliding-Jumping and Jumping-Jumping.
If participants are engaging in movement-to-goal simulations, then we expect them to be able to simulate the distal goal only when the observed movement contains continuous velocity information, and regardless of whether the second movement contains velocity information or not. Thus, we expect participants in the Sliding-Jumping condition to map more consistently in the motor-iconic direction than in the Jumping-Jumping condition, and thereby produce a pattern of responses similar to the one found in the Sliding-Sliding condition of Experiment 1. In contrast, if participants engage in movement-to-movement simulations, which take into account the presence (even if implied) of a second continuous movement in the process of simulating the distal goal, we expect participants in the Sliding-Jumping condition to have difficulties in simulating the distal goal, and therefore produce less motor-iconic mappings than in the Sliding-Sliding condition of Experiment 1. More generally, we expected participants to be able to use the communicative modulations of movement velocity and/or duration, and therefore to benefit from their exaggerations by producing more consistent mappings.

## Methods

## Participants
We recruited 50 participants (25 women; Age: M = 29.8 years; SD = 9.9 years) through Testable. The conditions of recruitment were identical to Experiment 1. Based on the same exclusion criteria used in Experiment 1, we excluded 2 participants from our analyses. The design and analyses of this study were pre-registered on OSF (https://osf.io/upg92).

## Stimuli
The layouts for each experimental condition of Experiment 2 were very similar to Experiment 1 (see ). The only difference with respect to Experiment 1 pertained to the size of the occluder, which in both conditions was kept the same size throughout the trial, thus leaving the intermediate target always visible.
 

## Design and procedure
As in Experiment 1, Experiment 2 consisted of a 2x3 mixed-factorial design with first movement type as a between-subject factor and degrees of exaggeration as a within-subject factor.
Participants were familiarized with the full layout and were presented with two normal movements. Once the box reached the intermediate location, where it stayed stationary for approximately 1.5 secs, it then disappeared and reappeared in one of the two target locations (order counterbalanced across participants). Note that the duration of these second jumping movements matched the duration of the second sliding movements used in the familiarization of Experiment 1. Thus, the duration of the second jumping movement directed to the far target was 2.74 secs, while the one to the near lasted 2.23 secs. After seeing the two Normal movements, participants in both conditions were asked to select the target location where the box had moved by pressing the “n” key (for near) or “f” key (for far). Then, they were presented with two more Normal movements, but this time the green target locations were covered with the black occluder ( ).

## Experiment
In each trial, participants were presented with an animation of the box either sliding along the black line in the Sliding-Jumping condition or disappearing from the origin and reappearing at the intermediate location in the Jumping-Jumping condition. Unlike Experiment 1, however, participants saw the box disappearing from the middle gray target, which indicated the beginning of the second jumping movement. Participants then selected the target location to which they thought the box was delivered by either pressing the “n” key (for near) or “f” key (for far).

## Results

## Consistency score
We conducted a 2x3 ANOVA with Consistency scores as dependent variable, first movement type as between-subject factor and degrees of exaggeration as within-subject factor. The ANOVA yielded a main effect of degrees of exaggeration (F(2,92) = 16.8, p < .001, η2 = .14), and an interaction between degrees of exaggeration and first movement type (F(2,92) = 3.6, p = .03, η2 = .035). However, there was no significant main effect of first movement type (F(1,46) = 1.5, p = .22, η2 = .03). This pattern of results suggests that participants benefited from communicative modulations of movements containing continuous velocity information (i.e., Sliding-Jumping, M = 5.77), but not necessarily from modulations of movements containing only discrete duration information (i.e., Jumping-Jumping, M = 4.82) (see ).
 

## Mapping score
We conducted a 2x3 ANOVA with first movement type as a between-subject factor and degrees of exaggeration as a within-subject factor. The ANOVA yielded a main effect of first movement type (F(1,46) = 9.6, p = .003, η2 = .12) but not of degrees of exaggeration (F(2,92) = 1.8, p = .16, η2 = .01). The interaction between these two factors did not reach significance (F(2,92) = 2.1, p = .13, η2 = .01). This replicates our findings of Experiment 1 and confirms that participants are more likely to map movements motor-iconically if the first movement contains continuous velocity information rather than discrete duration one (see ).
 

## Type of simulation
To see whether the presence of a second movement that contains velocity information plays a role in simulating a distal goal, we conducted a between-Experiment comparison. Specifically, we conducted a 2x3 ANOVA using the Mapping scores of the two conditions in which participants saw velocity information in the first movement component (i.e. a Sliding movement: Sliding-Sliding in Exp. 1 and Sliding-Jumping in Exp. 2) as a dependent variable. Thus, the between-subject factor in the ANOVA was the second movement type, which in this case either contained velocity information (Sliding-Sliding in Exp. 1) or not (Sliding-Jumping in Exp. 2). As in our previous analyses, the within-subject factor was the degrees of exaggeration. The ANOVA yielded a main effect of degrees of exaggeration (F(2,92) = 12.5, p < .001, η2 = .08), but no main effect of second movement type (F(1,46) = 1.44, p = .23, η2 = .02) and no significant interaction (F(2,92) = .27, p = .76, η2 = .002).

## Discussion
In Experiment 1 we found that participants were able to rely on communicative modulations of continuous velocity information to simulate the distal goal of the action sequence. When participants only received discrete information about the duration of the movement, they failed collectively to display any strong mapping preference, thus suggesting that at least some participants did not simulate a distal goal with such minimal duration information (or at least not in the way we predicted, i.e., using motor-iconic mappings). These findings, however, do not allow us to draw conclusions about the type of simulation that observers were using to predict the distal goal on the basis of velocity information. To gain more knowledge about these underlying simulation processes, we modified the second movement component in both conditions of Experiment 2, from a continuous movement to a discrete one that did not contain velocity information. This created a situation in which movement-to-movement simulations of a distal goal on the basis of observing an initial movement containing velocity information were made more difficult.
The results of Experiment 2 show that, despite the fact that participants’ simulations in the Sliding-Jumping were made more difficult (because there was no continuous second movement to map onto), they were still able to predict the distal goal from observing modulations in movement velocity in that condition. This was indicated by the higher number of motor-iconic mappings and the increasing consistency (as a function of degrees of exaggeration) in the Sliding-Jumping condition compared to the Jumping-Jumping condition. In this latter condition, unexpectedly, participants did not benefit from the exaggeration of movement duration. These results therefore provide a first indication that observers can predict distal goals directly by engaging in movement-to-goal simulations.
A second indication that observers engage in movement-to-goal simulations, and thus might not need to rely on an implied second movement in order to predict a distal goal, is the fact that participants in the Sliding-Jumping condition collectively agreed as much on the motor-iconic mappings as those in the Sliding-Sliding condition of Experiment 1. Thus, this suggests that it is sufficient for observers to observe velocity modulations to simulate its distal goal, and that a second movement does neither interfere nor contribute to such capacity.
However, when looked at more descriptively, our results also point to differences in how some participants interpret the movements when they rely on direct movement-to-goal simulations. Indeed, the mapping scores in the Sliding-Jumping condition of Experiment 2 show that while the majority of participants mapped the movements onto the target locations motor-iconically (N = 19), a small number reversed this mapping (N = 6), thus suggesting that those participants either arbitrarily chose a mapping at the beginning of the experiment or, as we suggested in our Discussion of Experiment 1, had opposing intuitions about the mapping.
Finally, a comparison between Sliding-Jumping in Experiment 2 with the Sliding-Sliding condition of Experiment 1 showed no significant difference in performance. This leaves open the possibility that the velocity information in the second movement might not always have an effect on participant’s capacity to simulate a distal goal (see Figs and ). In other words, this result is consistent with both direct movement-to-goal simulations and movement-to-movement simulations. In sum, the findings of Experiment 1 and 2 suggest that observers rely on movement-to-goal simulations to link modulations in movement velocity to a distal goal, but that movement-to-movement simulations could in some circumstances also play a role. To test this possibility more directly, and thus to see if there are circumstances in which observers rely on the second movement to simulate a distal goal, we conducted Experiment 3.

## Experiment 3. When do movement-to-movement simulations enable the prediction of a distal goal?
To explore more directly under which circumstances movement-to-movement simulations facilitate motor-iconic interpretations of communicative modulations, we conducted Experiment 3 in which we reversed the direction of the first sliding movement while we manipulated, across two conditions, whether the second movement contained continuous velocity information or not. Unlike the two previous experiments in which both movements approached the target locations and had therefore a similar connection to the distal goal, Experiment 3 creates an asymmetry between the two sequential movement components such that the movement directions are opposed and only the second movement is directed towards the distal goal. With this manipulation, we had two aims. First, we wanted to test whether participants rely exclusively on the velocity of a movement, regardless of its direction, when simulating the distal goal. Second, by reversing the first movement, we aimed at weakening its connection to the goal and, in contrast, to highlight the connection of the second one with respect to the goal. Based on this, we expected participants to be more likely to rely on movement-to-movement simulations in this experiment.
We predicted that if participants engage in movement-to-movement simulations, then they should be able to simulate the distal goal in the Sliding-Sliding condition, where they are presented with a second movement containing velocity information that they can feed into their simulation, but less so in the Sliding-Jumping condition, where this second movement containing velocity information is absent. However, if participants disregard the second movement and only engage in movement-to-goal simulations, then we do not expect a difference across the two conditions, as only observing the first movement should enable them to simulate the distal goal. Finally, since the reversed movements in the present study still preserved differences in peak velocity, we predicted that in both conditions participants would benefit from the exaggerations by producing more consistent motor-iconic mappings.

## Methods

## Participants
We recruited 50 participants (11 women; Age: M = 31 years; SD = 12.2 years) through Testable. The conditions of recruitment were identical to Experiment 1 and 2. We excluded one participant from our analyses. The design and analyses of this study were pre-registered on OSF (https://osf.io/3g24f).

## Stimuli
The full layout without the black occluder for both conditions is presented in . Participants saw a layout in which the box was initially displayed in the middle of the screen, at the rightmost end of the black line connecting the middle of the screen to the grey hexagonal location on the left-hand side of the screen.
 During trials, once the box was moved from the starting location towards the grey location on the left, the black line along which the box had moved either got stretched out, thereby connecting the grey location to the green target locations on the right side of the screen (in the Sliding-Sliding condition, see ) or completely disappeared from the display (in the Sliding-Jumping condition, see ).

## Design and procedure
Experiment 3 consisted of a mixed-factorial design with second movement type as a between-subject factor and degrees of exaggeration as a within-subject factor.
As in Experiments 1 and 2, participants were first presented with the full task layout, without the occluder ( ). In Experiment 3, however, the box moved continuously from the starting location now located in the middle of the screen, towards the intermediate target now located on the left. Participants saw two Normal sliding movements during familiarization. What happened next differed across the two between-subject conditions. In the Sliding- Sliding condition, once the box reached the intermediate target, the black line was stretched out and the box slid to either the near or far target location ( ). In the Sliding-Jumping condition the black line disappeared ( ). Then, the box disappeared and reappeared in either the near or far green target location. These changes in the line were introduced in order to highlight the differences in the second occluded movement. The disappearance or stretching of it before the onset of the second movement was used to inform participants about the upcoming disappearance-reappearance or sliding of the box towards the targets, respectively.
During trials, participants in both conditions saw the first sliding movement towards the grey target on the left, and saw either the disappearance of the line or its stretching before the occluder covered the entire layout. Note that the first movement participants saw was identical in both conditions; what differed during trials is the implied (i.e., occluded) second movement only.

## Results

## Consistency scores
We conducted a 2x3 ANOVA on Consistency scores with second movement type as between subject factor and degrees of exaggeration as a within subject factor. The ANOVA yielded a significant main effect of degrees of exaggeration F(2,94) = 35.9, p < .001, η2 = .25. The main effect of second movement type did not reach significance F(1,47) = 1.34, p = .25, η2 = .016, nor did the interaction between these two factors F(2,94) = .18, p = .81, η2 = .002 ( ).
 

## Mapping scores
We conducted a 2x3 ANOVA with Mapping scores as dependent variable, second movement type as between-subject factor and degrees of exaggeration as within-subject factor. The ANOVA yielded main effects of second movement type (F(1,47) = 8.3, p = .006, η2 = .11), degrees of exaggeration (F(2,94) = 6.6, p = .002, η2 = .03) and an interaction between these factors (F(2,94) = 3.5, p = .03, η2 = 02). Within the Sliding-Jumping condition, none of the pairwise comparisons across degrees of exaggeration using Bonferroni-corrected t-tests yielded a significant difference (all t(94) > -1.1, p >.86, d < .09), whereas in the Sliding-Sliding condition both the comparison between Normal and Exaggerated (t(94) = -3.4, p = .003, d = .87) and between Normal and Very Exaggerated (t(94) = -4.1, p < .001, d = .88) differed significantly ( ).
 

## Discussion
In Experiment 3 we asked whether highlighting the connection of the second movement to the distal goal would affect how participants simulate a distal goal, and whether such change would also depend on whether the second movement contains velocity information or not. By doing this, we created a situation in which participants would be more likely to integrate the second movement into their simulations (i.e., movement-to-movement simulations). The findings of Experiment 3 suggest that participants do integrate information coming from the second movement component when simulating a distal goal. When presented with continuous movements containing velocity information which are then followed by another continuous movement containing velocity information (i.e., Sliding-Sliding), participants were more likely to map the movements to the target locations in a motor-iconic fashion. But when the same continuous movements were followed by a second discrete movement that did not contain velocity information (i.e., Sliding-Jumping), participants did not show a clear preference towards any mapping direction, and thus failed collectively to simulate the distal goal. Thus, our findings support a more complex conclusion regarding the simulations that observers use to predict a distal goal. In some (and maybe most) circumstances observers can simply rely on movements containing modulations in velocity to run direct movement-to-goal simulations that do not take into account a potential second movement. In others, however, the second movement, particularly when it contains informative kinematic features like velocity, can facilitate the process whereby observers link initial movements to their distal goals. In Experiment 3 we showed that one such situation concerns the reversal of the initial movement, which meant that the direction of the first and second movement were opposed, with the first going away and the second towards the target locations. This meant that, while the first movement still contained useful velocity information that could be used to simulate the distal goal, its change in direction led to a weakened relationship with the distal goal. Possibly, other situations in which the relationship between the movements or between the movements and the distal goal is modified might lead to a similar change in the type of simulations that observers rely on.
In sum, these results support the hypothesis that observers infer distal goals taking into account not only the kinematics of the first movement in a sequence, but also the features of an implied (i.e., occluded) second movement.

## General discussion
Previous research on SMC focused on settings in which observers made online predictions of unfolding movements in order to derive a proximal goal [ – , ]. Here we extend this focus to situations in which they need to simulate a future, more distal goal [ ]. To do so, we first differentiated proximal and distal goals with respect to the number of motor acts used to achieve them: proximal goals are achieved by a single motor act, such as reaching for an object, while distal goals are achieved by means of at least two sequential motor acts, each with their own proximal (sub-)goal, like reaching for an object to then throw it [ , ]. Following this distinction, we created a task in which we presented participants with the first component of a partially occluded two-step action sequence, and asked them to predict the distal goal of the sequence on the basis of communicative modulations present in the first component. Thus, our task differed from previous studies in SMC in that, instead of presenting one-step actions whose goals needed to be predicted as the movements unfold [see for a review], we showed participants a full initial movement leading to an intermediate (sub-)goal, and asked them to simulate the distal goal of the entire sequence.
Using this paradigm, we were interested in studying the conditions under which observers can derive information about a distal goal by using two types of simulation: one in which observers use the kinematic information presented in an initial movement to simulate the distal goal directly, which we referred to as “movement-to-goal” simulation, and another in which they use that same kinematic information to simulate an upcoming movement, subsequently leading to a simulation of a distal goal and which we referred to as “movement-to-movement” simulation.
To do so, we first looked at whether the presence or absence of continuous velocity information in the first movement of the sequence would enable observers to simulate a distal goal. Participants in Experiment 1 were presented with either a continuous sliding movement that contained velocity information or a discrete jumping movement that only had information about its total duration. These movements were then followed by a second, occluded sliding movement towards one of two target locations. We found that participants established consistent mappings both when the velocity information was presented and when it was not, and that such mappings became more consistent with higher degrees of exaggeration, in line with previous findings in SMC [ , ]. Despite the high consistency of their mappings, participants were only able to simulate a distal goal when the movements they observed contained modulations of velocity, and not when they only contained modulations in total duration, as indicated by the strong preference for motor-iconic mappings in the former but not the latter condition. This preference for motor-iconic mappings is a clear indication that observers are able to identify the underlying lawful relation that connects movements and distance during natural performance (i.e., aiming movements reach higher peak velocity when directed at further targets [ , ], and use it to connect a first movement component in a sequence to its distal goal.
However, the findings of Experiment 1 were inconclusive with regard to the type of simulation used by participants to predict the distal goal. Participants may have integrated the second sliding movement into their interpretations, consistent with movement-to-movement simulations, or may have completely disregarded the implied second movement, thus supporting a more direct, movement-to-goal simulation. Thus, to get a better understanding of the type of simulation underlying participant’s responses we conducted Experiment 2, where we presented participants with the same movements as in Experiment 1, but these were then followed by a movement that only contained information about duration. Thus, we created a situation in which participants would be less able to use movement-to-movement simulations to predict the distal goal of a movement containing velocity. The findings of Experiment 2 suggest that participants can engage in direct movement-to-goal simulations when observing movements containing velocity, and thus can bypass the second movement in their simulations of the distal goal. However, the results also showed that movement-to-goal simulations were leading to more variability in the way participants mapped the movements onto the target locations. This made us hypothesize that, at least in some circumstances, participants’ simulations of a distal goal are sensitive to the presence of a second movement, even if this movement is not directly observed but only implied.
The particular aim of in Experiment 3 was to address this question. In other words, would there be situations in which movement-to-movement simulations also play a role? We hypothesized that one such circumstance would be if the relationship of the first movement with respect to the distal goal is weakened, thus highlighting the role played by the second movement. This weakening of the link between the movements was made possible by reversing the direction of the first movement, which was directed away from the target locations, while the second movement was directed towards them. With this manipulation, we expected participants to integrate the second movement into their simulations, and therefore also expected their responses to be affected by whether this second movement contained velocity information or not. The results of Experiment 3 confirmed this prediction, as participants interpreted the movements presented differently depending on whether the second movement contained velocity information or not.
What does this set of studies tell us about the relationship between proximal and distal goals? One way of describing the relationship between proximal and distal goals, besides the number of motor acts leading to their achievement, is to locate them vertically along an action hierarchy, with overarching (potentially more distal) goals on top, and simpler motor acts (possibly more proximal) at the bottom [ , ]. This way of describing proximal and distal goals is interesting for two reasons. First, it implies that proximal goals are sometimes instrumental for the achievement of more distal goals, as the former are simply the subgoals leading to the achievement of the latter (e.g., the proximal goal of picking up an apple is a subgoal leading to the more distal goal of eating it). Second, and maybe more relevant for our purposes, this hierarchical organization suggests that proximal goals located at different levels of the action hierarchy can be used by observers to simulate distal goals which might also vary along the same hierarchy. For example, the initial stages of an aiming movement towards a ball can then be used not only to predict whether the agent will then throw it into a large box [ ] but more generally, whether the agent is doing so because she has a goal located high up in the action hierarchy, like tidying up a room or simply practicing her aim. In the context of SMC, where people exaggerate their movements to convey anticipatory information about their action goals and thus facilitate coordination, one would expect observers to be similarly able to derive information about such overarching, higher goals, especially when these are relevant to the achievement of a joint goal. For instance, observers are sensitive to the kinematics of their co-actor’s instrumental movements while playing a speeded game, but even more so depending on whether the game is framed by the experimenter as a cooperative game, rather than a competitive one [ ], suggesting that higher, and in this case pro-social, goals can have strong top-down effects on people’s sensitivity to others’ actions [see also , ]. Within the context of SMC, observers have been shown to benefit from communicative modulations not only to predict simple action goals, but also to infer whether an actor is performing a given action sequence with the arguably more complex social goal of demonstrating the sequence to a naïve observer (i.e., teaching), or to coordinate with someone [ ]. Altogether, these studies suggest that people can derive useful information from observing other people’s movements, and from these observations infer more than mere action goals that vary with respect to the number of motor acts (i.e., proximal and distal), but that can also be located at different levels of an action hierarchy, starting from simple motor actions all the way up to complex social intentions.
An open question for future studies is whether communicative modulations of instrumental actions can, on top of facilitating the prediction and identification of more or less complex goals, trigger other types of inference about the observed action. For example, recent computational models of communicative demonstrations have shown that participants can learn the hidden reward structure of grid-like environments when observing movements that deviate from the most efficient trajectory (e.g., by visiting multiple tiles within a trial). Crucially, participants in this task increased their accuracy when told that the agent producing the movements knew that naïve observers would then watch and learn from them [ ]. In line with findings from SMC and action observation, this indicates that observers interpret movements differently if they know that these were produced not only with an instrumental goal, but with a further communicative goal. Another interesting example of observers going beyond the mere prediction of goals is a recent study by Schmitz et al. [ ], where they showed that observers can infer the hidden properties of an object (i.e., its weight) by relying on communicative modulations of reaching movements directed towards these objects. Thus, these two studies open up a venue for future research on people’s capacity to derive other kinds of information when observing communicative modulations, either about the person performing the action (e.g., what the person knows [ ]) or about hidden properties of objects (e.g., their function [ ]).
Extending our own previous research [ ], we made two proposals about the underlying simulation processes that would enable observers to link communicative modulations in early instrumental movements to their distal goals. These two theoretical possibilities differ primarily in the amount of information needed in order for the simulation to occur. A “movement-to-goal” simulation is made possible when observers link an early movement to its distal goal directly, and thus do not need to take into account the role played by the second movement in the sequence. A “movement-to-movement” simulation, on the other hand, does integrate the second movement in the process of linking the early movement to the distal goal. The process of using the kinematic information present in an initial movement to feed into a simulation of a second movement is in some respects analogous to the process of action simulation described by Prinz & Rapinett [ ], according to which observers use the early kinematic features present in a reaching movement before its occlusion to generate an internal simulation that replicates the kinematic features of the reaching movement and then applies them to the now extrapolated reaching movement occurring behind the occluder [ ]. This internal simulation, which reuses information from the early stages of the movement, before its occlusion, enables observers to make accurate predictions about the reappearance of the movement after these short episodes of occlusion. As such, movement-to-movement simulations and the action simulation processes described by Prinz and Rappinet [ ] seem to rely on the same underlying principle which enables observers to predict action trajectories and goals by means of internally regenerated movements, i.e. simulations. The main difference between the two processes, however, is that while action simulations are commonly used in the process of extrapolating partially occluded one-step movements, the movement-to-movement simulations we propose here are used to regenerate an entire movement, with its corresponding (distal) goal.
To address the question of how observers can simulate distal goals, we decided to focus on two-step action sequences in which only the first movement was visible to participants. This meant that, unlike previous research on SMC in which proximal movements are exaggerated to facilitate the online prediction of proximal goals, the first movement was temporally and spatially separated from the simulated distal goal. In our previous work [ ], we discussed the possibility that such separation may have led some participants to change the way in which they interpreted the movements they saw. Specifically, participants in our experiments may have fully disregarded the instrumental aspects of the movement (i.e., delivering the box), while focusing exclusively on its communicative goal (i.e., informing observers about the upcoming delivery location). This could have happened despite the fact that participants were explicitly told that the movements had an instrumental goal at the beginning of the study. If participants fully disregarded the instrumental aspect of the movements, this would imply that they may have taken the movements as purely communicative movements that stand for, represent, or refer to particular target locations, similar to other “purely” communicative movements, like gestures, that are also said to stand for, represent, or refer to particular entities by means of hand and bodily movements. Indeed, functional accounts of gestures have recently put forward the idea that what makes a movement a “gesture” is the fact that these are bodily movements that are stripped away from their more habitual instrumental aspects (e.g., reaching and manipulating objects). In the process of becoming less “instrumental”, these movements come to fulfill a different function, essential to most gestures: that of representing or referring to objects [ , ], either for oneself or for others.
This way of understanding the difference between instrumental and communicative actions has interesting implications for our current findings and for SMC more generally. Given that SMC relies on the production and understanding of movements that have both an instrumental and communicative goal, this form of communication can be seen as occupying an intermediate position between fully instrumental and fully communicative movements [ – , ]. Consequently, one could argue that the communicative modulations present in SMC might already contain some of the ingredients that enable movements to become “representational”, or “referential”, thus making them more similar to gestures. For example, in our studies, communicative modulations of an early movement might be seen as referring to the distal goals of the sequence (corresponding, in this case, to specific movement endstates). What makes this relationship between movement and goal one of “reference” is the fact that the movements are separated, and thus “detached”, from the goal. From the observer’s point of view, this form of detachment might be seen as a first step in the process of interpreting movements as having the capacity to “represent”, which subsequently might lead observers to come up with stable mappings between these movements and their goals. Whether and how SMC can provide a standpoint from which to study the relationship between instrumental and communicative actions, and how the former kind of action becomes more like the latter by means of gradually acquiring such “representational” features, are among some of the questions that will require further investigation.
Besides providing evidence that observers can simulate goals that are spatially and temporally removed from the here-and-now (i.e., that are distal), our studies also indicate that these simulations drive participants towards establishing specific mappings between movements and the distance of target locations, where faster movements are more likely to be mapped onto far locations [ ]. In the Discussion of Experiment 1 we mentioned how this motor-iconic mapping can be contrasted with its reversal which, interestingly, was more likely to be present in the conditions in which participants saw movements that only contained information about their total duration (i.e., Jumping). In other words, participants in these conditions were more likely to interpret longer durations as directed to further target locations. As we pointed out, this mapping was also consistently used by participants in a previous study on SMC, by Vesper et al., [ ], in which pairs of participants were asked to coordinate their actions by performing aiming movements towards one of three target locations. Their results show that Leaders systematically mapped shorter aiming movements to near targets and longer aiming movements to far targets.
Although our study and the one by Vesper and colleagues [ ] differ in many respects, they both point to similarities in the intuitions that people have about the relationship between particular movement parameters (such as duration or velocity) and distances. Thus, in both studies, the predominantly chosen mappings can be considered instances of “motor-iconicity”. Whereas most participants in the present study focused on the regularities between movement velocity and movement distance (i.e., faster velocities go with farther distances), the task layout in the Vesper et al. study highlighted the relationship between movement duration and movement distance (i.e., longer durations go with farther distances). What makes this latter mapping motor-iconic is the fact that the duration-distance mapping also originates from a regular relationship found in the performance of aiming movements, where people tend to take longer (in terms of duration) to reach further locations [ ]. From this point of view, participants in the Jumping-Sliding and Jumping-Jumping conditions who, according to our interpretation, were “reversing” the mapping, might simply rely on a different, but still motor-iconic, relationship connecting the movements to their goals. Whether people are aware of these differences in motor-iconic relations, and whether they can use these to inform others about their goals, are among the questions that should be further investigated.

We thank Fanni Takátsy for her help with data collection.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0306072.r001Decision Letter 0
TessariAlessiaAcademic Editor© 2024 Alessia Tessari2024Alessia Tessarihttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
6 Mar 2024

PONE-D-23-26818Communicative modulations of early action components support the prediction of distal goalsPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Dockendorff,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Apr 20 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Alessia Tessari, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf.
2. Thank you for stating in your Funding Statement:
“This research was supported by the European Research Council under the European Union's Seventh Framework Program (FP7/2007-2013) / ERC grant agreement n° [609819], SOMICS.”
Please provide an amended statement that declares *all* the funding or sources of support (whether external or internal to your organization) received during this study, as detailed online in our guide for authors at http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submit-now.  Please also include the statement “There was no additional external funding received for this study.” in your updated Funding Statement.
Please include your amended Funding Statement within your cover letter. We will change the online submission form on your behalf.
3. We note that your Data Availability Statement is currently as follows: [All relevant data are within the manuscript and its Supporting Information files.]
Please confirm at this time whether or not your submission contains all raw data required to replicate the results of your study. Authors must share the “minimal data set” for their submission. PLOS defines the minimal data set to consist of the data required to replicate all study findings reported in the article, as well as related metadata and methods (https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-minimal-data-set-definition).
For example, authors should submit the following data:
- The values behind the means, standard deviations and other measures reported;
- The values used to build graphs;
- The points extracted from images for analysis.
Authors do not need to submit their entire data set if only a portion of the data was used in the reported study.
If your submission does not contain these data, please either upload them as Supporting Information files or deposit them to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. For a list of recommended repositories, please see https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/recommended-repositories.
If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially sensitive information, data are owned by a third-party organization, etc.) and who has imposed them (e.g., an ethics committee). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent. If data are owned by a third party, please indicate how others may request data access.
Additional Editor Comments (if provided):
Please, pay close attention to the comments and suggestions of the reviewers while preparing the new draft, and to the points raised by reviewer 1 particularly.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: The manuscript presents a set of three experiments in which the authors test the circumstances under which participants use kinematic information to infer a distal goal. Overall, the design was clear and the methods seem sound. The topic itself is quite interesting, and I think it makes an important contribution to the field. I mainly have some issues with the framing, and in particular the focus on “motor simulation” as the only potential explanation for the findings.
In the introductory text on Page 3, the authors refer to “coordination smoothers” as behavioral strategies, such as kinematic modulation, that can make an action more readable and thus facilitate prediction by an observer. I think it’s important, for the sake of a balanced discussion of this topic, to also note that kinematic modulation is likely not always a ‘strategy’ per se. In the example of piano duets, I would agree that this is likely driven by an intention to communicate/coordinate. However, when the authors go on to focus on the two-step action sequences such as grasping food to bring it to one’s mouth, I think it’s less clear that this would be an active strategy to signal what is being done. Particularly given that much of this work has used recordings of these reach-to-grasp movements that are used outside of any communicative or interactive context. Instead, these modulations are more likely to be a consequence of an action being embedded in a larger action-chain, and the motor system attuning to the context of the larger action. Observers can use the kinematics, but more as a cue, rather than an actively created signal. See, for example, the work by Runeson & Frykholm (1983). I see that further into the introduction the authors explicitly discuss action chains as an influence and communicative modulation as another, but then the two seem to be conflated again in the explanations of the experiments. For example, the authors write the following about Experiment 1: “If the presence of velocity information increases the likelihood that information from the first movement is interpreted as communicative, and thereby facilitates the prediction of a distal goal, participants should consistently map fast initial movements onto far targets and slow initial movements onto near targets”. I think it’s important to note that velocity information can be informative, without it being, or being perceived as, communicatively intended.
Page 6. In the discussion of motor representations, I believe the authors are appealing to a similar idea as what I outlined in my first comment, regarding the embedding of actions in the larger action chain. However, I think it can be made clearer why the distal goal would affect an earlier movement. To use the authors’ example, if there is a motor representation for throwing an object into a basket, presumably the representation involves picking up the object (1), and throwing it in such a way that its trajectory brings it into the basket (2). The representation of (2) will depend on the outcome of (1), such as the end position of the hand, but the text is currently unclear on why the kinematics of (1) would already be shaped by the representation of (2).
Page 10. The authors explain that the link between velocity profile and target distance as “motor iconic”, and likely resulting from motor representations. I wonder, why are motor representations the most likely explanation here? I guess this would involve an internal representation of moving an object, and matching that representation to the observation. Wouldn’t it be a much simpler explanation to say that statistical learning has taught us that high peak velocity is associated with longer/farther movements? The lawful relationship aspect is still there, but doesn’t require on-line motor mirroring. I think this is particularly important to make clear, because on page 12 there is the suggestion that there is either 1) movement-to-goal simulation, 2)movement-to-movement simulation, or 3) an arbitrary, spontaneously chosen link between observed kinematics and predicted goal that can be (as the authors say) more or less random. If there is a lawful relationship between information that can be perceived (i.e., velocity of an object) and a distal outcome, why do we need to simulate or represent a motor plan?
Page 20. The authors find differences between Exaggerated and Very Exaggerated movement profiles in the Mapping Score analyses. However, it was quite unclear to me on first reading which contrasts are being discussed. In other words, that there is a difference in mapping score of exaggerated and very-exaggerated movements when comparing sliding-sliding and jumping-sliding conditions (if I am understanding it correctly).
Reviewer #2: Dockendorff and co-authors, through three experiments, provide an interesting and original overview of how communicative modulations affect the prediction of distal goals. Their experiments nicely demonstrate that for observers to simulate distal goals via motor-iconic mappings, the initial movement needs to contain velocity information. Additionally, they examine whether participants engage in movement-to-movement or movement-to-goal simulations.
I believe the paper would benefit from the following adjustments:
- The main issue I see in the paper lies within Experiment 2. Here, the authors aim to investigate whether participants engage in movement-to-goal or movement-to-movement simulations. To address this question effectively, the focus should primarily be on comparing the sliding-sliding condition of Experiment 1 to the sliding-jumping condition in Experiment 2. While the authors do report these analyses, they seem to place more emphasis on the contrast between the sliding-jumping and jumping-jumping conditions. To strengthen the paper, I would suggest clarifying the relevance of the between-experiment comparison more strongly throughout the study. Additionally, providing a plot of this comparison would enhance the relevance of the findings.
- Throughout the experiment, the authors mention interindividual differences in the mapping style. For instance, on page 22, they claim that the lower motor-iconic mappings in the jumping-sliding condition (compared to the sliding-sliding condition) are likely due to some participants reversing the mappings (high consistency but reversed motor-iconic mappings). Similarly, on page 29, they mention that some participants reverse the mappings. I believe it is necessary to address this further. To strengthen these claims the authors could consider to:
1) Clarify why some participants show this behaviour. Is there any additional information about the sample analysed that might help explaining this pattern (e.g., questionnaires etc.)? Do the authors have any hypotheses?
2) Include result sections where discussing some of these interindividual differences. For instance, what is the percentage of people reversing the mappings?
3) Analyse the dispersion of the data. For instance, in line 636, the authors claim that there are fewer interindividual differences in the mapping style in the sliding-sliding condition compared to the sliding-jumping. Statistical analyses should be provided to support this claim.
4) Revise Fig4A. In line 636, they claim that interindividual differences seem to be entirely absent from the sliding-sliding condition of Experiment 1. However, upon examining the plot, there is at least one subject reversing the mapping. This should be clarified.
- Also, the authors should clarify why the timing at which the box remained stationary changes between experiments (Experiment 1 had a timing of 500ms [line 342] while Experiment 2 had a timing of 1500 ms [line 536]).
- In the introduction of Experiment 3, it would be beneficial to explain further why the authors chose to reverse the direction of the first movement, among other possible manipulations. Also, it would be beneficial to link it to existing evidence using the same manipulation.
- In the introduction, the authors largely discuss motor representations. If deemed relevant, there is interesting neuroimaging evidence linking motor representations and goals (i.e., rewards). It could be interesting to cite some brain-related studies in the introduction:
1) Adkins, T. J., & Lee, T. G. (2021). Reward modulates cortical representations of action. NeuroImage, 228, 117708. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.117708
2) Galaro, J. K., Celnik, P., & Chib, V. S. (2019). Motor Cortex Excitability Reflects the Subjective Value of Reward and Mediates Its Effects on Incentive-Motivated Performance. The Journal of Neuroscience, 39(7), 1236–1248. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1254-18.2018
- Consider adding a practical example on page 12 to clarify what is meant by consistent "arbitrary" relationships between movements and distal goals.
- In line 562, correct the grammar (suggests, instead of suggest).
- Highlight significance bars in the plots.
Overall, Dockendorff et al.'s paper provides interesting insights into communicative modulations of actions. I believe that by addressing these points the paper will be clearer and stronger.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: James Trujillo
Reviewer #2: Yes: Margherita Tecilla
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0306072.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
24 Apr 2024

Response to Reviewers:
Reviewer #1: The manuscript presents a set of three experiments in which the authors test the circumstances under which participants use kinematic information to infer a distal goal. Overall, the design was clear and the methods seem sound. The topic itself is quite interesting, and I think it makes an important contribution to the field. I mainly have some issues with the framing, and in particular the focus on “motor simulation” as the only potential explanation for the findings.
In the introductory text on Page 3, the authors refer to “coordination smoothers” as behavioral strategies, such as kinematic modulation, that can make an action more readable and thus facilitate prediction by an observer. I think it’s important, for the sake of a balanced discussion of this topic, to also note that kinematic modulation is likely not always a ‘strategy’ per se. In the example of piano duets, I would agree that this is likely driven by an intention to communicate/coordinate. However, when the authors go on to focus on the two-step action sequences such as grasping food to bring it to one’s mouth, I think it’s less clear that this would be an active strategy to signal what is being done. Particularly given that much of this work has used recordings of these reach-to-grasp movements that are used outside of any communicative or interactive context. Instead, these modulations are more likely to be a consequence of an action being embedded in a larger action-chain, and the motor system attuning to the context of the larger action. Observers can use the kinematics, but more as a cue, rather than an actively created signal. See, for example, the work by Runeson & Frykholm (1983). I see that further into the introduction the authors explicitly discuss action chains as an influence and communicative modulation as another, but then the two seem to be conflated again in the explanations of the experiments. For example, the authors write the following about Experiment 1: “If the presence of velocity information increases the likelihood that information from the first movement is interpreted as communicative, and thereby facilitates the prediction of a distal goal, participants should consistently map fast initial movements onto far targets and slow initial movements onto near targets”. I think it’s important to note that velocity information can be informative, without it being, or being perceived as, communicatively intended.
We agree with the distinction made by R1 between intentional signaling strategies and mere “cues”. Unlike signals, cues are not produced with the intention to communicate, but they can still be used by observers to understand (and predict) what an actor is doing. We now make this distinction more explicit throughout the Introduction, as well as in the transition from the first section, on action production/understanding, to the second section, on sensorimotor communication (lines 129-136). We finally highlight a key aspect of sensorimotor communication, kinematic exaggerations, which in some circumstances (e.g., joint actions) can be interpreted as intentional, in the sense of being produced with the goal of facilitating the observer’s predictions (lines 152-157)
Page 6. In the discussion of motor representations, I believe the authors are appealing to a similar idea as what I outlined in my first comment, regarding the embedding of actions in the larger action chain. However, I think it can be made clearer why the distal goal would affect an earlier movement. To use the authors’ example, if there is a motor representation for throwing an object into a basket, presumably the representation involves picking up the object (1), and throwing it in such a way that its trajectory brings it into the basket (2). The representation of (2) will depend on the outcome of (1), such as the end position of the hand, but the text is currently unclear on why the kinematics of (1) would already be shaped by the representation of (2).
We now clarify and simplify our use of the notion of “motor representation” in the Introduction (lines 108-116). In the case of action production, motor representations play a role in guiding actions towards their outcomes. Because of this guiding role, they can lead to visible changes in the kinematics of early movements, particularly when these movements are embedded in a larger action chain.
Page 10. The authors explain that the link between velocity profile and target distance as “motor iconic”, and likely resulting from motor representations. I wonder, why are motor representations the most likely explanation here? I guess this would involve an internal representation of moving an object, and matching that representation to the observation. Wouldn’t it be a much simpler explanation to say that statistical learning has taught us that high peak velocity is associated with longer/farther movements? The lawful relationship aspect is still there, but doesn’t require on-line motor mirroring. I think this is particularly important to make clear, because on page 12 there is the suggestion that there is either 1) movement-to-goal simulation, 2) movement-to-movement simulation, or 3) an arbitrary, spontaneously chosen link between observed kinematics and predicted goal that can be (as the authors say) more or less random. If there is a lawful relationship between information that can be perceived (i.e., velocity of an object) and a distal outcome, why do we need to simulate or represent a motor plan?
We agree with R1 that, although our results are consistent with on-line motor mirroring, they do not provide any direct evidence for it. We also agree that other processes (e.g., statistical learning, action-effect associations) can also account for how a regular relationship between movements and target distance is established. We now make this point explicit in the Introduction, where we also clarify our use of the term “simulation” (lines 232-237). We use “simulation” in a broad sense to refer to the capacity observers have to link the kinematics of early movements to distal goals.
Page 20. The authors find differences between Exaggerated and Very Exaggerated movement profiles in the Mapping Score analyses. However, it was quite unclear to me on first reading which contrasts are being discussed. In other words, that there is a difference in mapping score of exaggerated and very-exaggerated movements when comparing sliding-sliding and jumping-sliding conditions (if I am understanding it correctly).
Yes, the comparisons are across conditions, suggesting that only in the Sliding-Sliding condition participants were able to map consistently in a motor-iconic fashion. We now make this comparison more explicit in the Results section (lines 422-423). We also add significance bars in each Figure.
Reviewer #2: Dockendorff and co-authors, through three experiments, provide an interesting and original overview of how communicative modulations affect the prediction of distal goals. Their experiments nicely demonstrate that for observers to simulate distal goals via motor-iconic mappings, the initial movement needs to contain velocity information. Additionally, they examine whether participants engage in movement-to-movement or movement-to-goal simulations.
I believe the paper would benefit from the following adjustments:
- The main issue I see in the paper lies within Experiment 2. Here, the authors aim to investigate whether participants engage in movement-to-goal or movement-to-movement simulations. To address this question effectively, the focus should primarily be on comparing the sliding-sliding condition of Experiment 1 to the sliding-jumping condition in Experiment 2. While the authors do report these analyses, they seem to place more emphasis on the contrast between the sliding-jumping and jumping-jumping conditions. To strengthen the paper, I would suggest clarifying the relevance of the between-experiment comparison more strongly throughout the study. Additionally, providing a plot of this comparison would enhance the relevance of the findings.
We now clarify the between-experiment comparison in the Results section of Experiment 2, specifically in the section titled “Type of simulation” (lines 610-625). There, we explain how the comparison between Sliding-Sliding (of Exp 1) and Sliding-Jumping (of Exp 2) can be used to inform us about the type of simulation that participants are using to connect the movements to their goals. We also expand on this point in the Discussion of Experiment 2 (lines 652-665).
- Throughout the experiment, the authors mention interindividual differences in the mapping style. For instance, on page 22, they claim that the lower motor-iconic mappings in the jumping-sliding condition (compared to the sliding-sliding condition) are likely due to some participants reversing the mappings (high consistency but reversed motor-iconic mappings). Similarly, on page 29, they mention that some participants reverse the mappings. I believe it is necessary to address this further. To strengthen these claims the authors could consider to:
1) Clarify why some participants show this behaviour. Is there any additional information about the sample analysed that might help explaining this pattern (e.g., questionnaires etc.)? Do the authors have any hypotheses?
As noted by R2, we proposed that participants who reversed the mapping were choosing it at the beginning of the experiment. We also proposed, briefly in the General Discussion, an alternative explanation for this reversal, according to which some participants had a different intuition about the relationship that connects movement duration and target distance. We now highlight this alternative explanation already in the Discussion of Experiment 1 (lines 474-486) and expand it further in the General Discussion (lines 1012-1037). Indeed, as revealed by participant’s self-reports, observing movements that had only differences in total duration (i.e., Jumping), led some of them to rely on the intuition that longer movements (i.e., movements with longer total durations) are more likely to travel longer distances (i.e., further target locations). Since longer movements have, in our task, a lower velocity, this intuition leads to a reversal of the mapping.
2) Include result sections where discussing some of these interindividual differences. For instance, what is the percentage of people reversing the mappings?
We now add the total number of participants reversing the mapping in the Discussion of Experiments 1 (for Jumping-Sliding see lines 471-472) and 2 (for Sliding-Jumping, see lines 662-665) We also discuss in detail the reasons why we think this split may have occurred (see our previous comment and lines 474-486 and 1012-1037)
3) Analyse the dispersion of the data. For instance, in line 636, the authors claim that there are fewer interindividual differences in the mapping style in the sliding-sliding condition compared to the sliding-jumping. Statistical analyses should be provided to support this claim.
As indicated in our previous answer, we now provide more detailed information about the number of participants who reversed the mapping as well as the reason for why some participants did this. We removed the claim about inter-individual differences, as this was not the reason why we decided to conduct Experiment 3. Instead, we now focus on simply describing the pattern of results in the Sliding-Jumping condition (lines 659-665). We hope that these changes make our claims more clear.
4) Revise Fig4A. In line 636, they claim that interindividual differences seem to be entirely absent from the sliding-sliding condition of Experiment 1. However, upon examining the plot, there is at least one subject reversing the mapping. This should be clarified.
We corrected the wording in the text. R2 is right in pointing out that one participant reversed the mapping in Sliding-Sliding. Now, instead of arguing that these interindividual differences seem to be entirely absent, we now simply mention the number of participants reversing the mapping in Experiment 1 (lines 471-472) and in the Sliding-Jumping of Experiment 2 (lines 662-665)
- Also, the authors should clarify why the timing at which the box remained stationary changes between experiments (Experiment 1 had a timing of 500ms [line 342] while Experiment 2 had a timing of 1500 ms [line 536]).
This was a mistake. The time the box remained stationary was 1500 ms in both experiments. We changed this now (line 336)
- In the introduction of Experiment 3, it would be beneficial to explain further why the authors chose to reverse the direction of the first movement, among other possible manipulations. Also, it would be beneficial to link it to existing evidence using the same manipulation.
We reversed the first movement to see if one of the simulations we propose (i.e., movement-to-movement simulation) can still play a role in how participants predict distal goals. As we now explain at the beginning of Experiment 3 (lines 684-690) the reversal of the first movement had two aims: weakening the relationship between the first movement and the distal goal (and thus, strengthening the one between the second movement and the distal goals), and furthermore, by maintaining the velocity information like in Experiment 1 and 2, verify that participants rely on velocity, regardless of the direction of the movement.
- In the introduction, the authors largely discuss motor representations. If deemed relevant, there is interesting neuroimaging evidence linking motor representations and goals (i.e., rewards). It could be interesting to cite some brain-related studies in the introduction:
1) Adkins, T. J., & Lee, T. G. (2021). Reward modulates cortical representations of action. NeuroImage, 228, 117708. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.117708
2) Galaro, J. K., Celnik, P., & Chib, V. S. (2019). Motor Cortex Excitability Reflects the Subjective Value of Reward and Mediates Its Effects on Incentive-Motivated Performance. The Journal of Neuroscience, 39(7), 1236–1248. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1254-18.2018.
We thank R2 for these suggestions. They are indeed relevant. We have added them to the Introduction, specifically when we discuss the effect of distal goals on early kinematics (line 114-116). Specifically, we describe the expected value (i.e., rewards) of goals as another feature of distal goals.
- Consider adding a practical example on page 12 to clarify what is meant by consistent "arbitrary" relationships between movements and distal goals.
We now clarify in what sense we use “arbitrary” (lines 242-247). By arbitrary, we simply mean that participants choose, at the beginning of the experiment, a mapping, and they stick to it throughout the study. In other words, they understand that they should establish consistent links between movement and distance, but they do not rely on regular relationships (i.e., motor-iconicity) to do so.
- In line 562, correct the grammar (suggests, instead of suggest).
We corrected this now (line 578)
- Highlight significance bars in the plots.
We added significance bars and asterisks to indicate when the comparison between distributions is significant, as well as the strength of the significance test (see Figures and Figure captions)
Overall, Dockendorff et al.'s paper provides interesting insights into communicative modulations of actions. I believe that by addressing these points the paper will be clearer and stronger.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response_to_Reviewers.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0306072.r003Decision Letter 1
TessariAlessiaAcademic Editor© 2024 Alessia Tessari2024Alessia Tessarihttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
29 May 2024

PONE-D-23-26818R1Communicative modulations of early action components support the prediction of distal goalsPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Dockendorff,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jul 13 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Alessia Tessari, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Additional Editor Comments:
Please, pay particular attention to Reviewer 1's requests.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Overall, the authors did a good job of addressing the comments that I had in the first round. The manuscript reads much better now. I have a couple of points that came up during this reading that I think would make the manuscript much stronger in how the results are interpreted.
Lines 622-625: the authors interpret the non-significant second-movement type effect as demonstrating that participants do not need the velocity information of the second movement, and thus that “participants can rely on direct movement-to-goal simulation”. However, a non-significant p-value should not be taken as evidence for a lack of effect. Given that this outcome is important for the overall interpretation of the experimental effects, the authors should conduct an additional analysis to determine if there is indeed evidence for a lack of effect, for example using a Bayesian approach.
Experiment 3. On re-reading the discussion of these results, I wonder about the conclusion that the authors draw: “while the first movement still contained useful velocity information that could be used to simulate the distal goal, its change in direction led to a weakened relationship with the distal goal”. The authors acknowledge that the change in direction weakened the link between the first movement and the goal, but I wonder if it did so to the point that the connection becomes arbitrary. In a Gestalt framing of these experiments, the two movements are seen as one sequence or action chain due to their similarity in direction. But with this similarity in direction being removed, these two movements would not likely show the type of Gestalt coherence that would link them as being part of one goal-directed sequence. The seemingly arbitrary mapping between goal and first movement could be learned through perceptual experience, but not if there is no feedback. I don’t suggest that the authors add any additional experiments or anything to that extent, but I think that this (or a similar) interpretation should also be presented as a possible alternative.
Minor:
Lines 803-807: this is quite a long sentence with a lot of information. I think it would be helpful to break this up a bit.
Reviewer #2: I thank Dockendorff et al. for thoroughly addressing the points I raised in my comments.
I still find a minor incongruence in Experiment 2. In lines 577-578, the authors reported that “However, there was no significant main effect of the first movement type.” Yet, in lines 646-648, they wrote, “This was indicated by the higher consistency and higher number of motor-iconic mappings in the Sliding-Jumping condition compared to the Jumping-Jumping condition.” Could the authors clarify this? Perhaps the authors should limit their conclusions to the mapping scores.
I appreciated that the authors included significance bars in the plots; however, this is limited to within-subject factors. I believe it would be relevant to include bars to highlight significant results on the between-subject factors as well, to communicate the findings better.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: James Trujillo
Reviewer #2: Yes: Margherita Tecilla
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0306072.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
7 Jun 2024

Reviewer #1: Overall, the authors did a good job of addressing the comments that I had in the first round. The manuscript reads much better now. I have a couple of points that came up during this reading that I think would make the manuscript much stronger in how the results are interpreted.
Lines 622-625: the authors interpret the non-significant second-movement type effect as demonstrating that participants do not need the velocity information of the second movement, and thus that “participants can rely on direct movement-to-goal simulation”. However, a non-significant p-value should not be taken as evidence for a lack of effect. Given that this outcome is important for the overall interpretation of the experimental effects, the authors should conduct an additional analysis to determine if there is indeed evidence for a lack of effect, for example using a Bayesian approach.
A:We clarify this in the Discussion section of Experiment 1 (lines 677-686), where we now make more explicit our interpretation of our findings. More specifically, we conclude that the findings of Experiment 2, together with those of Experiment 1, are consistent with the possibility that both types of simulation (movement-to-movement and movement-to-goal) can play a role in how participants link early communicative modulations to distal goals.
Experiment 3. On re-reading the discussion of these results, I wonder about the conclusion that the authors draw: “while the first movement still contained useful velocity information that could be used to simulate the distal goal, its change in direction led to a weakened relationship with the distal goal”. The authors acknowledge that the change in direction weakened the link between the first movement and the goal, but I wonder if it did so to the point that the connection becomes arbitrary. In a Gestalt framing of these experiments, the two movements are seen as one sequence or action chain due to their similarity in direction. But with this similarity in direction being removed, these two movements would not likely show the type of Gestalt coherence that would link them as being part of one goal-directed sequence. The seemingly arbitrary mapping between goal and first movement could be learned through perceptual experience, but not if there is no feedback. I don’t suggest that the authors add any additional experiments or anything to that extent, but I think that this (or a similar) interpretation should also be presented as a possible alternative.
A:The purpose of our manipulation of direction in Exp 3 was indeed to weaken the relationship of the first movement with the second movement. However, our data suggest that this did not make the connection arbitrary: The majority of participants still chose a motor iconic mapping in the Sliding-Sliding condition (see Figure 10A)
Regarding the suggestion that a pure learning account could also explain our results: It is important to remember that, during trials, participants never saw the box actually being delivered to the near or far target. Learning by association, we think, could only be between first and second movement, but not the distal goal. As such, we would like to point towards our existing discussion of alternatives to a simulation account (lines 235-237), where we mention statistical learning as a theoretical possibility. We also now include Gestalt-like grouping principles (e.g., similarity) as a theoretical possibility.
Minor:
Lines 803-807: this is quite a long sentence with a lot of information. I think it would be helpful to break this up a bit.
A:We did this now (see lines 822-826).
Reviewer #2: I thank Dockendorff et al. for thoroughly addressing the points I raised in my comments.
I still find a minor incongruence in Experiment 2. In lines 577-578, the authors reported that “However, there was no significant main effect of the first movement type.” Yet, in lines 646-648, they wrote, “This was indicated by the higher consistency and higher number of motor-iconic mappings in the Sliding-Jumping condition compared to the Jumping-Jumping condition.” Could the authors clarify this? Perhaps the authors should limit their conclusions to the mapping scores.
A:We thank R2 for pointing out this incongruence. Indeed, there was no significant main effect of first movement type. We corrected this in the Discussion of Experiment 2 (lines 653-655), where we now limit our interpretation to motor-iconic mappings. We also point out that in the Sliding-Jumping condition consistency increased as a function of degrees of exaggeration.
I appreciated that the authors included significance bars in the plots; however, this is limited to within-subject factors. I believe it would be relevant to include bars to highlight significant results on the between-subject factors as well, to communicate the findings better.
A:We now added the significance bars across conditions whenever the differences between distributions are significant.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response_to_reviewers.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0306072.r005Decision Letter 2
TessariAlessiaAcademic Editor© 2024 Alessia Tessari2024Alessia Tessarihttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
12 Jun 2024

Communicative modulations of early action components support the prediction of distal goals
PONE-D-23-26818R2
Dear Dr. Dockendorff,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager® and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Alessia Tessari, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0306072.r006Acceptance letter
TessariAlessiaAcademic Editor© 2024 Alessia Tessari2024Alessia Tessarihttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
18 Jun 2024

PONE-D-23-26818R2 
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Dockendorff, 
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
If revisions are needed, the production department will contact you directly to resolve them. If no revisions are needed, you will receive an email when the publication date has been set. At this time, we do not offer pre-publication proofs to authors during production of the accepted work. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few weeks to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps. 
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Professor Alessia Tessari 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE