253envhperEnvironmental Health PerspectivesEnviron Health PerspectAmerican Chemical SocietyPMC186797818679781867978Extramural Research Updates Move Online
LangDennis 1Acting Director, Division of Extramural Research and Training, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences520071155A274A274762007Publication of EHP lies in the public domain and is therefore without copyright. All text from EHP may be reprinted freely. Use of materials published in EHP should be acknowledged (for example, ?Reproduced with permission from Environmental Health Perspectives?); pertinent reference information should be provided for the article from which the material was reproduced. Articles from EHP, especially the News section, may contain photographs or illustrations copyrighted by other commercial organizations or individuals that may not be used without obtaining prior approval from the holder of the copyright. statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoFor the past 10 years, the NIEHS Division of Extramural Research and Training (DERT) has used the Extramural Update page in Environmental Health Perspectives (EHP) as a vehicle to communicate with the scientific community about new program initiatives, updates on NIH policy, programmatic accomplishments, leadership changes, and future directions at NIEHS.
Highlights from past columns include:
Research programs
Programs featured in the Extramural Update have included Superfund, Environmental Health Sciences Core Centers, Children’s Centers, Parkinson’s Disease Collaborative Centers, and the Worker Education and Training Program. Newly developed programs described have included the DISCOVER Program, Outstanding New Environmental Scientists (ONES), and Oceans and Human Health.
Community outreach and education programs
Descriptions of the various education and outreach programs involved in translating research findings for different target audiences—including community organizations, health care professionals, and health decision makers—have highlighted the positives outcomes of these efforts.
World Trade Center and Hurricane Katrina responses
NIEHS and grantees have worked together to respond to environmental and public health needs resulting from these catastrophic events.
New initiative planning from DERT retreats
The extramural community was provided with a window into the research planning and priority-setting processes within DERT and NIEHS. The Division announced areas of research that were of interest to NIEHS in order to help guide potential applicants.
Grantee and trainee recognitions
Significant awards and honors attained by NIEHS grantees and trainees were communicated, such as the Karen Wetterhahn awards and NIEHS MERIT recipients.
During the summer of 2007, NIEHS will launch a totally redesigned and updated website that will include a modern look, easier navigation, and new features to enhance its usability. DERT will use the new website to continue its communication with the extramural community. The change of venue will provide DERT with greater flexibility to respond more quickly to emerging events and issues of importance to the extramural community. The additional flexibility will also enable DERT to expand the content of the Extramural Update web page. As this change takes effect, look to the NIEHS website for the latest information and developments in extramural research that you have been used to seeing in the Extramural Update section of EHP.
DERT wishes to thank the staff at EHP for the decade-long collaboration that has enhanced the visibility of DERT, its staff members, and its scientific programs and accomplishments. The Division looks forward to continuing its collegial and collaborative relationship with the journal in other areas of mutual benefit.