3459idmInfectious Disease ModellingInfect Dis ModelKeAi PublishingPMC1028718810287188103318433736648310.1016/j.idm.2023.05.009The effect of non-pharmaceutical interventions on COVID-19 outcomes: A heterogeneous age-related generalisation of the SEIR model
MendesJorge M CoelhoPedro S aNOVA Information Management School (NOVAIMS), Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Campus de Campolide, 1070-312, Lisbon, PortugalbNOVA Cairo at the Knowledge Hub Universities, New Admnistrative Capital, Cairo, Egypt∗Corresponding author. jmm@novaims.unl.pt
226202383742742–7682362023© 2023 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
Successive generalisations of the basic SEIR model have been proposed to accommodate the different needs of the organisations handling the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic and the assessment of the public health measures adopted and named under the common umbrella of Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions (NPIs). So far, these generalisations have not been able to assess the ability of these measures to avoid infection by the SARS-CoV-2 and thus their contribution to contain the spread of the disease. This work proposes a new generalisation of SEIR model and includes a heterogeneous and age-related generation of infections that depends both on a probability that a contact generates the transmission of the disease and a contact rate. The results show (1) thanks to the universal wearing of facial coverings, the probability that a contact provokes the transmission of the disease was reduced by at least 50% and (2) the impact of the other NPI is so significant that otherwise Portugal would have gone into a non-sustainable situation of having 80% of its population infected in the first 300 days of the pandemic. This situation would have led to a number of deaths almost twenty times higher than the number that was actually recorded by December 26th, 2020. Moreover, the results suggest that even if the requirement of universal wearing of facial coverings was adopted sooner jointly with closing workplaces and resorting to teleworking would have postponed the peak of the incidence, altought the epidemic path would have result in a number of infections hardly managed by the National Health System. Complementary, results confirm that (3) the health authorities adopted a conservative approach on the criteria to consider an infected individual not infective any longer; and (4) the most effective NPIs and stringency levels either impacting on self-protection against infection or reducing the contacts that would eventually result in infection are, in decreasing order of importance, the use of Facial coverings, Workplace closing and Stay at home requirements.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Sep 21; Revised 2023 May 26; Accepted 2023 May 29; Collection date 2023 Sep.

1.

## Introduction
In December 2019, a new coronavirus named Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome-Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2), causing severe acute respiratory disease emerged in the region of Wuhan, China ( and ). SARS-CoV-2 is an acute respiratory infectious disease that spreads through the respiratory tract by droplets, respiratory secretions, person-to-person contact and objects or materials which are likely to carry infection, such as clothes, utensils, and furniture ( , and ).
At the time of writing this introduction almost all European countries have been through at least five “waves”, but the effect induced by the high vaccination coverage started to appear ( ). Consequently, many countries began to ease some of the heavy measures in force and the mandatory use of face masks was even under judicious evaluation. Indeed, in the fight against this coronavirus and the absence of a vaccine or treatment, the international community was more interested in putting in force measures to control the spread of the virus and/or mitigate it. The extent (stringency and duration) which these measures were adopted depends either on the epidemiological situation, the population being targeted or the governments sensitivity to their economic impact. Furthermore, the actions taken potentially mitigate the spread of infection by the SARS-CoV-2 and contribute to preserving the health of citizens ( ; ).
It is possible to organise the spectra of all mitigation measures taken under a common umbrella named Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions (NPIs), that is, any public health measures that aim to prevent and/or control infection transmission in the community. During the period when there was no effective and safe vaccine to protect those at risk of severe COVID-19, NPIs were seen as the most effective public health instruments against COVID-19. The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) guidelines detail available options for NPIs in various epidemiological scenarios, assess the evidence for their effectiveness and address implementation issues, including potential barriers and facilitators ( ). According to the ECDC, NPIs can be classified into three levels of implementation: individual, environmental and population levels. In parallel to these guidelines, the ECDC keeps tracks of selected national public NPIs presented in the weekly COVID-19 country overviews report.
The best available scientific evidence is required to design effective NPIs and disseminate the knowledge to help public officials assess the potential benefits and costs of NPIs to contain COVID-19 outbreaks, as it is to expect that different measures will also present different levels of cost-effectiveness. Therefore, it is essential to describe how different countries implemented NPIs, and at what point of the epidemic. It is also necessary to explore how those NPIs have impacted the number of cases, the mortality, and the capacity of health care facilities to deliver healthcare services.
As early as December 2022, a search of published scientific material on “Covid-19” and NPIs (searched as non-pharmacologial interventions, non-pharmacological interventions or non-pharmaceutical) on ISI Web of Knowledge returned 452 entries. A refinement based on scientific areas, publishing outlets and topics addressed restricted the number of publications, yet far above 200. A read over their abstracts unveiled a broad spectrum of used methodologies, although their conclusions were coincident to some extent. It is not the authors’ purpose to perform a systematic literature review here, especially when others have been successfully doing so. Therefore, regarding the different methodologies used to perform the NPIs assessment, we refer to the outstanding systematic review by . In this work, the authors systematically review the literature on assessing the effectiveness of non-pharmaceutical interventions between January 1, 2020 and January 12, 2021, using a total of 248 publications. Although despite the substantial variation in methodologies with respect to study setting, outcome, intervention, methodological approach, and effectiveness assessment, which prevents comparability among studies, the heterogeneity in the used methodologies may be desirable to assess the robustness of results, the study points out to shortcomings of existing studies and make recommendations for the design of future ones. Regarding the empirical studies and their results about the effectiveness of NPIs we refer to the excellent review carried out by . In this review the authors followed the a systematic methodology (PRISMA) ( ) to search for published literature and preprints, respectively, available in English from January 1, 2020 to the beginning of March 2021. The authors rank the NPIs according to their effectiveness in reducing reproduction number, infection growth rate, and other incidence-related measurements. Overall, school closing was the most effective measure in reducing the number of cases. As they point out, several authors report a mean reproduction number reduction after the closures of educational facilities. Indeed, after the closure of schools and universities estimated a mean reproduction number reduction of 39%. In turn, estimated a reduction of 73% after the school closing. Workplace closing to at greater extent and business or venue closing and public event bans to a less one are considered the most effective in reducing cases.
Other NPIs such as lockdowns, movement limitations through national or international travel restrictions, social gathering bans ranging from 10 people to mass gathering bans, social distancing, public information campaigns and mask-wearing requirements are reported as a group of intermediate effectiveness yet still important.
Several authors seem to have found no evidence of the effectiveness of other NPIs like public transport closure, testing and contact tracing strategies and quarantining or isolation of individuals. Also, limited work and evidence indicate that stringency may play an important role when adopting a NPI ( ). Finally, the specific topic of face masks has also been addressed, suggesting that the broad adoption of even relatively ineffective face masks may meaningfully reduce community transmission of COVID-19. However, several of these results are contradictory, limited in outcomes analysed (e.g. limited to the reproduction number) and partial in the sense that they do not address the combined effect of different NPIs and, in particular, the role of face masks in the presence of other NPIs ( ).
Although almost all the conclusions of the empirical studies have pointed out to coincident effects of some NPIs regarding their ability to mitigate or stop disease spread, several factors have also been reported to be of critical importance for NPIs effective impact (e.g. ). These factors affect the population's compliance to adopting NPIs, which can even be graded in concern, government performance's perception or agreement and compliance (e.g. ). Their nature ranges from demographic, social and psychological (e.g. , , , and ).
As points out, mathematical modelling and statistical inference provide a framework to evaluate different non-pharmaceutical and pharmaceutical interventions to control epidemics. However, addressing the challenges in modelling the health, economic and political aspects of interventions need a wide variety of interdisciplinary expertise and cross-collaboration between scientists and policymakers, combining mathematical knowledge with biological and social insights, including health economics and communication skills.
All things considered, there are still crucial knowledge gaps on the effectiveness of different interventions to adequately justify the preparation, implementation, or cancellation of various NPIs. In addition, governments across the World need evidence as to the combination and timings of each potential NPI, which remains lacking ). Despite this discussion, the ultimate goal of the different NPIs referred to above is to reduce the number of contacts between humans or lower the probability of transmission, especially between the most exposed to infection and those who exhibit particular vulnerabilities, and therefore mitigate and contain the spread of the infection. The reduction in human contacts is hard to quantify, but proxy variables exist that aid the investigation of NPIs effects, Google (https://google.com/covid19/mobility/) or Apple mobility (https://covid19.apple.com/mobility) data are two examples of those proxies.
The motivation of this work is anchored on the current lack of knowledge about the effectiveness of different NPIs. Additionally, the authors aim to provide a comprehensive framework to assess the effect of different NPIs adopted during the pandemic. Indeed, using an extension of the widely known compartmental model, the Susceptible-Exposed-Infected-Removed (SEIR) model, the authors set up a methodology to assess the direct effects NPIs on population mobility and their indirect impacts on the spread of the infection. Additionally, simulations are performed to assess what would have happened if those NPIs or only a subset of them were adopted. Therefore, its purpose is to understand how NPIs have affected the mobility of citizens and the probability of disease transmission. These data are subsequently used to mimic how the contact rate evolved and how it impacts the daily generation of confirmed COVID-19 cases. A set of simulations also aims to compare the effects of different NPIs on the most relevant outcomes of the epidemic, namely the accumulated number of infections and deaths. All this is performed by proposing a generalisation of the SEIR model that accommodates heterogeneity between age-groups and a Bayesian estimation framework. A time-varying contact-mobility matrix is also proposed as an input for the estimation framework.
This work is organised as follows. Section introduces the research problem and the overall research objective. Section describes the data used, namely the COVID-19 daily epidemic data (Section ), the age-group specific contact matrices (Section ) and the NPIs data (Section ). Section presents the SIR model, its extension to accommodate the necessary period of virus incubation, as known as SEIR model (Section ), and its generalisation to account for COVID-19 infection heterogeneity across different age groups due to age-dependent contact rates and mobility levels temporal paths (section ). These age-dependent contact rates and mobility levels temporal paths are incorporated into the model's time-varying contact-mobility matrix obtained as described in Section . These section finishes with a full description of the Bayesian framework conceptual model and it estimation details (Section ). Section presents the main results and, lastly, Section discusses the main conclusions as well as their implications in epidemiology policy-making.

2.

## Materials and methods
2.1.

## Data
2.1.1.

## Data on COVID-19 pandemic
Epidemic data were collected from the Data Science for Social Good ( ) relative to Portugal. The dataset used contains the data released by the Direção-Geral de Saúde (Directorate-General of Health, DGS), the Portuguese health authority. Since the beginning of the pandemic, DGS releases daily data on its course. The key released variables used for modelling purposes as explained below are age-stratified (in decennial groups, 0–9, 10–19, 20–29, 30–39, 40–49, 50–59, 60–69 and 70 and more years old) number of confirmed cases number of deaths, and number of recovered cases (not age-stratified).
The period of analysis ranges from March 3rd, 2020 to December 26th, 2020. It corresponds to a period where several NPIs were implemented (ranging from simple recommendations to law enforcement) and matches the period when vaccines were not yet available. The course of the epidemic over this period is shown in .
 illustrates the occurrence of two distinct waves. The first occurred between mid-March and the beginning of May 2020 and the second commenced in late August until late December 2020. Yet out of the current time frame, a third wave occurred in January 2021, leading to the highest spikes Portugal had experienced ever.

2.1.2.

## Age-group contact matrix
Quantifying what entails a contact that is sufficient to transmit a disease can be extraordinary difficult, especially with a disease like COVID-19 that can be spread with even causal incidental contact with a infected person. Several comprehensive works have been made throughout the last fifteen years to quantify contacts (e.g. , ; ). Here, due to nonexistence of infection data by location, we shall use the contact matrix for all locations estimated by for Portugal. As points out, the matrices provided by are asymmetric, because his empirical work information collected regards contacts experienced with other that might not be part of the target population and matrices correspond to absolute frequencies of interactions between age groups, rather than frequencies relative to the sizes of the age groups. The age-structured model used here already account for the susceptible population which belongs to each age group, thus we processed the contact matrices as describes:
1.To correct for the second source of asymmetry by dividing each column by the proportion of the population in the corresponding age group;
2.To correct the first source of asymmetry by averaging out the pairs of elements reflected across the diagonal.
The age-group contact matrix C is a G × G matrix representing the average daily number of contacts between each pair of age-groups, where G here denotes the number of age-groups considered. We denote the matrix entry [Cij], i, j = 1, …, G as the average daily number of contacts the people in the age-group i (matrix row index) have with people in age-group j (matrix column index).
 reports matrices for 16 quinquennial age-groups ([0,4], [5,9], …, [70,74], [75,∞]). As the COVID-19 related data is only available at decennial age-groups, prior to the asymmetry correction described above, were obtained by aggregating quiquennial age-groups to decennial ones ([0,9] = [0,4]+[5,9], [10,19] = [10,14]+[15,19], …, [70, …] = [70,74]+[75,∞]), taking in consideration their relative demographic weight. The used matrix is represented in , where the cell figures represent the average number of daily contacts of people in the age-group i (row index, i = 1, 2, …, 8) with people in the age-group j (column index, j = 1, 2, …, 8), and the 5-tone cyan scale denotes their intensity. Notice that there is a strong tendency for people to prefer contacts with their peers. Also, there is evidence of the child/parent and grandchild/grandparent interactions.
 
2.1.3.

## Non-pharmaceutical interventions data
Information on NPIs was mainly obtained from the Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Tracker (OxCGRT) (https://www.bsg.ox.ac.uk/research/research-projects/covid-19-government-response-tracker) which collects systematic information on policy measures that governments have taken to tackle COVID-19. The different policy responses have been tracked since January 1, 2020, covering more than 180 countries, coded into 21 indicators, including a miscellaneous notes field organised into five groups, containment and closure policies, economic policies, health system policies, vaccination policies and miscellaneous policies. These policies are recorded on a scale to reflect the extent and stringency of government action. For more detailed information please refer to in Appendix. The selection of NPI indicators used in this work, along with their time extent and stringency, is represented in .
 The stringency scale of NPIs represented in differs across the eight categories (cf. in Appendix). However its possible to group them into three groups. A first group of NPIs whose stringency scale ranges from 0 to 4, which is the case of Restriction on gatherings, Facial coverings and International travelers controls; a second group whose scale ranges from 0 to 3, which the case of Stay at home requirements (lockdown), Workplace closing and School closing, and, finally, a group composed of Close public transport and Cancel public events whose scale ranges from 0 to 2. In any case the “0” denotes absence of the measures and the scale maximum denotes the most higher stringency. The colour scale used in uses no colour (white) for scale value “0” and “the darker cyan tone” for the most stringest case. The intermediate stringency levels are represented by lighter cyan tones. Be aware that in Portugal some intermediate stringency levels of some measure do not exist, therefore aggregation was done for modelling purposes (cf. in Appendix).
 shows the NPI and the curve of daily cases in the analysis timeline. During the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic in Portugal four distinct periods can be distinguished. The first one, between the beginning of the epidemic and the declaration of a state of emergency, the first hard lockdown control measures (on March 18th, 2020). The second one, between March 18th, 2020, and the declaration of the situation of calamity when the lockdown measures started easing (May 4th, 2020). A third period from May 4th onwards and until August 18th, corresponding to the traditional Portuguese holidays period and the beginning of the school year and finally, from August 18th onwards.
For modelling purposes, it is observable that the discriminating levels (cf. in Appendix) of some NPIs might raise collinearity issues for model estimation. Section explains the aggregation of some stringency levels and justifies the exclusion of NPIs from the analysis.

2.2.

## Methods
2.2.1.

## The SIR and SEIR models
Much work has been done so far on the course of the COVID-19 outbreak using the so-called compartmental models ( ; ; ). The origin of compartmental models dates back to the early 20th century with the seminal work of Kermack and McKendrick (in 1927) ( ). Compartmental models simplify the mathematical modelling of infectious diseases. The population is assigned to compartments and may progress between compartments. Compartmental order usually shows flow patterns between the compartments; for example, SIS means susceptible, infectious, and then susceptible again ( ). The models are most often run with ordinary differential equations (which are deterministic). Still, they can also be used with a stochastic framework ( ).
Compartmental models allow predicting how a disease spreads through the total number infected, the duration of an epidemic, and infection reproductive number (R0), among other important epidemic course parameters. Moreover, such models could potentially be used as a framework to show how different public health interventions (e.g. vaccination, limited social contacts, lockdown) may affect the outcome of the epidemic.
The basic compartmental model is the SIR model ( ). Nonetheless, it still captures the main properties of an epidemic ( ; ), and it has been widely used in epidemic modeling studies. The SIR model comprises three compartments: S for the number of susceptible, I for the number of infectious, and R for the number of removed (recovered, deceased, or immune) individuals at a particular time ( (a)). This model assumes incidence grows exponentially, which is not in agreement with the observed epidemic course, as the measures adopted by public health authorities at different moments, as well as the change in human behaviours tend to flatten the parabolic incidence curve. Therefore, its predictive value for infectious diseases that are transmitted from humans to humans, without any change in the constant transmission rate is of limited usefulness.
 To represent that the number of susceptible, infectious and removed individuals may vary over time (even if the total population size remains constant) a time index, t, might be added: S(t), I(t) and R(t).
For infections with the characteristics of COVID-19, there is a significant incubation period during which individuals have been infected but are not yet infectious themselves ( ), ; ; ). During this period the individual is in compartment E(t) (for exposed), resulting in the so-called SEIR model. Moreover, many authors ( ; ; ) have been proposing generalisations of this basic SEIR model by splitting the compartment, R into two compartments, one to account for the infected people that genuinely recover from the disease, R, and a second one to account for the mortality induced by the infection, D. For a specific disease within a particular population, these functions may be worked out to predict possible outbreaks and bring them under control.
In , the boxes represent the compartments (or states) and arrows represent transitions from one compartment to another. S(t) is the number of people susceptible at time t, E(t) is the number of people exposed to the infection at time t (people that become infected but not infectious), I(t) is the number of infective people infected at time t, R(t) is the number of people recovered at time t and D(t) is the number of deceased at time t. Transitions from one compartment to another usually follow the framework represented in (b). The rate describes how long the transition takes, population is the group of individuals that this transition applies to, and probability is the probability of the transition taking place for an individual.
The full SEIRD model is depicted in . The transitions from E to I and from I to R or D occur with the probability being 1 (everyone infected will certainly become infectious), 1 − μ′ (a share of 1 − μ′ infectious people will recover, usually expressed in “%“) and μ′ (a share of μ′ infectious people will die, usually expressed in “%“) and the population is E and I, respectively. Here δ is the rate at which infected people become infectious (days−1). The recovery rate is γ′ (expressed in days−1), μ′ is the fatality share (usually expressed in “%“), and α is the rate at which people die (expressed in days−1). In general, it is not possible to identify parameters α, μ′ and γ′, therefore a simplification is assumed hereafter, that is, γ = γ′ × (1 − μ′) (expressed in days−1) and μ = α × μ′ (expressed in days−1), where γ′ and μ′ represent the latent, non-identifiable, crude recovery and fatality share, respectively.
The following differential equations describe transitions of the SEIRD model:
(1)∂S(t)∂t=−βS(t)I(t)N∂E(t)∂t=βS(t)I(t)N−δE(t)∂I(t)∂t=δE(t)−γI(t)−μI(t)∂R(t)∂t=γI(t)∂D(t)∂t=μI(t)N=S(t)+E(t)+I(t)+R(t)+D(t)The parameter β denotes the transmission rate, that is, the expected number of people an infected person infects per day and is the result of the contact rate
c - the number of people an average person enters into contact with each day - and the probability that a contact provokes the transmission of the disease, ψ). Usually no data is available allowing estimation of ψ and c separately; hence, β is directly estimated. However, either ψ might change over time as a result, for example, of new virus variants or c is affected by changes in individual behaviour and NPIs put in place by the governments. Here we propose to replace c with age-structured contact matrices describing the rate of contact between each pair of ages. More specifically, we consider an age-structured model as used by ( ) in which we compute the age distribution of each compartment in decennial age-groups (0–9,10-19, …,60-60, 70+), incorporating age-group-dependent contact-mobility matrix describing the rate of contact between each pair of age-groups. In doing so, we aim to capture the heterogeneous effect of COVID-19 across different ages as well as the impact of the NPI both across different age-groups and age-specific daily environments.

2.2.2.

## The age-structured SEIRD model
In the following the rationale underlying the age-structured SIR model is presented. As the permanent knowledge of the deaths generated by COVID-19 is of crucial importance to monitoring the pandemic's effects we have split the previous Removed compartment into Recovered and Death compartments, allowing us to monitor the recovering rate and the age-specific fatality rates. The system of ordinary differential equations in is replaced by a system of age-stratified ordinary differential equations here:
(2)∂Si(t)∂t=−ψ(t)Si(t)∑j=1GMij(t)Ij(t)Nj∂Ei(t)∂t=ψ(t)Si(t)∑j=1GMij(t)Ij(t)Nj−δEi(t)∂Ii(t)∂t=δEi(t)−γiIi(t)−μiIi(t)∂Ri(t)∂t=γiIi(t)∂Di(t)∂t=μiIi(t)Ni=Si(t)+Ei(t)+Ii(t)+Ri(t)+Di(t)N=S(t)+E(t)+I(t)+R(t)+D(t)E(t)=∑i=1GEi(t),I(t)=∑i=1GIi(t),R(t)=∑i=1GRi(t),D(t)=∑i=1GDi(t).where i and j, i, j = 1, …, G are the age groups, ψ(t) is the probability of transmission given a contact, δ is the rate at which an infectious individual becomes infective, γi is the rate of recovery, μi is the age-group specific fatality rate, and Ni is the population size of age group g.
The parameter δ is the inverse of the average incubation period and governs the lag between having undergone an infectious contact and becoming infective. It is generally considered fixed because it depends mainly on the infectious agent's characteristics. Here we use the value 1/5.1 ( ; ).
The parameter γi is the recovery rate for infected people. It corresponds to the inverse of the average time required for an active case to recovers. It provides precious information about how fast the people may recover from the disease (in days, in general). We believe that γi is dependent on the individual health status which subsequently highly dependent on the individual age, but relatively constant in time. However, in this work, due to the lack of reliable empirical information on the daily recovered patients, we consider γ to be fixed across all age-groups and equal to 1/14 (1/days) ( ). The practitioner that needs to estimate this parameter might set a gamma prior, Ga(1, 1/14), that corresponds to a mean recovery period of 14 days and accounts for some uncertainty and variability in the patients recovery time. As discussed by , other formulations are possible to account for temporal variation as well.
The parameter μi is the fatality rate and provides information simultaneously on the proportion of infected individuals who, unfortunately, die and the time undergone infective as before death. It depends, indeed, on the patients’ resilience, the severity of the disease and the health system capability to treat people over time (e.g., with the introduction of a new therapy). However, due to the short period under analysis we do not consider μi to be time-dependent.
The probability of transmission of the disease given a contact ψ(t) depends mainly on the virus spreading ability which might be affected by self-protection measures. Whilst the former is highly related to the relative importance of the virus variants in circulation in a community, the latter is associated with the general level of use of facial covering devices. Here, due to the relatively short period in analysis which was not particularly affected by diverse virus variants, but reliable information on the use of facial coverings is available, we model ψ(t) as a step function distinguishing three distinct periods i.e., before any facial covering has even been recommended (cf. stringency “0” according to the OxCGRT scale), the period when they were required in some specified shared/public spaces outside the home with other people present, or some situations when social distancing not possible (cf. stringency “2” according to the OxCGRT scale) and the period when they were required in all shared/public spaces outside the home with other people present or all situations when social distancing not possible (cf. stringency “3” according to the OxCGRT scale). In the Bayesian framework proposed below all the parameters associated with these binary variables are considered stochastic with associated prior distributions.
The contact-mobility matrix entries, , defined in are considered stochastic as described in Section . The simulation of the course of the epidemic assuming no NPIs were adopted is done assuming the contact-mobility matrix is constant over time, as described in Section , in .
For modelling performed hereafter, one uses a discrete-time approximation to the stochastic continuous-time SEIRD model defined in . Consider a time interval (t, t + h), where h represents the length between the time points at which measurements are taken, here h = 1 day. Let dEi(t) denote the daily number of susceptible individuals who become infected, dIi(t) the daily number of infected individuals who become infectious, dRi(t) the daily number of infectious cases who recover, and dDi(t) the daily number of infectious cases who decease in age group i, i = 1, …, G, t = 1, …, T. Given initial conditions Si(0) = si(0), Ei(0) = ei(0), Ii(0) = ii(0), Ri(0) = 0 and Di(0) = 0, and the population size N, the discretised stochastic SEIRD model is specified by:
(3)St+1g=Si(t)−dEi(t),g=1,…,G,t=0,…,T−1Et+1g=Ei(t)+dEi(t)−dIi(t),g=1,…,G,t=0,…,T−1It+1g=Ii(t)+dIi(t)−dRi(t)−dDi(t),g=1,…,G,t=0,…,T−1Rt+1g=Ri(t)+dRi(t),g=1,…,G,t=0,…,T−1Dt+1g=Di(t)+dDi(t),g=1,…,G,t=0,…,T−1dEi(t)=ψ(t)Si(t−1)∑j=1GMij(t)Ij(t−1)Nj,i=1,…,G,t=1,…,TdIi(t)=δEi(t−1),i=1,…,G,t=1,…,TdRi(t)=γIi(t−1),i=1,…,G,t=1,…,TdDi(t)=μiIi(t−1),i=1,…,G,t=1,…,TNg=Si(t)+Ei(t)+Ii(t)+Ri(t)+Di(t),g=1,…,G,t=1,…,TN=S(t)+E(t)+I(t)+R(t)+D(t),t=1,…,TE(t)=∑i=1GEi(t),I(t)=∑i=1GIi(t),R(t)=∑i=1GRi(t),D(t)=∑i=1GDi(t),t=1,…,TAgain, to simulate the course of the epidemic, assuming no NPIs were adopted to mitigate the spread of the infection and flatten the incidence and prevalence curves we assume
(4)dEi(t)=ψ(t)Si(t−1)∑j=1GMij′Ij(t−1)Nj,i=1,…,G,t=1,…,Twhere , is the time-invariant average daily number of contacts between each pair of age-groups as specified in .
This set of equations, jointly with the initial conditions, define the age-structured SEIRD model used in this work.

2.2.3.

## Contact-mobility matrix
The daily time-varying contact-mobility matrix, M(t) result from scaling the contact matrix of Section by a mobility index, I(t), as follows:
(5)M(t)=C⋅Idx(t),The purpose of Idx(t) is to measure the relative change in baseline contacts due to the implementation of several NPIs, incorporating in the baseline contact matrix C the adjustments induced by the NPIs whose role is to limit the contacts between individuals.
The time-varying age-group contact-mobility matrix entries, Mij(t) are conditionally independent random variables as described in Section .
It is generally accepted that flattening the infection incidence curve has been successfully achieved in most European states (e.g. ; ; ). However, we do not know what would have happened if the NPIs had not been adopted and, in many cases, enforced by law. Therefore, we decided to perform a simulation where one assumes the contact matrix remains constant, that is,
(6)M′=C.Here, it is assumed the daily contact rate among people prior to pandemic holds for the whole analysis period, leading to the simulation of what would have been the infection course if the number of contacts among people would mimic the population mixing prior to the pandemic, given the probability of infection caused by a single contact.
The Google Mobility Reports (GMR) data (https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility/), were used to derive the mobility indexes, Idx(t). GMR provides daily data on several categories of places are changing in each geographic region. The used categories are: Retail & recreation, Grocery & pharmacy, Transit stations, Workplaces and Residential. The category Parks was not accounted for as the authors consider it has no influence on infections. These five categories originated other five indexes expressed in percentage change of the baseline (prior pandemic) contacts (that is, indexes are greater than 1, if contacts grow; 1, if contacts remain constant; and less than 1, if contacts decrease; see ). When the lockdown policy was implemented, mobility in workplaces and other locations decreased sharply and increased smoothly again after the measures had been ease. On the contrary, mobility in residential areas shows the opposite course.
 These five indexes were collected in the T × 5 matrix of mobility, W. A singular value decomposition of the matrix W, which is admitted to be full-rank, was performed to obtain a single summary index as follows:
(7)W=PEQ′,where P is a T × 5 matrix, E is a 5 × 5 diagonal matrix containing the singular values (square root of eigenvalues) of W′W and Q′ is a 5 × T matrix of eigenvectors of W′W. The resulting principals components scores are contained in the columns of the T × 5 matrix Z:
(8)Z=PE=WQ.The first principal component (corresponding of first column of the scores matrix Z) accounts for 96.6% of the total variation of the data. Therefore, we used the temporal relative change of these scores as our summary mobility index, Idx(t), which are represented in .
The total number of contacts in Portugal between March, 3rd and December 26th, 2020 (a total of 299 days), the whole period under analysis) can be estimated by:
∑t=1T∑i=18∑j≥i8Mij(t)Ni.Assuming the situation prior to pandemic had not changed as a result of the set of taken NPIs, the total number of contacts in Portugal in the same period can be estimated by:
300×∑i=18∑j≥i8CijNi.Therefore, as a result of the changes in mixing and social contacts among citizens, the expected number of contacts decreased from 201015.5 millions to 164418.2 millions. This decay (18.2%) in the number of contacts in the middle of March 2020 was responsible for avoiding millions of infections and thousands of deaths. The results of a simulation comparing these two extreme situations is reported in Section .

2.2.4.

## Bayesian hierarchical model
Using the discrete-time approximation to the stochastic continuous-time SEIRD model (3) defined above we set up a Bayesian hierarchical model where the incidence variables are assumed stochastic (the time unit h is one day).
Bayesian hierarchical models attempt to decompose the observed data into a series of conditional models, all linked together formally through basic probability relationships. In essence the strategy is based on the formulation of three primary statistical models or stages:
●Stage 1: Data model: [data|Process, ν1],
●Stage 2: Process model: [Process|ν2],
●Stage 3: Prior distributions on parameters: [ν1, ν2],
where the square brackets notation denotes probability distribution and ν1 and ν2 generically represent parameters introduced in the modelling.
The following paragraphs follow this framework describing the (1) likelihood and associated distributional assumptions, (2) the process parameters’ link functions and (3) the prior distributions of the model parameters. The section closes with modelling considerations and decisions that have turned model estimation possible.
 summarises the notation used in the Bayesian hierarchical model likelihood and distributional assumptions below.
 2.2.4.1.

## Likelihood and distributional assumptions
Given the three processes defined in the previous section, the likelihood is given as follows:
(9)L=p(dE,dI,dR,dD,M|M,ν)=p(dE|dI,dR,dD,M,M,ν)×p(dI|dR,dD,M,M,ν)×p(dR|dD,M,M,ν)×p(dD|M,M,ν)×p(M|M,ν)where p(u, v) represents the joint probability density of random vectors u, v and p(u|v) represent the conditional density of u, given the vector v, represents the SEIRD model and the states of its correspondent compartment (as defined in ) and ν is vector of all model parameters. To formalise the likelihood we need first to make some assumptions, some of them for computational simplicity, others inspired by the data generation process.
The transitions of individuals from one compartment to the next of in the SEIRD model are considered stochastic movements between the corresponding population compartments. In each period, an individual either stays in or moves on to the next compartment. In reliability analysis, life-time is usually considered to follow an exponential distribution. By analogy, here the time length an individual spends in a compartment is exponentially distributed with some compartment-specific rate λ(t). Therefore, the probability of extending the stay by a further period of length h is exp(−λ(t)h) and the probability of leaving is therefore 1 − exp(−λ(t)h). The summation over the individual Bernoulli trials assuming they are independent and identical for all compartment members, would result in binomial distributions ( ). Due to the scale we are working with, we found it useful to take advantage of the approximation of the binomial to the Poisson distribution.
Assumption 1Given (3), we assume that dE conditional on , Mi(t) and ν is independent in time and among age-groups: 
(10)p(dE|dI,dR,dD,M,M,ν)=p(dE|M(t−1),Mi(t),ν)=∏i=18∏t=1Tp(dEi(t)|Si(t−1),I(t−1),Mi(t),ν).Assumption 2Given (3), we assume that dI conditional on and ν is independent in time and among age-groups: 
(11)lllp(dI|dR,dD,M,M,ν)=p(dI|M(t−1),ν)=∏i=18∏t=1Tp(dIi(t)|Ei(t−1),ν).Assumption 3Given (3), we assume that dR conditional on and ν is independent in time: 
(12)p(dR|dD,M,M,ν)=p(dR|M(t−1),ν)=∏t=1Tp(dR(t)|I(t−1),ν).Assumption 4Given (3), we assume that dD conditional on and ν is independent in time and among age-groups: 
(13)p(dD|M,M,ν)=p(dD|M(t−1),ν)=∏i=18∏t=1Tp(dDi(t)|Ii(t−1),ν).Assumption 5The incidences dEi(t), dIi(t), dRi(t), and dDi(t) are considered conditionally independent Poisson random variables, that is: 
(14)p(dEi(t)|Si(t−1),Mi(t),I(t−1),ν)∼Pois(Si(t−1)×πdEi(t)),i=1,…,8,t=1,…,Tp(dIi(t)|Ei(t−1),ν)∼Pois(Ei(t−1)×πdIi(t)),i=1,…,8,t=1,…,Tp(dR(t)|I(t−1),ν)∼Pois(I(t−1)×πdR),i=1,…,8,t=1,…,Tp(dDi(t)|Ii(t−1),ν)∼Pois(Ii(t−1)×πdDi(t)),i=1,…,8,t=1,…,T,where transition probabilities are given by:
(15)πdEi(t)=1−exp−ψ(t)∑j=1GMij(t)Ij(t−1)Nj,i,j=1,…,8,t=1,…,T,πdIi=1−exp−δ,i=1,…,8,t=1,…,TπdR=1−exp−γ,i=1,…,8,t=1,…,TπdDi(t)=1−exp−μi(t)i=1,…,8,t=1,…,T.The model further assumes the population size is , remains constant, and individuals mix homogeneously.
Assumption 6The time-varying age-group contact-mobility matrix entries, Mij(t), are considered stochastic, conditionally independent, given a set of covariates that impact, directly or indirectly, in the contacts as depicted by the stringency of the NPIs of . The model matrix X is a matrix containing dummy variables for each level of stringency as described in . Due to collinearity issues, some of the stringency levels on result from aggregation of the raw ones as explained below.
 The three levels of stringency of C1(t), t = 1, …, T, were collapsed into two levels as we think the distinction between recommendation and requirement is useless given that the public education system in Portugal (representing 98% of the sector) complied quickly with all the interventions and even anticipated them. The four levels of stringency of C4(t), t = 1, …, T, were collapsed in a single one as we think the distinction based on the size of the gatherings is useless for our purposes. Due to Spearman's perfect correlation between C3(t) and C4(t) and highly collinearity of these and C8(t) with C1(t), we removed variables C3(t), C4(t), and C8(t) from the analysis, letting C1(t) as being their proxy. This prevents the Markov chain chain simulation process from mixing poorly being unable to distinguish the effects of those variables on the contact-mobility levels. Therefore, the model matrix is defined as: X = (C11, C21, C22, C51, C61, C62, C71), where C11 = {C11(t), t = 1, …, T} is the vector of T observations of the dummy variable representing the stringency level 1 of C1(t) and the remaining variables are defined in a similar manner. Moreover, the time-varying age-group contact-mobility matrix entries are considered conditionally independent and follow a gamma model as follows:
(16)p(Mij(t)|X)∼Gaθi,θiξij(t),i,j=1,…,8,t=1,…,Twhere θi is the shape parameter and is the rate parameter, implying E(Mij(t)|X) = ξij(t).
The above assumptions simplify the likelihood as follows:
(17)L=p(dE,dI,dR,dD,M)=p(dE|dI,dR,dD,M)p(dI|dR,dD,M)p(dR|dD,M)p(dD|M)p(M)=∏t=1TpdR(t)|I(t−1)∏i=18pdEi(t)|Si(t−1),I(t−1),Mi(t)×pdIi(t)|Ei(t−1)pdDi(t)|Ii(t−1)∏j=18pMij(t)
2.2.4.2.

## Link functions
In order to account for the effects of some NPIs such as lockdown and social distancing, we assume that the transmission rate is affected by: (1) the time-varying age-group contact-mobility matrix M(t) or the constant age-group specific contact-mobility matrix M′ (obtained as explained in Section ) and (2) the probability of virus transmission ψ(t), which is assumed to be a step function where the intervention moments correspond to the entry in force of an important self-protection measure not accounted for by mobility indexes, that is, the use of facial coverings. It is modelled through two dummy variables H61(t) and H62(t):
(18)H61(t)=1,H6(t)=10,otherwise,t=1,…,T,(19)H62(t)=1,H6(t)=20,otherwise,t=1,…,T,which correspond to the periods when facial coverings were required in some specified shared/public spaces outside the home with other people present, or some situations when social distancing was not possible (cf. ) and when they were required in all shared/public spaces outside the home with other people present or all situations when social distancing was not possible (cf. ).
This implies ψ(t) to be formulated as:
(20)logit(ψ(t))=H′(t)η=η0+η1H61(t)+η2H62(t)=η0t<τ1η0+η1,τ1≤t<τ2η0+η2,t≥τ2,t=1,…,T,where logit(•) is the log(p/(1 − p)) transformation, η′ = (η0, η1, η2), where η0 is the baseline probability that a contact provokes the transmission of the disease, η1 and η2 are the (expected) change in this probability due to the introduction of two different stringency levels of wearing a facial covering and h′(t) is the tth row of the T × 3 matrix H, composed of a column of 1's and the two T-length column vectors representing the dummy variables describing the stringency of wearing facial coverings (H6(t)), H = (1, H61, H62). This formulation allows for assessing the effect of the introduction of facial coverings on the risk of getting infected.
The link function for ξij(t) in is defined by:
(21)logξij(t)=λij0+x′(t)λ,i,j=1,…,8;t=1,…,T,where models the expected log-level value of the baseline contact-mobility matrix Mij(1) (that is, Cij), and are the regression coefficients multiplying x′(t), t = 1, …, T, the rows of X (as defined before).
The expected value of the gamma distribution above is defined to assess NPI effects on the average number of daily contacts responsible for infection spreading. The mean of the posterior distribution of , t = 1, is expected to fit the entries of the contact matrix , and the posterior mean of exp(X′λ) is meant to fit the mobility index Idx(t), t = 1, …, T defined in Section .
A comment on the previous model matrix is necessary. The authors think the facial coverings interventions (H6) may be better accounted for in the model of probability of virus transmission, ψ, as it might might be seen as an reduction on the baseline probability of infection. As a matter of fact, several other authors have used this framework to assess the potential effect of using masks (e.g., and ).
Evoking the aforementioned reasons (cf. Section ), the parameters μi(t), i = 1, …, 8, which govern the passage from the compartment I to the compartment D, are considered age-group dependent. For the first four age groups, [0,9], [10,19], [20,29] and [30,39] deaths are rare; therefore the fatality rate is considered time-invariant:
(22)μi(t)=μi0,i=1,2,3,4,t=1,…,T,For the last four age-groups, [40,49], [50,59], [60,69] and 70+ the parameters μi(t) are considered time-dependent following an exponentially decreasing trend, with an increasing rate constant across the four age-groups:
(23)μi(t)=μi0exp(−ρμt),i=5,6,7,8,t=1,…,T,where the parameter , i = 5, 6, 7, 8, represents the initial value of the fatality rate.
As discussed about the SEIRD model represented in , the fatality rates, μ(⋅)(t) in , represent the product of two distinct quantities: (1) the probability of moving from compartment I to compartment D and (2) the inverse of the period an infected person takes to perish. It is measured in days−1. The mortality rate is supposed to decrease over time at a rate of ρμ (expressed in days).

2.2.4.3.

## Prior distributions
The following independent prior distributions are assigned to each of the previous parameters:
(24)η∼N3(0,Pη),λij0∼N(0,0.0001),i,j=1,…,8,λ∼N7(0,Pλ),θi∼Ga(0.0001,0.0001),i=1,…8μi∼Ga(0.0001,0.0001),i=1,…8,ρμ∼Ga(0.0001,0.0001).where Ga(a, b) refers to a gamma distribution with shape a and rate b, mean a/b, and variance a/b2, N(0, 0.0001) to a normal distribution with a mean of zero and a precision of 0.0001, and N(•)(0, P(•)) to a (•)-variate multivariate normal distribution with a mean vector of zeros and precision matrix P(•). The precision matrix P• follows a Wishart distribution with a diagonal scale matrix with diagonal elements equal to 1000 and dim(P(•)) + 2 degrees of freedom to ensure a non-informative hyperprior.
Given the hierarchical representation presented above and using the same notation as in , one can evaluate the posterior distribution of all of the processes and parameters, given the observed data:
(25)Π(ν|dE,dI,dR,dD,M,X,H)∝p(dE,dI,dR,dD,M|ν,X,H)p(ν)=p(dE,dI,dR,dD,M|ν,X,H)p(η)∏i=18∏j=18p(λij0)p(λ)p(θ)p(μ)p(ρμ)=∏t=1TpdR(t)|I(t−1)∏i=18pdEi(t)|Si(t−1),I(t−1),Mi(t)×pdIi(t)|Ei(t−1)pdDi(t)|Ii(t−1)∏j=18pMij(t)×p(η)∏i=18∏j=18p(λij0)p(λ)p(θ)p(μ)p(ρμ)
2.2.4.4.

## Other considerations
The epidemic model specified in , , , , the fatality rate models (22) and (23) with the transmission probability model (20), and the time-varying age-group contact-mobility matrix model (16) and (21) has parameter vector , which we would like to estimate from the knowledge of the initial conditions Si(0), Ei(0), Ii(0), Ri(0) = 0, and Di(0) = 0, i = 1, …, 8, the population sizes, Ni, i, 1, …, 8, and the data of {dE, dI, dR, dD, M, X, H}.
The initial conditions Ii(0), i = 1, …, 8 are unknown. Indeed, the number of confirmed cases in the very beginning of the epidemic is far from the true prevalence of COVID-19 infections. However, for simplicity, one assumes it to be known and equals the number of confirmed infected cases on March 3rd, 2020, in each age-group. To determine the initial conditions Si(0), Ei(0), i = 1, …, 8, one needs to know at least one of them. One decided to estimate the initial condition Ei(0), i = 1, …, 8 from the series of exposed, dEi(t), whose paths were based on the time between exposure and infectiousness, that is, 5.1 days, on average ( ). A gamma distribution with a μX/σX parameter of 5.1/4.5, corresponding to a mean and median incubation period of 5.1 and 4.2 days was used to backcast the values of dIi(t) to the previous compartment and provide the initial values Ei(0), i = 1, …, 8. The initial conditions Si(0), i = 1, …, 8 were then obtained by difference to the total population of the respective age-group, Ni, i = 1, …, 8. This procedure was only used to estimate the initial conditions Si(0) and Ei(0). Indeed, the observed processes dEi(t), i = 1, …, 8, t = 1, …T are not observed and thus considered missing, requiring numeric integration over the support of the probability distribution of dEi(t) in .
One cannot evaluate the posterior distribution (25) analytically and must resort to numeric simulation methods. We use the special case of MCMC known as Gibbs sampling ( ) and implemented the algorithm using the R package JAGS (all code used in this paper can be obtained from the authors upon request).
Additionally to the estimation of model parameters ν, we decided to perform four additional simulations to assess the effect of the absence of all/some NPIs on infections. The first considers the case where no NPIs are considered, except facial coverings (denoted in Section as Facial coverings(+), other NPIs(−)). The second accounts for all NPIs effects are considered but facial coverings (denoted in Section as Facial coverings(−), other NPIs(+)). The third accounts for the case where no NPIs effects are considered (denoted in Section as Facial coverings(−), other NPIs(−)). This simulation in based on a constant transmission probability ψ(t) = η0 and a constant contact-mobility matrix, that is M′ = C. Finally, the fourth simulation accounts only for the effects of Facial coverings and Workplace closing (denoted in Section as Facial coverings(+), Workplace closing(+)).

3.

## Results
After an adaptation phase of 5000 iterations and a burn-in period of 2000 iterations by which we consider convergence has been achieved. A sample of size of 300, resulting from running four independent chains with a thin step of 50 iterations (to avoid serial correlation) was used to obtain marginal posterior distributions for all model parameters. For the vast majority of the parameters the Gelman-Rubin statistic ( ) achieved values below 1.05 which reinforces the belief convergence was achieved (cf. in Appendix).
Analysing the model's fit against real data is relevant as a tool of external validation. Therefore, the model fit is assessed by plotting the available data against the estimated expected values of the posterior distribution. The model's fit is evident from and A2, in the Appendix, regarding the age-group epidemic data, and , , for accumulated and daily number of infected cases, accumulated deaths and recoveries, regarding all ages, for the period corresponding to the used data. Indeed, the observed number of accumulated infected cases, ∑tdI(t), is 391.7 thousands and the fitted value, ∑tE[dI(t)], is 384.1 thousands, representing an underestimation of about 1.9%; on the other hand, the observed number of accumulated deaths for the period under analysis, D(t) on 26th December 2020, is 5907 and the fitted value, ∑tE[dD(t)], is 5911, representing an overestimation of only 0.07%.
 The contact-mobility matrix, M(t), and its baseline source C and mobility index Idx(t) (see Section ), are targets of the proposed model. Therefore, and A4 summarise model's fitting results regarding the mobility index Idx(t), and the contact matrix C. shows the mobility index, Idx(t), t = 1, …, T and the mean of posterior distribution of exp(Xλ) (see equation ). It fairly follows the mobility index temporal path.
Finally, shows, side by side, the target matrix C and the mean of the marginal posterior distribution of , i, j = 1, …, 8. Some small differences are noticed but the 5-tone colour pattern is similar in both matrices. Moreover, the root mean square deviation between the entries of C and their fitted values is equal to 0.06 daily contacts.
These results suggest that jointly considering a time-varying probability of infection, ψ(t), and a time-varying contact-mobility matrix is able to capture the age-group and the overall course of the epidemic. It also confirms something else: mobility data, represented here through the Google Mobility data, mimics the reduction in daily contacts among individuals which inevitably led to mitigating the natural spread of the disease.
 (a) represents the overall number of recovery people paths (as mentioned previously age-group recovery data are unavailable). As described in Section , we considered the recovery rate, γ, as a fixed parameter. The purpose was to mimic the recovery path using a generally literature-accepted recovery rate (corresponding to 14 days of infectiousness) and compare it with the non-reliable figures released by national heath authorities. As shows, the estimated path of recoveries shows some departure from the observed one, confirming the expert perception of the delay of releasing figures about infected people off the isolation period followed a conservative criterion. Besides, the spikes in the observed path denote the moments when DGS released data on recoveries accumulated for some weeks.
 presents the posterior means and posterior standard deviations of model parameters. The results regarding the infection parameters equation are all statistically significant at 5%. The posterior mean of η1 is −0.513 (se = 0.010). Therefore, the risk of a contact provokes the transmission of the disease suffers a reduction of 40.2% (1 − exp(η1) × 100), when facial coverings become required in
some
specified shared/public spaces outside the home with other people present, or
some
situations when social distancing not possible. Moreover, when the stringency of this NPI increased, that is, when facial covering become required in
all
shared/public spaces outside the home with other people present or
all
situations when social distancing not possible the risk fall down even sharply by 59.0%, as the posterior mean of η2 is −0.892.
 The results regarding the age-group fatality rates, μi, i = 1, …, 8 are also reported. These parameters are expressed in days −1 units. They are not significantly different from zero (at 5% significance level) for the first two age-groups, [0,9] and [10,19] years of age. For the age-groups [20,29] and [30,39] fatality rates are statistically significant but still not different from zero in practical terms. For older ages, the results, being statistically significant, are not practically different from zero. In the period under analysis Portugal undergone a pandemic landscape dominated by the variant alpha of SARS-CoV-2 which was not one of deadliest among all SARS-CoV-2 variants identified so far. Moreover, the fatality rate μ here represents the product of the probability of an infectious individual die (α) by the rate (in days) it takes to perish (μ′) (see Section ). The estimated value of μ8, given by the mean of its marginal posterior distribution is 0.0157538. If we assume that only a tiny fraction of the infectious individuals go through a serious respiratory condition leading eventually to death, usually reported between 1% and 4% (the value of α), that it would correspond to a average of between 0.5 and 2.5 days to perish after becoming infectious, that is, hosting a sufficient viral load capable of spreading out to other individuals.
 shows the expected impact (in per cent) of the combination NPI/level considered in this work on the average contact-mobility matrix entries. The values were computed transforming the posterior means of the log link function} (21), (exp(λ(•)) − 1) × 100. The statistical significance of the parameter (at 5% significance level) is indicated in the table by the superscript “a”.
 The results show that, holding the other NPIs fixed, on average, closing (or working from home) for some sectors or categories of workers (C21, starting on March 12th, 2020) had a statistically significant effect on reducing prior pandemic contact-mobility levels by 14.19%. However, when this NPI became more strict (closing (or working from home) for all-but-essential workplaces (e.g. grocery stores, doctors) (C22, starting on March 19th, 2020), the prior pandemic contact-mobility levels dropped, on average by 35.57%.
The result on recommend not leaving house (C61, stating on March 15th, 2020) shows it had more impact in reducing the prior pandemic contact-mobility levels (−8.08%), than requiring not leaving the house with exceptions for daily exercise, grocery shopping, and ‘essential’ trips (C62), which started four days later, on March 19th, 2020 (−1.68%). A behaviour of self protection may explain this result, as at the beginning of the pandemic, a generalised feeling of fear spread out in the Portuguese population.
Much debate is going on about the effect of School closing (C11, starting on March 9th, 2020). Results presented in on school closing do not indicate a high potential for reduction of prior pandemic contact-mobility levels (−0.59%). This NPI mainly aimed at preventing students to infect their families after infectious contacts at school environment and the other way around. Its lack of effect is likely due to its nature that did not have direct effects on the generalised contact-mobility levels.
 also reports the estimated impact of two other combinations NPI/level. First, The result regarding recommend closing public transport (or significantly reduce volume/route/means of transport available) (C51, starting on March 19th, 2020) shows a statistically significant impact on raising the prior pandemic contact-mobility levels (2.16%). This result is not surprising as we know that limitations on the offer of public transportation may, on one hand prevent close contacts among passengers but, on the other hand, may imply the citizens to move around using other transportation means and thus raising the contact-mobility levels as they are measured in this work. Second, the result regarding recommend not to travel between regions/cities or internal movement restrictions in place (C71, starting on March 19th, 2020) exhibits a marginal, but still statistically significant, impact on reducing the prior pandemic contact-mobility levels by only 2.45%.
Three other NPIs that were not considered for model estimation Cancel public events, (C3), Restrictions on gatherings (C4), and International travel controls (C8) as explained in Section . In Portugal, these measures were in place for a extended period of time (cf. ) and were almost coincident (collinear) with school closing. Results about their proxy, C1, suggest they had a small or even null impact on changing the prior pandemic contact-mobility levels.
The results of the four simulations performed are presented in and , A6 and A7. The results suggest a very much different situation on December 26th, 2020 regarding the accumulated number of infections, the daily infections and deaths under different NPI scenarios.
 In simulation 1 we consider a situation where measures are absent, except for facial coverings (one denotes it as Facial coverings(+), other NPIs(−)). This simulation shows the number of accumulated infections by December 26th would reach 8.2 million, instead of the 391.7 thousand actually verified. Similarly, this simulation shows the accumulated number of deaths would reach 88.5 thousand instead of the 5907 observed indeed. On the other hand, the maximum of daily number of infection cases would reach 107.8 thousands, a much larger number than the recorded daily maximum on December 9th, 2020 (9.2 thousand).
Simulation 2 represents an even more extreme scenario (one denote it as Facial coverings(−), other NPIs(−)). Indeed, in the absence of any NPI, including neither the mandatory use of facial coverings in some or all places, the number of accumulated infections by December 26th would reach 9.7 million, the accumulated deaths would reach 147.3 thousand, and the maximum of daily infection would reach 225.0 thousand.
Simulation 3 represents an intermediate situation somewhere between simulations 1 and 2 (one denotes it as Facial coverings(−), other NPIs(+)). Indeed, in the absence of facial covering, but assuming all other NPIs were taken, the number of accumulated infections by December 26th would reach 9.4 million, the accumulated deaths would reach 122.7 thousand, and the maximum of daily infections would reach 181.8 thousand.
Simulation 3 shows that the joint adoption of a set of NPI whose intended role was to prevent people from closely contacting each other, has a more extensive impact than the universal use of facial coverings. Yet, the use of facial masks together with the additional NPIs has an additional and not negligible effect, which is easily concluded from the difference between the results of simulation 3 and the actual observed situation.
These results jointly with the results of the impact of the NPIs above suggest the joint effect of Facial coverings and Workplace closing is major among all the NPI combinations. Simulation 4 (one denotes it as Facial coverings(−), Workplace closing(+)) considers the situation where only the effects of facial covers on the probability of transmission and the two Workplace closing stringency levels on the contact-mobility levels are accounted for. It is clear from the results reported in and illustrated in , A6 and A7 that even adopting only these two NPIs together would have resulted in postponing the peak of the incidence (see ), and in a number of infections hardly managed by the National Health System. Indeed, by December 26th the number of accumulated infections, the accumulated deaths, and the maximum of daily infections would have reached 7.1 million, 59.8 thousand, and 75.7 thousand, respectively. It is even possible to support the statement that the sooner enforcement of wearing face mask (the use of facial masks became required only on October 28th, 2020) would have been positive both for incidence of infections and deaths, but not sufficient to avoid an unmanageable burden in the health system.

4.

## Discussion and future work
In this work, the main classes of public health measures that aim to prevent and/or control infection transmission in the community were characterised and presented under a common umbrella named Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions (NPIs). In particular, those put into force in Portugal were considered. Ultimately, the scientific community and government officials need proof of their effectiveness in reducing the number of contacts between individuals, specially between the most exposed to infection and those who present particular vulnerabilities, and therefore mitigate and contain the spread of the infection. This proof is even more critical when there was no effective and safe vaccine to protect those at risk of severe COVID-19, NPIs were seen as the most effective measures against COVID-19. As the social and economic costs may vary significantly between NPI measures, it is of utmost importance to offer some insight into the ones that may be more effective in preventing the spread of the disease. The reduction of individual contacts is hard to quantify, but proxy variables exist that aid in the investigation of NPI effects, having the mobility information widely available on the Internet as an example of a potential proxy.
A SEIRD model was fitted to the COVID-19 epidemic data of Portugal to achieve this primary objective. The model was estimated through a Bayesian hierarchical framework and a set of singular model features used to assess the role of mobility data as a potential proxy of the reduction of individual contacts. Furthermore, once the critical role of mobility data was established, several other issues were investigated, namely the quantification of the impact of those NPIs on the course of the epidemic curves. The methodology presented in this work might be even extended for other purposes such as simulation of the effect of specific interventions.
The age-structured SEIRD model framework considered the generation of daily infections to be a function of the virus-inherent probability of transmission and the contact rate - the number of people an average person entered into contact with on a daily basis. We considered the contact rates to be heterogeneous across age-groups. A matrix of average daily prior pandemic contacts per age-group is used. It is supposed to evolve according to a corresponding mobility index computed using Google mobility data. A full contact-mobility matrix resulted and is used to mimic the temporal path of mixing pattern. The contact-mobility matrix entries are considered stochastic and assumed to vary according to the impact of the NPIs.
Assuming a constant virus-inherent probability of transmission, which is not a hard assumption given the short period of analysis (the period prior to the vaccination phase which corresponds to the first 300 days of the pandemic in Portugal), the model fit is considered fair. Indeed, the visual fit is from , A2, in the Appendix, regarding the age-group data, and , , for all ages, depicting the observed and fitted number of accumulated and daily number of infected cases, accumulated deaths and recoveries, for the period corresponding to the used data. Indeed, the fitted number of accumulated infected cases underestimates the observed value by 1.9% and the fitted number of accumulated deaths for the same period overestimates the observed value by 0.07%.
Given the unreliable nature of the data on daily recoveries, the fitted model considers the curve of recoveries a function of a constant and widely accepted recovery rate. Under this circumstance one would have necessarily expected a departure between the observed and estimated curves of recoveries. It was the case, which suggests a conservative approach by the public health authorities in the criteria to consider an infected individual not infectious any more.
Regarding the contact-mobility matrix, another target of the proposed model, the fit fair as well. Indeed, on one hand the baseline prior pandemic contact matrix is accurately reproduced ( ), and on the other, the main features of its temporal path, represented by the summary mobility index, are fairly fitted ( ).
The age-group fatality rates, μi,i = 1, …, 8, are not significantly different from zero (at 5% significance level) for the first two age-groups, [0,9] and [10,19] years of age. For the remaining age-groups, fatality rates are statistically significant, but still not different from zero in practical terms. The last age group is where fatality concentrate the most.
The baseline probability that a contact provokes the transmission of the disease is, under the model, highly low, around 0.25%. However, the risk of a contact provoking the transmission of the disease suffers a reduction of 40.2%, when facial coverings became required in
some
specified shared/public spaces outside the home with other people present, or
some
situations when social distancing was not possible. Moreover, when the stringency of this NPI increased, that is, when facial covering became required in
all
shared/public spaces outside the home with other people present or
all
situations when social distancing was not possible the risk dropped even sharper by 59.0%. Although, these two effects are statistically significant, they had a moderate impact in the course of the pandemic. In fact, the comparison between simulations shows the impact of using facial covering is much lower than the effect of all other NPIs in lowering contacts between individuals.
Among the other NPIs, the crucial contributions to the reduction of the prior pandemic contact levels and therefore to the spread of infection must be emphasised, were by the following order of importance Workplace closing, Stay at home requirements (lockdown) and Restrictions on internal movement. These results are, in general, in line with what has been published in the literature (e.g. ). The lockdown intervention impact on the number of infections cannot be measured directly. However, results confirm the growth of the contact-mobility mixing in residential areas, certainly reducing the mixing in places where the infection would have spread out easily. Works exist reporting the importance of School closing as a mean of reducing the spread of the infection (cf. Section ). These results are fully understandable, given the mixing of students within schools and their families. However, as we do not have data on infections by source of infection it turns hard to assess this effect. Moreover, the results reported here do not support this thesis.
In short, the results obtained here are fourfold. Firstly, thanks to the universal wearing of facial coverings, the probability that a contact provoked the transmission of the disease was reduced by more than 50%. Secondly, the impact of the other NPI (from which Workplace closing stands clearly out) is so significant that otherwise Portugal would have gone into a non-sustainable situation of having 80% of its population infected in the first 300 days of the pandemic. This situation would have led to a number of deaths more than twenty times higher than the number that was actually recorded by December 26th, 2020. Thirdly, the requirement of wearing face masks and working-from-home (Workplace closing) whenever possible had a impact on reducing the probability of transmission and preventing physical contacts among the population that would not have been sufficient for Portugal to avoid an unmanageable number of infection. Therefore, the it seems clear the economic and social effects of NPIs adopted could not have been avoided. And lastly, the observed curve of recovery cases in Portugal suggests health authorities followed a conservative approach on the criteria to consider an infected individual not infectious any longer.
This work is clearly limited by the unavailability of data on infections by source of infection and mobility data stratified by age-group. This lack of data prevented the authors to go deeper in the consideration of different contact matrices according to the place where infections occurred and forced them to use of a mobility index uniform across all age-groups. Consideration of these data would have turned possible modelling accurately some sources of heterogeneity. Moreover, the modelling approach does not consider the impact in a more extended period as the vaccination effect was not considered. Including the effect of the vaccination in the burden caused to the health system should be a priority in the near future. These implies extending the analysis to the year of 2021, where the hardest wave of infections hit the country, requiring (1) the consideration of other model compartments, as suggested by , and (2) the incorporation of effects of different SARS-Cov-2 variants on the probability of transmission and morbidity.

## Funding
This work was supported by national funds through FCT (Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia) under the project UIDB/04152/2020 - Centro de Investigação em Gestão de Informação (MagIC).

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

Handling Editor: Dr Daihai He

## Footnotes
Peer review under responsibility of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd.

## Contributor Information
Jorge M. Mendes, Email: jmm@novaims.unl.pt.
Pedro S. Coelho, Email: psc@novaims.unl.pt.

A Appendix.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

## References