pmcCochrane Database Syst RevCochrane Database Syst Rev3102cochrev10090974714651858The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews1469-493X1361-6137John Wiley and Sons, Inc. and the Cochrane LibraryPMC10594594PMC10594594.110594594105945943787396810.1002/14651858.CD014722.pub2CD014722.pub2CD0147221Effective practice & health systemsMental healthInsurance medicineImplementation strategiesPrimary‐level and community worker interventions for the prevention of mental disorders and the promotion of well‐being in low‐ and middle‐income countries
Cochrane Effective Practice and Organisation of Care GroupPurgatoMarianna ; ; ). Mental health and behavioural disorders contribute 7.4% of the global burden of disease in the world ‐ more than, for example, tuberculosis (2%), HIV/AIDS (3.3%), or malaria (4.6%) ( ). The contribution of major depressive disorders alone to worldwide disability‐adjusted life‐years (DALYs) increased by 37% between 1990 and 2010 and is predicted to rise further ( ; ). In addition, self‐inflicted injuries and alcohol‐related disorders are likely to increase in the ranking of disease burden due to the decline in communicable diseases and because of a predicted increase in war and violence. The disease burden due to Alzheimer’s disease is also increasing; this is linked to the demographic transition towards an ageing population ( ). Despite these figures, levels of public expenditure on mental health are still low (a global median of 2.1% of government health expenditure) and particularly meagre in lower resource settings. Data from official WHO reports highlight persistent gaps in the availability of mental health resources, significant variation between high‐ and low‐income countries and across regions, and the need for continued country‐level investment in policies, plans, health services, and monitoring systems for mental health care ( ).
Political instability, war, and natural disasters disproportionally affect populations living in low‐ and middle‐income countries (LMICs) ( ). In addition, people living in these contexts, are more prone to experiencing extreme chronic poverty (less than 1.90 international dollars per day), which causes about 385 million of children under the age of 18 years to experience severe deprivation of basic human needs, including food, water, sanitation, health, and education. The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that the prevalence of post‐traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, and mixed anxiety disorders in conflict settings is at 22% ( ), which is, conservatively, around five times higher than the general population. The COVID‐19 pandemic is an additional public health emergency that occurred against an already complex backdrop of psychological suffering. It further affected social determinants of mental health, also rasing concerns about the deprioritization of the psychological needs of people in LMICs. Risk factors for mental disorders and increased symptomatology can include community‐level risk factors (e.g. neighbourhood disadvantages, high levels of community violence, community‐level gender inequitable norms), family‐level risk factors (e.g. intimate partner violence, harsh parenting), or individual‐level risk factors (e.g. low self‐esteem, maladaptive coping strategies). Similarly, protective factors can operate at multiple levels of the social environment. Promotion interventions may target promotive factors (i.e. factors associated with an increased chance of achieving positive mental health states).
These illnesses also imply substantial economic costs. One recent report on the global economic burden of non‐communicable diseases (NCDs) suggests that, by the early 2030s, mental health conditions alone will account for the loss of an additional USD 16.1 trillion, with a dramatic impact on productivity and quality of life ( ). Data on the macroeconomic costs for LMIC settings remain uncertain ( ). However, the economic and social costs for individuals and families are substantial. High direct costs are incurred in countries where health spending is met largely through private, as opposed to public, spending, and where health insurance and employer‐met health payments are insubstantial ( ). High indirect costs are incurred as the result of informal caregiving and lost work opportunities, as well as untreated disorders and their associated disabilities ( ).
All over the world, the gap between individuals in need of mental health interventions and those who actually receive such care is very large ( ). Previous estimates suggest that more than 56% of people with depression ( ; ; ; ), along with 78% of persons with alcohol use disorders ( ), do not receive care. A study of 21 countries via the WHO Mental Health Surveys found that 52.6% of persons with depressive disorders in LMICs had received no treatment in the past 12 months, and only 20.5% of persons with depressive disorders had received minimally adequate treatment ( ). Major barriers to closing the treatment gap include scarcity of skilled human resources, large inequities and inefficiencies in resource distribution and utilization, and the significant stigma associated with mental health conditions ( ). Recent studies report the existence of a range of cost‐effective interventions in mental health care available that can be implemented in LMICs ( ; ). The global mental health community, therefore, advocates for the scaling‐up of these evidence‐based services, that focus on task‐shifting as a mean to bridge the treatment gap ( ).

## Description of the intervention
A recent Lancet Commission sought to align global mental health efforts with sustainable development goals, and emphasized the importance of efforts to prevent mental health disorders and promote mental health, in addition to scaling‐up treatments ( ). Prevention and promotion of mental health have previously been advocated as critical by the WHO ( ), and prevention is part of the WHO Mental Health Action Plan ( ). Prevention and promotion efforts are an important complementary focus, in addition to the treatment of mental disorders, given that (1) many mental disorders have risk factors in the social environment (e.g. gender‐based violence, poverty) that can be effectively addressed; (2) there are limitations to the extent that treatments alone can reduce the burden associated with mental disorders ( ); and (3) cost‐effective prevention and promotion interventions are available ( ).
In the present review, we followed the classification of promotion and prevention interventions described by the Institute of Medicine (IOM) report on preventing mental disorders ( ; ; ).
Promotion is an approach aimed at strengthening positive aspects of mental health and psychosocial well‐being; it includes, for example, intervention components that foster pro‐social behaviour, self‐esteem, positive coping with stress, and decision‐making capacity ( ) ( ). The definition of promotion has been recently updated to include a wider set of interventions provided at societal, community, individual, and family levels. These updates reflect important trends in research in the field of public mental health and reveal the enduring importance of a spectrum of key tools for fostering mental health ( ).
 Prevention is an approach aimed at reducing the likelihood of future mental disorders in the general population or amongst people who are identified as being at risk for developing a full‐blown mental disorder ( ; ; ). Prevention is further subdivided on the basis of the targeted population.
Universal prevention includes strategies that can be offered to the whole population based on evidence that prevention strategies are likely to provide some benefit to all (i.e. reduce the probability of disorder), which clearly outweighs the costs and risks of negative consequences. Examples of common universal prevention interventions include:
community‐wide provision of information on the negative effects of specific behaviours;
protection against human rights violations in the whole population (e.g. community mobilization to reduce gender‐based violence); and
community‐wide efforts to improve livelihood as a key protective factor for mental health (e.g. working on lifting restrictions on movement and employment for everyone in a refugee camp).
Selective prevention refers to strategies that target subpopulations identified as being at elevated risk for a disorder because they have known risk factors or lack protective factors. Examples include:
support for children whose parents have a mental illness;
strengthening of community networks for vulnerable families by activating social networks and supportive communication; and
stress management training in communities affected by chronic poverty.
Indicated prevention includes strategies that are targeted to individuals who are identified (or individually screened) as having increased vulnerability for a disorder based on some individual assessment of symptoms experienced but not meeting criteria for a full‐blown mental disorder. These interventions include but are not limited to:
mentoring programmes aimed at teachers and caregivers of children with behavioural problems; and
prevention of postnatal depression amongst women with heightened levels of prenatal symptoms ( ) or interventions to prevent intimate partner violence ( ).
These interventions may be delivered at an individual level or at a group level and include antenatal and postnatal classes, parenthood classes, group interventions for managing distress, and continuity of care (home visits, follow‐ups) ( ; ).

Primary healthcare workers (PHWs) are first‐level providers who have received general health rather than specialist training in mental health and can be based in a primary care clinic or in the community. It has been suggested that PWs (primary‐level workers) could deliver general and mental health interventions that are at least as effective and acceptable as those delivered by specialist health workers ( ). In addition, PW interventions often have lower up‐front costs compared with those provided by professional specialist health workers. However, it is possible that these savings may be cancelled out by higher downstream resource use ( ). To address this concern, we aimed to include data on the costs and cost‐effectiveness of PW interventions. PHWs include professionals (mainly nurses, midwives, and other general health professionals) and para‐professionals (such as trained lay health providers, e.g. traditional birth attendants). PHWs do not include those with specialist mental health training, for example, psychiatrists, psychologists, psychiatric nurses, or mental health social workers with formal training. Community workers (CWs) are individuals who work in the community but not within the health sector. These might include teachers, trainers, support workers at schools and colleges, and other volunteers or workers within community‐based networks or non‐governmental organizations (NGOs). CWs are an additional human resource that can be widely deployed in delivering promotion and prevention interventions ( ). In this review, both these categories of providers (PHWs and CWs) are referred to under the umbrella heading of primary‐level workers (PWs).
PWs have been deployed for a variety of services, including those delivered in governmental organizations, private clinics, halfway homes, schools, and other community settings. For example, PWs have been involved in supporting and befriending carers and in ensuring intervention adherence ( ). Nurses, social workers, and CWs may also take on follow‐up or educational/promotive roles ( ; ; ). In addition, doctors with general mental health training have been involved in the identification, diagnosis, treatment, and referral of complex cases ( ).
A summary of the main definitions adopted in this review is provided in .

## How the intervention might work
Prevention interventions commonly target known modifiable risk and protective factors for mental disorders.
Although a vast array of interventions can be implemented to meet a population's psychosocial needs, there are some common elements, especially when interventions target smaller groups or families. Many interventions include techniques from cognitive‐behavioural therapy (CBT) which work at stopping negative cycles, breaking down feelings and problems that generate psychological suffering, anxiety or depression into separate parts. This mechanism facilitates problem management and changes negative thought patterns, improving the way people feel ( ). CBT may comprise, for example, facilitated discussion, strengthening of social networks, space provided for sharing personal experiences and exchange of peer support, and opportunities to practice coping skills to manage adversity. Sessions on problem‐solving skills and emotional support Interventions may work by challenging participants to replace negative or critical self‐talk with compassionate, more constructive self‐talk, and to consider different viewpoints for managing problems ( ). Interventions may also consist of sessions with psychoeducational contents, strategies for stress management, enhanced insight and relationship/rapport building, networking support, communication skills, self‐help interventions, and motivational enhancement ( ; ).
In many LMICs, training and retaining sufficient numbers of mental health specialists to meet current needs is not feasible. Therefore, it is important in these settings to consider options for expanding access to mental health promotion and disorder prevention services. Given that they are far more numerous and often more accessible than mental health specialists, the deployment of PWs for this purpose is one option that could prove to be of value in LMICs. This review, therefore, focused on the evaluation of a task‐shifting model as a possible implementation modality for prevention and promotive interventions in LMICs.

## Why it is important to do this review
This review is limited to LMICs, where the need for PWs is greater than in high‐income settings. Far fewer mental health professionals are present in LMICs (the median number of psychiatrists is 172 times lower in low‐income countries (LICs) than in high‐income countries (HICs)) ( ; ). These differences in the organization of mental health services between LMICs and HICs, with poorer countries having few or no mental health service structures in primary care or in the community, mean that the problem of providing mental health interventions, especially in preventing mental disorders or promoting psychological well‐being, is different in such settings. PWs may need to work with little or no support from specialist mental health services. Consequently, PW interventions might be expected to function differently in LMICs as compared to HICs ( ; ).
The paucity of mental health professionals and the abundance of challenges for mental health systems in LMICs make it imperative to focus attention on prevention and promotion strategies via a public health approach ( ). To address current shortages of mental health workers, prevention interventions in LMICs have been conceived as short, simple, and mostly delivered through a task‐shifting approach that includes different forms of intervention delivery. Delivery strategies range from informal delivery of simple interventions to more complex and longer strategies, as stepped‐care models. Task‐shifting is increasingly emphasized in global mental health and holds promise for improving access to mental health interventions ( ; ).
However, reviews on the task‐shifting approach to mental health interventions in LMICs have tended to focus more on treatment interventions ( ; ; ; ). Evidence on the effectiveness of mental health prevention and promotion interventions in LMICs is scarce. Systematic reviews have focused mainly on populations living in high‐income settings, raising applicability concerns related to contextual factors and resource availability, including, for example, the lack of professionals in low‐resource contexts (i.e. psychiatrists, and psychologists) ( ). In addition, LMICs differ from HICs with regard to social determinants of mental health, e.g. exposure to conflicts and wars, poverty, and gender‐based violence may be more frequent in LMICs ( ).
Populations in LMICs can conceptualize and seek assistance for mental health problems and mental health promotion in a wide variety of ways; these approaches may differ from conceptualizations and help‐seeking patterns seen in high‐income industrialized countries. Thus, evidence regarding the effectiveness of interventions implemented in HICs may not directly apply or be relevant to LMICs. For the reasons mentioned above, we expect that interventions might be applied differently in LMICs ( ).
The aim of this review is therefore to bridge this gap by assessing the effectiveness of delivery by primary workers of interventions for the promotion of mental health and for prevention of mental disorders or symptoms of mental illness in LMICs. Through this work, we aim to provide a picture of the characteristics and quality of the promotive and preventative research initiatives that have been carried out in lower resource settings. In addition, we strive to provide insights on what type of promotion strategies (universal, selective, and indicated) work best for whom (children and adults). This is overall in line with the WHO principle of integrating mental health into primary care and with the specific prevention objective of the WHO Action Plan for global mental health ( ; ).
This review has been conducted in parallel with an update of the Cochrane Review focused on treatment interventions in LMICs ( ; ).

## Objectives
To assess the effectiveness of delivery by primary workers of interventions for the promotion of mental health and for prevention of mental disorders or symptoms of mental illness in LMICs.
To examine the impact of intervention delivery by primary workers on resource use and costs associated with the provision of mental health care in LMICs.

## Methods

## Criteria for considering studies for this review

## Types of studies
We included RCTs. We included trials that employed a cross‐over design ‐ whilst we acknowledge that this design is rarely used in intervention studies ‐ and we used data from the first randomized stage only. We excluded quasi‐randomized trials, such as those that allocate participants by using alternate days of the week. We considered both individual and cluster‐randomized trials as eligible for inclusion.
We included economic studies conducted as part of included effectiveness studies. We considered full economic evaluations (cost‐effectiveness analyses, cost‐utility analyses, or cost‐benefit analyses), cost analyses, and comparative resource utilization studies. We planned to report only cost and resource usage outcomes from these studies.

## Types of participants

## Participants
We included participants of any age, gender, ethnicity, and religion. We conducted two separate meta‐analyses on the different outcomes ‐ one for children and adolescents (younger than 18 years) and one for adults (18 years of age and older). Studies with mixed population groups (children and adolescents; adults) were allocated according to the proportion of participants belonging to the child and adolescent age range, or to the adult age range. When the intervention was designed and directed to a specific population group (i.e. children and adolescents or adults), we entered outcome data on efficacy for the specific target group for which the intervention was designed and delivered. For each of these two populations, we conducted meta‐analyses by different outcomes. We included studies focused on the prevention of any common mental disorder. Carers of study participants were included in meta‐analyses on adults, as some interventions may be directed at carers rather than at participants themselves, and consequently, mental health outcomes were measured in carers.

## Settings
We considered studies conducted in LMICs. We used the World Bank criteria for categorizing a country as low‐ or middle‐income ( ); these criteria provide a historical date of when countries were LMICs. If a country was an LMIC at some point during the recruitment of study participants, we included the study. We excluded studies undertaken in high‐income countries (at the time of study recruitment).
We included mental health promotion and/or prevention interventions delivered in primary care or community settings, refugee camps, schools, communities, survivors’ homes, and detention facilities. We excluded studies evaluating mental health promotion and/or prevention interventions undertaken outside of primary or community settings.

## Diagnoses
Given the focus on interventions for the promotion of mental health and prevention of mental disorders, we restricted this review to participants without any formal diagnosis at the time the trial was undertaken. However, because many studies screened on the basis of a risk factor or heightened symptoms (without excluding people with diagnosed mental disorders), we could not exclude trial participants who might have fulfilled the criteria for an actual psychiatric diagnosis that remained unobserved because it was not investigated when the trial was undertaken. For example, we included populations who left their homes due to a sudden impact, threat, or conflict; populations exposed to political violence/armed conflicts/natural and industrial disasters; those with major losses or in poverty; and those belonging to a group (i.e. discriminated against or marginalized) experiencing political oppression, family separation, disruption of social networks, destruction of community structures and resources and trust, increased gender‐based violence, and undermined community structures or traditional support mechanisms ( ).

## Comorbidities
We included studies that recruited participants with physical disorders and studies that focused on the prevention of multiple mental disorders.

## Types of interventions

## Included interventions
We included trials of primary‐level and/or community health worker interventions for promoting mental health and/or preventing mental disorders. Included mental health promotion or prevention interventions were delivered by primary‐level and/or community workers. Primary‐level health workers (PHWs) are first‐level providers who have received general health rather than specialist mental health training and can be based in a primary care clinic or in the community. PHWs include professionals (doctors, nurses, midwives, and other general health professionals) and para‐professionals (such as trained lay health providers, e.g. traditional birth attendants). PHWs do not include those with specialist mental health training, for example, psychiatrists, psychologists, psychiatric nurses, or mental health social workers. Community workers (CWs) are individuals who work in the community but not within the health sector. These might include teachers, trainers, support workers from schools and colleges, and other volunteers or workers within community‐based networks or non‐governmental organizations (NGOs). These CWs are not trained health workers but have a mental health role. They represent a further human resource employed in the delivery of promotion and prevention interventions ( ). In this review, both of these categories of providers (PHWs and CWs) were referred to under the umbrella heading of 'primary‐level workers' (PWs).
This review aimed to include the following comparisons.
Provision of promotion and/or prevention interventions by primary‐level health workers and/or community workers versus usual care (little prevention or promotion strategy).
Provision of promotion and/or prevention interventions by primary‐level health workers and/or community workers versus no prevention or promotion strategy.
Provision of promotion and/or prevention interventions by primary‐level health workers and/or community workers versus interventions delivered by professionals with specialist mental health training.

We grouped the interventions as follows.
Promotion of mental health (e.g. interventions with a mental health or psychological component aimed at creating living conditions and environments that support mental health and encourage healthy lifestyles). We included any types of promotion interventions with a mental health component, delivered at individual, group, family, community, and/or societal levels ( ).
Universal prevention (e.g. community‐wide provision of information on positive coping methods to help people feel safe and hopeful; to protect against human rights violations; and to support community‐wide efforts to reduce poverty as a key risk for mental illness) ( ).
Selective prevention (e.g. psychological first aid for people with heightened levels of psychological distress after exposure to severe stressors, loss, or bereavement). These interventions involve human, supportive, and practical help covering both a social and a psychological dimension. They work through communication (asking about people's needs and concerns; listening to people; and helping them to feel calm), practical support (i.e. providing meals or water); a psychological approach (including teaching stress management skills and helping people cope with problems) ( ); facilitation of community support for vulnerable individuals by activating social networks and communication; and structured cultural and recreational activities supporting the development of resilience ( ), such as traditional dancing, artwork, sports, and puppetry ( ).
Indicated prevention (e.g. mentoring programmes aimed at children with behavioural problems; psychosocial support for school children with subclinical levels of post‐traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), anxiety, depression, or somatic symptoms and related disorders; prevention of postnatal depression in women with heightened levels of prenatal symptoms) ( ).
Interventions were delivered through any means, including, for example, face‐to‐face meetings, digital tools, radio, telephone, or self‐help booklets, between participants and PHWs. Both individual and group interventions were included, with no limit on the number of sessions.
As this review was conducted in parallel with the update of the Cochrane Review on treatment interventions ( ; ), we looked at the aim of the study and decided whether the aim was prevention or treatment, and we looked at the inclusion criteria for participants (these criteria must include specific mental distress/prodromal symptoms or a diagnosable disorder). When there was no clear distinction between prevention and treatment groups, we made a pragmatic decision on whether these trials were primarily about well‐being/prevention or about treatment and then allocated them to the appropriate review, or included them in both reviews.

## Excluded interventions
We excluded interventions aimed at treating people with a diagnosed mental disorder. We also excluded studies that included participants on the basis of scoring above a cut‐off on a symptom checklist, with the explicit authors' stated intention to identify people with mental disorders. We excluded interventions aimed at treating people with a diagnosed disorder ( ).

## Types of outcome measures

## Primary outcomes
Diagnosis (or a proxy thereof, as assessed by scoring above a cut‐off for a screening tool) of mental disorders at study endpoint, determined according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) III ( ), DSM‐III‐R ( ), DSM‐IV‐TR ( ), DSM‐V ( ), International Classification of Diseases (ICD)‐10 ( ), or any other standardized criteria.
Diagnosis (or a proxy thereof, as assessed by scoring above a cut‐off for a screening tool) of mental disorders at 1 to 6 months post‐intervention.
Diagnosis (or a proxy thereof, as assessed by scoring above a cut‐off for a screening tool) of mental disorders at 7 to 24 months post‐intervention.
Quality of life.
Adverse events experienced during the intervention.

## Secondary outcomes
Psychological functioning and impairment.
Changes in service utilisation and contact coverage, including admission rates to hospital whether related to mental disorder or not; attendance rates in regard to utilization of primary or community services; or increased demand and/or referral rates from the primary/community setting to a mental health specialist.
Changes in mental health symptoms captured on rating scales (i.e. depressive symptoms, anxiety symptoms, distress/PTSD symptoms).
Social outcomes (e.g. perception of social inclusion).
Resource use (for health services: personnel time allocated/number of consultations, other opportunity costs of the intervention, or other aspects of the health service; for participants: extra costs of travel, lost productivity, employment status, income, work absenteeism, retention, educational attainment).
Carer mental health.

We grouped primary and secondary outcomes into three sets of time points.
Post‐intervention (0 to 1 month after the intervention) (to detect incidence/symptoms, reduction of the intervention).
1 to 6 months post‐intervention (to detect sustained incidence/symptom reduction).
7 to 24 months post‐intervention (indicating medium‐ to long‐term reduction).

We chose the latest time point within that category if several time points fitted within a category. We however included a time point that correlated best with other studies being compared within each outcome.
We included studies that reported only secondary outcomes of the review.

## Search methods for identification of studies

## Electronic searches
The EPOC (Effective Practice and Organisation of Care) Information Specialist developed search strategies in consultation with the review authors.
We searched the following databases for primary studies, from inception to date of search on 29 November 2021.
Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL; 2021, Issue 11) in the Cochrane Library.
MEDLINE and Epub Ahead of Print, In‐Process, In‐Data‐Review & Other Non‐Indexed Citations, Daily and Versions: 1946 to 24 November 2021, Ovid.
Embase: 1974 to 24 November 2021, Ovid.
CINAHL (Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature): 1980 to date searched, EBSCO.
Global Index Medicus, World Health Organization (WHO) (www.globalindexmedicus.net/).
APA PsycINFO: 1806 to November Week 3 2021, Ovid.

Search strategies comprised natural language and controlled vocabulary terms. We did not apply any limits on the language of publication, and we searched all databases from inception to the date of search, except for MEDLINE and Embase. MEDLINE and Embase were limited to records from the last few months to find those not yet included in CENTRAL. Searches were limited by the use of study design filters appropriate to the stated inclusion criteria. See for all strategies used.
For this prevention review, we used the search strategies developed for the complementary Cochrane Review on treatment ( ; ), with appropriate adaptation.

## Searching other resources

## Trial registries
WHO ICTRP (World Health Organization International Clinical Trials Registry Platform) (www.who.int/ictrp) (searched on 29 November 2021).
ClinicalTrials.gov, US National Institutes of Health (www.clinicaltrials.gov) (searched on 29 November 2021).

## Grey literature
We conducted a grey literature search to identify studies not indexed in the databases listed above.
In particular, we:
reviewed reference lists of all included studies and relevant systematic reviews for additional potentially eligible primary studies;
contacted authors of included studies/reviews to clarify reported published information and to seek unpublished results/data;
contacted researchers with expertise relevant to the review topic/EPOC interventions.

## Data collection and analysis

## Selection of studies
We downloaded all titles and abstracts retrieved by electronic searching to a reference management database and removed duplicates. Review authors (NvG, MP, EU, EP, CC) independently screened titles and abstracts for inclusion. We (NvG, MP, CC, EU, EP, CCad) retrieved the full‐text study report/publication and independently screened the full text and identified studies for inclusion; we identified and recorded reasons for exclusion of ineligible studies. We resolved disagreements through discussion, or, if required, we consulted a third review author (CB, WT, DP).
We listed in the table studies that initially appeared to meet the inclusion criteria but that we later excluded. We collated multiple reports of the same study so that each study rather than each report was the unit of interest in the review. We also provided any information we were able to obtain about ongoing studies. We recorded the selection process in sufficient detail to complete a PRISMA flow diagram ( ).

## Data extraction and management
We extracted descriptive and outcome data for each study using an adapted version of the EPOC standard data collection form ( ). We piloted the form on at least one study in the review. One review author (MP, DP, CC, EP, CCad, LA) independently extracted descriptive data consecutively, and these were cross‐checked by a second review author (EP, EU, JA). We noted in the table if outcome data were reported in an unusable way. We extracted the following study characteristics from the included studies, and we entered the data into RevMan Web.
Methods: study design; number of study centres and locations; study settings; withdrawals; dates of study; follow‐up.
Participants: number; mean age; age range; gender; clinical conditions; inclusion criteria; exclusion criteria; other relevant characteristics such as ethnicity and socioeconomic status.
Interventions: type and length of intervention; theory of change (hypothesized risk, protective, promotive factors); full description of cadre(s) of primary‐level health and/or community workers including details on supervision, training, and length, frequency, and type of experience; intervention components; comparison; fidelity assessment.
Setting: country; type of health and/or community service (e.g. NGO, government‐funded).
Outcomes: main and other outcomes specified and collected; time points reported.
Notes: funding for the trial; notable conflicts of interest of trial authors; ethical approval.

For economic data, we developed a specific data extraction form based on the format and guidelines used to produce structured abstracts of economic evaluations for inclusion in the National Health Service (NHS) Economic Evaluation Database (NHS EED) ( ), which we adapted to the specific requirements of this review.
We contacted the authors of included studies via email to collect key unpublished information.
Review authors who were authors of included studies were not involved in the following steps for those studies: study selection, data extraction, risk of bias assessment, and GRADE assessment.

## Assessment of risk of bias in included studies
Two review authors (EP, CC) independently assessed risk of bias applying Cochrane Risk of Bias 2 tool and using the criteria outlined in the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions Chapter 8 ( ), along with guidance from the EPOC Group ( ). We resolved disagreements by discussion or by consultation with a third review author (CB, MP). We assessed risk of bias according to the following domains.
Bias arising from the randomization process.
Bias due to deviations from the intended interventions.
Bias due to missing outcome data.
Bias in measurement of the outcome.
Bias in selection of the reported result.

We answered signalling questions as: yes, probably yes, probably no, no, no information. We summarized risk of bias judgements for study results for each of the domains listed. We assigned a risk of bias assessment (low, some concerns, high) to results of the included studies using the approach suggested in Chapter 8 of the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions ( ). We considered results of studies that had low risk of bias for all key domains, or for which it seemed unlikely for bias to seriously alter the results, to have low risk of bias. We considered results of studies to have some concerns for their risk of bias when risk of bias in at least one domain indicated some concern, or when results were judged to have some bias that could plausibly raise doubts about the conclusions. We considered results of studies to have high risk of bias when they had high risk of bias in at least one domain, or when we judged that they had serious bias that decreased the certainty of the conclusions.
We considered blinding separately for all outcomes (e.g. for unblinded outcome assessment, risk of bias for all‐cause mortality may be very different than for a patient‐reported rating scale). When information on risk of bias was related to unpublished data or correspondence with a trialist, we noted this in the risk of bias table. We did not exclude studies on the grounds of their risk of bias, but we clearly reported the risk of bias when presenting study results.
When considering interventions' effects, we took into account the risk of bias for studies that contributed to that outcome.
We evaluated cluster‐randomized controlled trials using the specific section in the Risk of Bias 2 tool ( ).
We conducted the review according to the published protocol and reported any deviations from it in the section of the systematic review.

## Measures of treatment effect
We estimated the effect of the intervention by using risk ratio (RR), together with the appropriate associated 95% confidence interval (CI), for dichotomous data; and mean difference (MD) or standardized mean difference (SMD), together with the 95% appropriate associated confidence interval, for continuous data ( ). We ensured that an increase in scores for continuous outcomes could be interpreted in the same way for each outcome, and we explained the direction to the reader, and reported when the directions were reversed, if this was necessary. For SMDs, we used the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions to interpret their clinical relevance: 0.2 represents a small effect, 0.5 a moderate effect, and 0.8 a large effect ( ; ). We attempted to establish minimally important differences per outcome (as suggested in ).

## Unit of analysis issues
We included cluster‐RCTs when primary healthcare facilities, schools, or classes within schools rather than single individuals were the unit of allocation. Because variation in response to psychological or social intervention between clusters may be influenced by cluster membership, we included, when possible, data adjusted with an intra‐cluster correlation coefficient (ICC).
We adjusted the results for clustering by multiplying standard errors of the estimates by the square root of the design effect when the design effect was calculated as DEff = 1 + (M ‐ 1) ICC, where M is the mean cluster size and ICC is the intra‐cluster correlation coefficient. When included studies did not report ICCs for respective outcome measures, we derived ICCs from a different outcome from the same study, or from a different study included in the same meta‐analysis. If the ICC value was not reported or was not available from trial authors directly, we assumed it to be 0.05 ( ; ). We combined adjusted measures of effects of cluster‐randomized trials with results of non‐cluster‐randomized trials when it was possible to adjust adequately the results of cluster trials.

## Dealing with missing data
We contacted investigators to verify key study characteristics and to obtain missing outcome data when possible (e.g. when a study was identified as abstract only). We tried to compute missing summary data from other reported statistics. We documented all correspondence with trial authors and reported in the and sections details from trial authors who responded. For cluster‐RCTs, we contacted study authors for an ICC value when data were not adjusted and could not be identified from the trial report. As mentioned above, when the ICC was neither available from the trial reports nor directly available from the trial authors, we assumed it to be 0.05 ( ).
For continuous data, we applied a looser form of intention‐to‐treat (ITT) analysis, whereby all participants with at least one post‐baseline measurement were represented by their last‐observation‐carried‐forward (LOCF). If the authors of included RCTs stated that they used an LOCF approach, we checked details on LOCF strategy and used data as reported by the study authors. When study authors reported only the standard error (SE) or t statistics or P values, we calculated standard deviations (SDs) according to .
For dichotomous data, we applied a modified ITT analysis without imputation of outcomes where missing, as all analyses with dichotomous outcomes were negative (diagnoses; adverse events).
When it was not possible to obtain data, we reported the level of missingness and considered how that might have impacted the certainty of evidence.

## Assessment of heterogeneity
If we found a sufficient number of studies for which we judged participants, interventions, comparisons, and outcomes to be sufficiently similar, we conducted a meta‐analysis ( ). We obtained an initial visual overview of statistical heterogeneity by scrutinizing the forest plots while looking at the overlap between CIs around the estimate for each included study. To quantify the impact of heterogeneity on each meta‐analysis, we used the I² statistic, and we considered the following ranges, according to the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of interventions ( ).
0% to 40%: might not be important.
30% to 60%: may represent moderate heterogeneity.
50% to 90%: may represent substantial heterogeneity.
75% to 100%: represents considerable heterogeneity.

The importance of the observed I² statistic was related to the magnitude and direction of intervention effects and the strength of evidence for heterogeneity ( ; ). If we identified substantial heterogeneity, we explored this through prespecified subgroup analysis.

## Assessment of reporting biases
If we were able to pool more than 10 trials in a meta‐analysis, we created and examined a funnel plot to explore possible publication biases and interpreted the results with caution ( ).

## Data synthesis
We undertook meta‐analyses only when this was meaningful (i.e. when the population, intervention, comparison, outcome, and underlying intervention question and the theory of change were similar enough for pooling to make sense) ( ). A common way that trialists indicate when they have skewed data is by reporting medians and interquartile ranges. When we encountered this, we noted that the data were skewed and considered the implications of this. When multiple trial arms were reported in a single trial, we included only the relevant arms. If two comparisons (e.g. intervention A versus usual care and intervention B versus usual care) had to be entered into the same meta‐analysis, we halved the control group to avoid double‐counting. Whenever sufficient data were available, we grouped studies for comparison by type of provider (e.g. primary‐health workers‐led, community workers‐led, collaborative), type of intervention (promotion, universal, selective, indicated prevention), and particular risk, protective, or promotive factors targeted ( ; ).
Given the potential heterogeneity of mental health promotion and prevention interventions, we used a random‐effects model in all analyses. The random‐effects model has the highest generalisability in empirical examinations of summary effect measures for meta‐analyses ( ). We examined the robustness of this summary measure by checking the results under a fixed‐effect model. We reported material differences between models.
Specifically, for dichotomous data, we used the Mantel‐Haenszel method, as this is preferable in Cochrane Reviews given its better statistical properties when there are few events ( ). We adopted the inverse variance method for continuous data: this method minimizes the imprecision of the pooled effect estimate, as the weight given to each study is chosen to be the inverse of the variance of the effect estimate ( ).

## Economic data
We aimed to conduct all elements of the economics component of this review according to current guidance on the use of economics methods in the preparation and maintenance of Cochrane Reviews ( ). We classified the included economic evaluations based on an established system ( ; ). We summarized the characteristics and results of included economic evaluations by using additional tables. We displayed resource use and cost data in a table, along with unit cost data (when available). A unit cost is defined as the cost of each specific resource input calculated by multiplying the measured number of units (quantities) of an item of resource use (e.g. the number of hours of time provided by a senior teacher) by an applicable unit cost (e.g. the salary cost of one hour of senior teacher time). We reported the currency and price year applicable to measures of costs and unit costs in each original study. Measures of costs are highly likely to vary across and within study settings and over time. This is the product of variations in underlying quantities of resource use and variations in underlying unit costs. This approach is consistent with that used in the parallel review on treatment that is being updated ( ).

## Subgroup analysis and investigation of heterogeneity
Within each comparison, we planned the following subgroup analyses.
Category of health worker (e.g. professionals, health workers, non‐professional health workers, community workers).
Setting of care.
Community settings, camps, schools.
Chronic or acute humanitarian versus non‐humanitarian settings.
Type of prevention intervention (universal, selective, indicated).
Type of promotion intervention (individual, group).
Specific risk, protective, or promotive factor targeted.

We planned to use the following outcomes in subgroup analysis.
Proportion of individuals developing new mental distress or mental disorders (incidence).
Quality of life outcomes.
Harmful outcomes: number of people experiencing harm during the intervention.
Change from baseline in average rating scale scores (e.g. psychological symptoms) for the study population.

If the number of included studies for each comparison was sufficient, we performed subgroup analyses to check whether the intervention effect varied with different population characteristics. When applicable, or when subgroup analysis was not possible, we described subgroup differences narratively in the section.
For random‐effects meta‐analyses, we used the formal Chi² test and the I² statistic for subgroup differences in RevMan 5, to detect statistically significant subgroup differences.

## Sensitivity analysis
We planned to perform sensitivity analyses defined a priori to assess the robustness of our conclusions and to explore its impact on effect sizes. This involved the following.
Restricting analysis to published studies.
Restricting analysis to studies measuring the incidence of mental disorders (i.e. studies in which all participants at baseline scored below defined symptom thresholds on rating scales).
Restricting analysis to studies with low risk of bias, as specified in incomplete outcome data and selective reporting.
Excluding trials with methodological characteristics that might generate the highest heterogeneity in a meta‐analysis (when a meta‐analysis has I² > 75%).

## Stakeholder consultation and involvement
Consultation with stakeholders was conducted by authors Nadja van Ginneken, Simon Lewin, and Paul Garner of the parallel review focused on treatment of mental disorders in LMICs ( ). Consultation was organized as follows.
A group face‐to‐face consultation with seven LMIC clinicians who were mature students/master's students or PhD students at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (December 2018).
An online consultation with seven implementers, academics, and policy‐makers from LMICs, and a further four written answers from further stakeholders received by email (February to April 2019).
An updated literature review of mental health terminology and descriptions.

The overall message that emanated from this consultation was that we should consider the spectrum of mental illness as broader than encompassing only diagnostic categories ( ). According to this framework, the current review complemented the parallel review on treatment interventions in LMICs.

## Summary of findings and assessment of the certainty of the evidence
Two review authors (EP, CC) independently assessed the certainty of the evidence (high, moderate, low, and very low) using the five GRADE considerations (risk of bias, consistency of effect, imprecision, indirectness, and publication bias) ( ). We used methods and recommendations described in Chapter 14 of the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of interventions ( ), and in the EPOC Worksheets ( ), and we used GRADEpro software ( ). We resolved disagreements on certainty ratings by discussion and planned to provide justification for decisions to downgrade or upgrade ratings by using footnotes in the table and making comments to aid readers' understanding of the review when necessary. We used plain language statements to report these findings in the review ( ).
We summarized review findings in a summary of findings table(s) for the main intervention comparison(s) and included the following outcomes.
Diagnosis (or a proxy thereof, as assessed by scoring above a cut‐off of a screening tool) of mental disorders at study endpoint, determined according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) III ( ), DSM‐III‐R ( ), DSM‐IV‐TR ( ), DSM‐V ( ), International Classification of Diseases (ICD)‐10 ( ), or any other standardized criteria.
Quality of life.
Adverse events experienced during the intervention.
Change in mental health symptoms seen on rating scales (i.e. depressive symptoms, anxiety symptoms, distress/PTSD symptoms).
Resource use (for health services: personnel time allocated/number of consultations, other opportunity costs of the intervention, or other aspects of the health service; for participants: extra cost of travel, lost productivity, employment status, income, work absenteeism, retention, educational attainment).
Psychological functioning and impairment.

If during the review process, we became aware of an important outcome that we failed to list in our planned summary of findings tables, we planned to include the relevant outcome and explain the reasons for this in the section . We considered whether there was any additional outcome information that could not be incorporated into meta‐analyses and noted this in the comments; we stated if this supported or contradicted information derived from meta‐analyses. If it was not possible to meta‐analyze the data, we summarized the results in the text. Only the post‐intervention time point was presented for each outcome in the summary of findings tables.

## Results

## Description of studies
Detailed descriptions of all studies are found in . This section contains detailed characteristics of each included study.

## Results of the search
We screened 11,938 records and included 113 randomized controlled trials with 32,992 participants and 97 in the quantitative synthesis of this review (19,570 participants). We identified 83 ongoing studies, and 25 studies awaiting classification. From our search of all the above databases and trial registries on 20 August 2020, we screened 9437 titles and abstracts ( ). We performed a second search on 29 November 2021, we screened 2501 titles and abstracts and identified 27 studies that are included ( ). We contacted 76 trial authors for additional information and/or data, and 33 of them replied to our requests.
 

## Included studies

## Study design
Of the 113 included studies, 67 were randomized trials and 46 were cluster‐randomized trials.

## Setting
Of the 113 included studies, 19 were conducted in low‐income countries, 27 in low‐middle‐income countries, 2 studies in middle‐income countries, and 58 studies in upper‐middle‐income countries. Seven studies were conducted in mixed settings, i.e. low to lower‐middle income or upper‐middle to lower‐middle‐income. A map of countries where the RCTs were conducted is available in .
 There were 23 studies from rural, 63 studies from urban and 11 studies in both rural and urban contexts. For 16 studies, the setting was not specified. Some interventions were delivered in freestanding primary care facilities (12 studies) or in hospital‐based primary care facilities (17 studies). In 19 studies, the interventions were delivered in community groups, in 26 studies at school, and in one study in the workplace. Interventions were delivered at home or in other settings in 36 studies, while in two studies the setting was not specified.

## Participants
There were 83 studies that included adults and 30 that included children (up to 18 years).

## Conditions
Most studies (n = 65) targeted the prevention of common mental disorders (39 studies of which 34 were included in meta‐analyses) and/or psychological distress (26 studies of which 21 were included in meta‐analyses). Amongst the other included studies, 18 covered perinatal depression or mental disorders and 30 targeted child mental disorders (24 studies included in meta‐analyses). See for details on the analyses.

## Interventionists
Various cadres of primary‐level workers were employed: primary care health workers (38 studies), community workers (71 studies), or both (2 studies). In two studies, the intervention was delivered online and the specific cadres were not described. The remuneration of interventionists was generally not reported or poorly described. The background of these interventionists is reported in detail under .

## Interventions
In 22 studies, the prevention interventions delivered were categorized as universal prevention or promotion of well‐being, targeting the general public or the whole population group, regardless of whether people were at higher risk or not of developing a disorder. For example, we included in this category programmes for all caregiver‐child dyads of students attending primary schools and designed to develop social skills in elementary‐age children using a universal, low‐cost approach. In 36 studies, the delivered interventions were categorized as selective prevention, targeting participants whose risk of developing a mental disorder was significantly higher than that of the rest of the population (e.g. exposed to specific risk factors), for example, support interventions for caregivers of patients with Alzheimers with distress levels below the cut‐off. In 55 studies, interventions were categorized as indicated prevention, as they were directed to smaller groups of participants at high risk for mental disorders and that might already present with some sign of disorder like psychological symptoms, without meeting the criteria for a formal diagnosis according to diagnostic tools or cut‐offs in rating scales. For example, we included in this category the intervention Self‐Help Plus, a pre‐recorded audio course, delivered by trained facilitators in a group setting and complemented with an illustrated self‐help book adapted for the target cultural group. The intervention is based on acceptance and commitment therapy and was delivered to participants with increased psychological distress (GHQ ≥ 3) and without a formal diagnosis according to the MINI. Intervention categorization is summarized in .
 

## Economic studies
Of the included studies, three ( ; ; ) reported economic evaluations which are summarized in with costs reported in dollars. These studies were not included in meta‐analyses due to the heterogeneity across measures and economic outcomes.
 

## Excluded studies
We excluded 218 studies. These studies were of interest but were excluded due to specific criteria for participants, interventions, comparators, and outcomes (PICOs) not being met (see ). The most common reason for exclusion was ineligible population. The other reasons for exclusion were, in descending order, the following: ineligible intervention, ineligible study design, ineligible outcome, ineligible setting, and duplicates.

## Risk of bias in included studies
We applied the Cochrane Risk of Bias 2 tool to individual and cluster‐randomized trials ( ). The most often identified biases across studies were performance bias ('risk of bias due to deviations from the intended interventions' ‐ 'effect of assignment to intervention and effect of adhering to intervention'), attrition bias ('risk of bias due to missing outcome data'), and reporting bias ('risk of bias in the selection of the reported result').

## Adults

## 1. Risk of bias arising from the randomization process (Domain 1‐A)
Two studies ( ; ) had a high risk of bias with regard to Domain 1‐A. In both cluster‐randomized controlled trials, the reported high RoB, was determined by the timing of identification or recruitment of participants. This is because individual participants were not identified and recruited before randomization and, for both, it was likely that the selection of individual participants was affected by knowledge of the intervention assigned to the cluster as assessed by items 1b.1 and 1b.2.
Ten studies presented a risk of bias classified as having 'some concerns'. This is because, in most cases, studies did not provide enough information on allocation concealment, and 62 had a low risk.

## 2. Risk of bias due to deviations from the intended interventions (effect of assignment to intervention and effect of adhering to intervention) (Domain 2‐B)
A high risk of bias for the Domain 2‐B was reported for 13 outcomes from six studies ( ; ; ; ; ; ) in the adult population.
For (indicated prevention; depressive symptoms at endpoint), (indicated prevention; depressive symptoms, distress/PTSD symptoms and social outcomes, all at endpoint and 7‐24 months), (universal prevention; quality of life at endpoint), and (selective prevention; quality of life and depressive symptoms, both at 1 to 6 months) this is due to deviations from the intended intervention that arose because of the trial context, as assessed by item 2.3. These deviations were deemed to be likely affecting the outcome and to be not balanced between groups (items 2.4, 2.5). (indicated prevention; diagnosis of mental disorders at 1 to 6 months) and (selective prevention; quality of life and social outcomes, both at 1 to 6 months) instead present a high risk of bias related to the analyses used to estimate the effect of assignment to intervention (items 2.6 and 2.7). For Skar 2021, this was because not enough information was provided: a) to evaluate if an appropriate analysis was used to estimate the effect of assignment to intervention, and b) to evaluate the potential for a substantial impact (on the result) of the failure to analyze participants in the group to which they were randomized. For instead, there was a chance that an appropriate analysis was not used to estimate the effect of assignment to intervention, as indicated by the quote: "The exclusion criteria were as follows: (i) being lost to follow‐up (…)".
For Domain 2‐B, 57 out of 175 outcomes from 26 included studies, presented a risk of bias classified as having 'some concerns'. Most of these studies did not provide enough information on whether the analysis used to estimate the effect of adhering was appropriate. Nevertheless, they held no potential for a substantial impact (on the result) of the failure to analyze participants in the group to which they were randomized.
A total of 105 out of the 175 outcomes from 46 included studies had a low risk of bias.

## 3. Risk of bias due to missing outcome data (Domain 3‐C)
A high risk of bias for the Domain 3‐C was reported for 12 outcomes from five included studies ( , indicated prevention; quality of life, distress/PTSD symptoms and social outcomes, all at endpoint; , selective prevention; quality of life and depressive symptoms, both at 1‐6 months; , indicated prevention; depressive symptoms, anxiety symptoms and distress/PTSD symptoms, all at endpoint); , indicated prevention; diagnosis of mental disorder at endpoint, 1 to 6 months and 7 to 24 months; , indicated prevention; diagnosis of mental disorders at 1 to 6 months) for the adult population. For all, data for this outcome were not available for all randomized participants/clusters that recruited participants/individual participants within clusters, or information on this (item 3.1) was not reported. In addition, there was no evidence that the result was not biassed by missing data (3.2) and it was likely that 'missingness' in the outcome depended on its true value (3.3, 3.4). Alternatively, not enough information was provided to give a judgement on the item.
For Domain‐3‐C, 9 out of 175 outcomes from four included studies, presented a RoB classified as having 'some concerns'. For these outcomes, data were not available for all randomized participants/clusters that recruited participants/individual participants within clusters, and there was no evidence that results were not biassed by missingness.
A total of 154 out of the 175 outcomes from 65 included studies had a low risk of bias.

## 4. Risk of bias in measurement of the outcome (Domain 4‐D)
A high risk of bias for Domain 4‐D was reported for three outcomes from one included study ( ; promotion/universal prevention; quality of life, depressive symptoms and distress/PTSD symptoms, all at endpoint). This was due to the fact that a different method for assessment was used at post‐intervention for the control and intervention groups.
For Domain 4‐D, 151 out of 175 outcomes from 72 included studies had a RoB classified as having 'some concerns'. For the great majority of these, outcome assessors (which were participants for self‐reported outcome measures) were most likely aware of intervention allocation across these non‐blinded designs. Across these studies, knowledge of the assigned intervention could have influenced participant‐reported outcomes, but there was no reason to believe that it did.
A total of 21 out of the 175 outcomes from five included studies had a low risk of bias.

## 5. Risk of bias in selection of the reported result (Domain 5‐E)
A high risk of bias for Domain 5‐E was reported for five outcomes from three included studies ( ; ; ). For (indicated prevention; diagnosis of mental disorder at endpoint, 1 to 6 months and 7 to 24 months) and (promotion/universal prevention; quality of life at endpoint), this was due to the fact that one outcome mentioned in the protocol was not reported in the results, suggesting outcome selection (item 5.2). (indicated prevention; distress/PTSD symptoms at endpoint), instead presented a high risk of bias related to both outcome selection and analyses selection.
For Domain 5‐E, 15 out of 175 outcomes from six included studies, had a RoB classified as having 'some concerns'. Most of these studies did not provide enough information to assess if a trial was analyzed in accordance with a prespecified plan or selection from multiple outcomes or analyses occurred.
A total of 155 out of the 175 outcomes from 67 included studies had a low risk of bias.

## 6. Overall risk of bias
An overall high risk of bias was reported for 31 outcomes from 13 included studies ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ) analyzing promotion/prevention interventions amongst adults. This overall judgement was determined by a high risk of bias reported in domain 1‐A for two studies ( and ), domain 2‐B for six studies ( ; ; ; ; ; ), domain 3‐C for five studies ( ; ; ; ; ), domain 4‐D for one study ( ), and finally domain 5‐E for three studies ( ; ; ). Amongst these, four studies had a high risk of bias for more than one domain ( ; ; ; ).
A total of 127 out of the 175 outcomes from 59 included studies were reported to have 'some concerns', 17 outcomes from four studies had instead a low risk of bias.

## Children

## 1. Risk of bias arising from the randomization process (Domain 1‐A)
No study had a high risk of bias with regard to the randomization process. A total of four studies were reported to have 'some concerns' in Domain 1‐A. Amongst these, most did not provide enough information on allocation concealment. A total of 20 studies had a low risk of bias.

## 2. Risk of bias due to deviations from the intended interventions (effect of assignment to intervention and effect of adhering to intervention) (Domain 2‐B)
A high risk of bias for Domain 2‐B was reported for eight outcomes from four studies ( ; ; ; ).
For (promotion/universal prevention; depressive symptoms, anxiety symptoms, and social outcomes, all at 1 to 6 months) and (indicated prevention; anxiety symptoms, and social outcomes, both at endpoint), this was due to deviations from the intended intervention that arose because of the trial context, as assessed by item 2.3. These deviations were deemed to be likely affecting the outcome and to be not balanced between groups (items 2.4, 2.5).
The two aforementioned studies as well as (selective prevention; quality of life at endpoint) and (promotion/universal prevention; distress/PTSD symptoms, at endpoint and 1‐6 months), presented a high risk of bias related to the analyses used to estimate the effect of assignment to intervention (items 2.6 and 2.7). This was because not enough information was provided to evaluate: a) if an appropriate analysis was used to estimate the effect of assignment to intervention, and b) the potential for a substantial impact (on the result) of the failure to analyze participants in the group to which they were randomized.
Nineteen out of 71 outcomes from seven included studies, were reported as having 'some concerns' in Domain 2‐B. Amongst these, most did not provide enough information on whether the analysis used to estimate the effect of adhering was appropriate. Nevertheless, they held no potential for a substantial impact (on the result) of the failure to analyze participants in the group to which they were randomized.
A total of 44 out of the 71 outcomes from 13 included studies had a low risk of bias.

## 3. Risk of bias due to missing outcome data (Domain 3‐C)
A high risk of bias for Domain 3‐C was reported for five outcomes from three included studies ( ; ; ). For (selective prevention; quality of life at endpoint), data were not available for all randomized participants (3.1), there was no evidence that the result was not biassed by missing data (3.2). It was likely that missingness in the outcome data depended on its true value (3.3, 3.4). For (indicated prevention; anxiety symptoms, and social outcomes, both at endpoint) and (promotion/universal prevention; distress/PTSD symptoms, at endpoint and 1 to 6 months), not enough information was provided to provide a judgement on any of these items.
Two out of 71 outcomes from one included study were reported to have 'some concerns' in Domain 3‐C. Amongst these, data were not available for all randomized participants, clusters, or individual participants within a cluster, and there was no evidence that results were not biassed by missingness.
A total of 64 out of the 71 outcomes from 20 included studies had a low risk of bias.

## 4. Risk of bias in measurement of the outcome (Domain 4‐D)
No study had a high risk of bias due to the measurement of the outcome. All outcomes from all 24 included studies were reported to have 'some concerns' in Domain 4‐D. Outcome assessors (which were participants for self‐reported outcome measures) were most likely aware of intervention allocation across these non‐blinded designs. Across these studies, knowledge of the assigned intervention could have influenced participant's reported outcomes, but there was no reason to believe that it did.

## 5. Risk of bias in selection of the reported result (Domain 5‐E)
A high risk of bias for the Domain 5‐E was reported for six outcomes from three included studies ( ; ; ). For (selective prevention; quality of life at endpoint) and (indicated prevention; quality of life, depressive symptoms and anxiety symptoms, all at endpoint), this was due to the fact that one outcome mentioned in the protocol was not reported in the results, suggesting outcome selection. (selective prevention; depressive symptoms and distress/PTSD symptoms, both at 1 to 6 months), instead presented a high risk of bias related to the fact that not all planned data collection was reported in the results.
Two out of 71 outcomes from one included study, were reported to have 'some concerns' in Domain 5‐E. This was because not enough information was provided to assess if a trial was analysed in accordance with a prespecified plan or selection from multiple outcomes or analyses that occurred was provided.
A total of 63 out of the 71 outcomes from 21 included studies had a low risk of bias.

## 6. Other potential sources of bias
We visually inspected funnel plots to identify asymmetry in any of the comparisons between psychological treatments and comparators when we identified 10 or more studies. We did not identify any asymmetry in the distribution of studies ( ; ).
 

## 7. Overall risk of bias
An overall high risk of bias was reported for 13 outcomes from six studies ( ; ; ; ; ; ) analyzing promotion/prevention interventions amongst children. This overall judgement was determined by a high risk of bias reported in three domains (2, 3 and 5) for one study ( ), in two domains (2 and 3) for two studies ( and ), and in one domain for three studies ( (2) and (5)).
For the remaining 58 out of 71 outcomes from 18 included studies, the risk of bias was classified as having 'some concerns'. No outcome or study had an overall low risk of bias.

## Effects of interventions
See: ; ; ; ; ; 
Results of meta‐analyses (n = 97 studies) of outcomes for the following comparisons were described:
Primary‐level health worker and/or community worker‐led universal prevention or promotion interventions for adults (n = 11 studies, 11.3%);
Primary‐level health worker and/or community worker‐led selective prevention interventions for adults (n = 20 studies, 20.6%);
Primary‐level health worker and/or community worker‐led indicated prevention interventions for adults (n = 42 studies, 43.3%);
Primary‐level health worker and/or community worker‐led universal prevention or promotion interventions for children (n = 8 studies, 8.2%);
Primary‐level health worker and/or community worker‐led selective prevention interventions for children (n = 7 studies, 7.2%);
Primary‐level health worker and/or community worker‐led indicated prevention interventions for children (n = 9 studies, 9.3%).

We were not able to group studies by type of provider (e.g. primary health workers‐led, community workers‐led, collaborative), and by risk, protective, or promotive factors targeted due to the small number of studies for each subgroup, and to the lack of information on risk, protective, and promotive factors. We were not able to report the comparison of promotion or prevention interventions versus interventions delivered by professionals with specialist mental health training, as no data were available for this comparison.
Outcome data on efficacy were extracted for the specific population group for which the intervention was designed and delivered. For example, when the intervention was designed and directed to adults, we entered efficacy data on adults (even though in some RCTs data on children were also available to measure potential indirect benefits). The same applied for interventions directed to children and adolescents.

## Comparison 1. Primary‐level health worker and/or community worker‐led universal prevention or promotion interventions for adults (n = 11 studies)
We identified 11 RCTs (6 cluster‐RCTs (54.5%) and five individual RCTs (45.5%)) contributing to meta‐analyses in this comparison. The total sample size was n = 3099 (1567 participants (50.6%) for the intervention group and 1532 participants (49.4%) for the control group).
As for the type of PWs, the majority of interventions (n = 7 studies, 63.6%) were delivered by community workers (CWs) whereas, in four studies (36.4%), interventions were delivered by primary health workers (PWs) (see for a complete list of studies regarding the classification of PWs). CWs included, for instance, trained facilitators, caregivers, coaches, and peer leaders; PWs included social workers, community‐based health workers, medical teachers, and village doctors. For most of the studies, participants in the control group were allocated to usual care (n = 9 studies, 81.8%); for the remaining two studies (18.2%), the control group was guided by a PW without training and/or supervision or was allocated to active control. Two studies (18.2%) had been conducted in schools, two (18.2%) in a community setting, one (9.1%) at home, one (9.1%) at a workplace and the remaining five (45.5%) in other settings, such as universities, or local parishes. From a wider geographical perspective, four studies (36.4%) were conducted in an urban context, four (36.4%) in a rural one and, for the remaining three studies (27.3%), it was not specified. Seven studies (63.6%) were undertaken in upper‐middle income countries, three (27.3%) in low‐middle‐income countries and for one study (9.1%) income level changed from low‐middle to upper‐middle. As for the condition, most studies addressed psychological distress (n = 8 studies, 72.7%), two studies (18.2%) targeted the prevention of common mental disorders, and one (9.1%) addressed perinatal mental disorders.

## Primary outcomes

## 1. Diagnosis (or a proxy thereof, as assessed by scoring above a cut‐off for a screening tool) of mental disorders
( ; )

## At 0 to 1 month post‐intervention
No studies reported on this outcome.

## At 1 to 6 months post‐intervention
One study with 137 participants ( ) identified that universal prevention/promotion interventions may lead to a decrease in the incidence of mental disorders at 1 to 6 months, although the actual effect range indicates it may have little or no difference (RR 0.57, 95% CI 0.28 to 1.18; I2 = NA; P = 0.13) ( ).

## At 7 to 24 months post‐intervention
One study with 323 participants ( ) identified that universal prevention/promotion interventions may lead to a decrease in the incidence of mental disorders at 7 to 24 months, although the actual effect range indicates it may have little or no difference (RR 0.67, 95% CI 0.43 to 1.05; I2 = NA; P = 0.08) ( ).

## 2. Quality of life
( ; )

## At 0 to 1 month post‐intervention
At 0 to 1 month post‐intervention, it is uncertain whether universal prevention/promotion interventions improve quality of life (SMD ‐0.23, 95% CI ‐0.51 to 0.04; I2 = 61%; P = 0.10; 4 studies, 684 participants; very low‐certainty evidence due to study limitations, inconsistency, and indirectness) ( ).

## At 1 to 6 months post‐intervention
No studies reported on this outcome.

## At 7 to 24 months post‐intervention
One study ( ) identified a positive effect of universal prevention/promotion interventions over the control group (MD ‐7.30, 95% CI ‐12.28 to ‐2.32; I2 = NA; P = 0.004; 222 participants) ( ).

## 3. Adverse events experienced during the intervention
No studies reported on this outcome.

## Secondary outcomes

## 1. Psychological functioning and impairment
No studies reported on this outcome.

## 2. Changes in service utilization and contact coverage
No studies reported on this outcome.

## 3. Changes in mental health symptoms captured on rating scales (i.e. depressive symptoms, anxiety symptoms, distress/PTSD symptoms)
( ; ; ; ; )
Three studies (349 participants) ( ; ; ) reported data on depressive symptoms at 0 to 1 month post‐intervention, indicating uncertainty of beneficial effects for universal prevention/promotion interventions versus control (SMD ‐0.31, 95% CI ‐0.78 to 0.15; I2 = 61%; P = 0.19; 3 studies, 349 participants; very low confidence due to study limitations, inconsistency and indirectness) ( ). At 1 to 6 months, only one study with 153 participants provided data ( ) indicating that a universal prevention/promotion intervention may improve depressive symptoms, although the actual effect range suggests it may have little or no difference (MD ‐1.25, 95% CI ‐3.28 to 0.78; I2 = NA; P = 0.23) ( ). At 7 to 24 months, two studies with 1207 participants ( ; ) identified a positive effect of universal prevention/promotion interventions over control (SMD ‐0.13, 95% CI ‐0.24 to ‐0.02; I2 = 0%; P = 0.02) ( ).
For anxiety symptoms at 0 to 1 month post‐intervention, one study with 158 participants ( ) found a probable difference in favour of the intervention versus control (MD ‐0.14, 95% CI ‐0.27 to ‐0.01; I2 = NA; P = 0.04; moderate certainty due to imprecision) ( ). At 1 to 6 and 7 to 24 months, no studies reported on this outcome.
For distress/PTSD symptoms, four studies with 722 participants ( ; ; ; ) identified that interventions may have a slightly beneficial effect at 0 to 1 month post‐intervention (SMD ‐0.24, 95% CI ‐0.41 to ‐0.08; I2 = 8 %; P = 0.04; 722 participants; low certainty due to study limitations and indirectness) ( ). At 1 to 6 and 7 to 24 months, no studies reported on this outcome.

## 4. Social outcomes (e.g. perception of social inclusion)
( )
One study with 158 participants ( ) identified a positive effect of interventions versus control condition in improving social outcomes at 0 to 1 month post‐intervention (MD ‐0.45, 95% CI ‐0.82 to ‐0.08; I2 = NA; P = 0.02; 158 participants). At 1 to 6 and 7 to 24 months, no studies reported on this outcome.

## 5. Carer mental health
No studies reported on this outcome.

## Comparison 2. Primary‐level health worker and/or community worker‐led selective prevention interventions for adults (n = 20 studies)
We identified 20 RCTs (8 cluster‐RCTs (40%) and 12 individual RCTs (60%)) contributing to meta‐analyses in this comparison. The total sample size was 4160 (2087 participants (50.2%) for the intervention group and 2073 participants (49.8%) for the control group).
As for the type of PWs, in nine studies (45%), interventions were delivered by community workers (CWs) whereas in 10 studies (55%) by primary health workers (PWs), and in one study it was a self‐help intervention (see for a complete list of studies regarding the classification of PWs). CWs included, for instance, community health aiders, trained yoga instructors, family volunteers, peer counsellors, and local groups; PWs included physiotherapists, nursing assistants, healthcare assistants, antenatal care staff team, and midwives. For most of the studies, participants in the control group were allocated to usual care (n = 18 studies, 90%); for the remaining two studies (10%), the control group was guided by a PW without training and/or supervision or was allocated to a waiting list. Six studies (30%) had been conducted in PC facilities (hospitals) and two (10%) in PC facilities (freestanding), eight (40%) at home, three (15%) in a community setting, two (10%) in other settings (yoga university and offices). From a wider geographical perspective, 13 studies (65%) were conducted in an urban context, four (20%) in a rural one, two (10%) both in an urban and rural context, and one in a slum. Ten studies (50%) were undertaken in upper‐middle‐income countries, four (20%) in low‐middle income countries, three (15%) in low‐income countries and, for one study (5%), income level changed from low‐middle to upper‐middle whereas for the remaining two studies (10%), income level changed from low to low‐middle. As for the condition, most studies addressed psychological distress (n = 12 studies, 60%) and eight studies (40%) targeted the prevention of perinatal mental disorders.

## Primary outcomes

## 1. Diagnosis (or a proxy thereof, as assessed by scoring above a cut‐off for a screening tool) of mental disorders

## At 0 to 1 month post‐intervention
No studies reported on this outcome.

## At 1 to 6 months post‐intervention
No studies reported on this outcome.

## At 7 to 24 months post‐intervention
One study with 349 participants ( ) identified an uncertain effect of selective prevention interventions at 7 to 24 months post‐intervention (RR 1.81, 95% CI 0.17 to 19.82; I2 = NA; P = 0.63) ( ).

## 2. Quality of life
( ; )

## At 0 to 1 month post‐intervention
Three studies ( ; ; ) (229 participants) showed that it is uncertain whether selective prevention interventions were more effective than control in improving quality of life at 0 to 1 month post‐intervention (SMD ‐1.64, 95% CI ‐2.97 to ‐0.31; 229 participants, I2 = 92%; P = 0.02; very low‐certainty evidence due to inconsistency, indirectness, and publication bias) ( ).

## At 1 to 6 months post‐intervention
Five studies ( ; ; ; ; ) (798 participants) provided data on this outcome. We identified a positive effect of selective prevention interventions versus control group in improving quality of life (SMD ‐1.05, 95% CI ‐1.84 to ‐0.26; I2 = 96%; P = 0.009; 798 participants) ( ).

## At 7 to 24 months post‐intervention
No studies reported on this outcome.

## 3. Adverse events experienced during the intervention
No studies reported on this outcome.

## Secondary outcomes

## 1. Psychological functioning and impairment
No studies reported on this outcome.

## 2. Changes in service utilization and contact coverage
No studies reported on this outcome.

## 3. Changes in mental health symptoms captured on rating scales (i.e. depressive symptoms, anxiety symptoms, distress/PTSD symptoms)
( ; ; ; ; ; )
For depressive symptoms ( ) at 0 to 1 month post‐intervention, we collected four studies with 223 participants ( ; ; ; ). The studies probably identified an important effect of selective preventive interventions versus control in reducing depressive symptoms (SMD ‐0.69, 95% CI ‐1.08 to ‐0.30; I2 = 39%; P = 0.0005; 223 participants; moderate certainty due to study limitations). At 1 to 6 months ( ), three studies ( ; ; ) provided data in favour of selective prevention interventions (SMD ‐0.60, 95% CI ‐1.00 to ‐0.21; I2 = 32%; P = 0.002; 186 participants). At 7 to 24 months, no studies reported on this outcome.
For anxiety symptoms at 1 to 6 months ( ), we collected one study with 2026 participants ( ) showing that selective prevention interventions may lead to decreased symptoms, although the actual effect range indicates it may have little or no difference (MD ‐0.80, 95% CI ‐1.87 to 0.27; I2 = NA; P = 0.14). At endpoint and 7 to 24 months, no studies reported on this outcome.
For distress/PTSD symptoms at 0 to 1 month post‐intervention ( ), we collected seven studies ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ) and found that selective prevention interventions may have a positive effect over controls but the evidence is very uncertain (SMD ‐0.90, 95% CI ‐1.44 to ‐0.36; I2 = 88%; P = 0.001; 535 participants; very low‐certainty evidence due to inconsistency and indirectness). At 1 to 6 months ( ), we collected five studies ( ; ; ; ; ) and found a difference in favour of selective prevention interventions (SMD ‐0.67, 95% CI ‐1.21 to ‐0.12; 464 participants, I2 = 86%; P = 0.02). At 7 to 24 months, we did not identify any differences between study arms ( ).

## 4. Social outcomes (e.g. perception of social inclusion)
( ; ; )
At 0 to 1 month post‐intervention, we found three studies ( ; ; ). Selective prevention interventions improved social outcomes compared with the control group (SMD ‐9.50, 95% CI ‐15.29 to ‐3.70; I2 = 81%; P = 0.001; 121 participants) ( ). At 1 to 6 months, selective prevention interventions may lead to decrease symptoms, although the actual effect range indicates it may have little or no difference (SMD ‐0.88, 95% CI ‐2.56 to 0.80; 2 studies, 236 participants; I2 = NA; P = 0.30) ( ). At 7 to 24 months, one study ( ) with 27 participants showed a positive effect of selective prevention over control in improving social outcomes (MD ‐15.70, 95% CI ‐28.35 to ‐3.05; I2 = NA; P = 0.02; 27 participants) ( ).

## 5. Resource use
No studies reported on this outcome.

## 6. Carer mental health
No studies reported on this outcome.

## Comparison 3. Primary‐level health worker and/or community worker‐led indicated prevention interventions for adults (n = 42 studies)
We identified 42 RCTs (11 cluster‐RCTs (26.2%) and 31 individual RCTs (73.8%)) contributing to meta‐analyses in this comparison. Total sample size was 6214 (3100 participants (49.9%) for the intervention group and 3114 participants (50.1%) for the control group).
As for the type of PWs, in 25 studies (59.5%), interventions were delivered by community workers (CWs) whereas in 18 studies (42.9%) interventions were delivered by primary health workers (PWs) (see for a complete list of studies regarding the classification of PWs). CWs included, for instance, lay community workers, group leaders, yoga instructors, teachers, and peer counsellors; PWs included midwives, nurses, physicians, and trained general practitioners. For most of the studies, participants in the control group were allocated to usual care (n = 35 studies, 83.3%); for one study (2.4%), the control group was guided by a PW without training and/or supervision and for the remaining six studies (14.3%), the control group was active control or waiting list. Nine studies (21.4%) had been conducted in a hospital and 6 (14.3%) in a freestanding PC facility, 13 (31%) in a community setting, seven (16.7%) at home, two (4.8%) in schools, one at the workplace and the remaining four (9.5%) in other settings, such as churches, mixed settings (homes, social centres). From a wider geographical perspective, 26 studies (61.9%) were conducted in an urban context, seven (16.7%) in a rural one, five (11.9%) both in urban and rural contexts, and for the remaining four studies (9.5%) it was not specified. Twenty‐five studies (59.5%) were undertaken in upper‐middle income countries, 11 (26.2%) in low‐middle income countries, two (4.8%) in middle‐income countries, two (4.8%) in low‐income countries, and for two studies (4.8%) income level changed from low‐middle to upper‐middle. As for the condition, the majority of studies (n = 32, 76.2%) targeted the prevention of common mental disorders, nine studies (21.4%) addressed perinatal mental disorders and the remaining one (2.4%) targeted psychological distress.

## Primary outcomes

## 1. Diagnosis (or a proxy thereof, as assessed by scoring above a cut‐off for a screening tool) of mental disorders
( ; ; )

## At 0 to 1 month post‐intervention
At 0 to 1 month post‐intervention, we found three studies with 843 participants. It is uncertain whether indicated prevention interventions reduce the incidence of mental health diagnosis (RR 0.30, 95% CI 0.06 to 1.57; I2 = 87%; P = 0.15; 3 studies, 843 participants; very low‐certainty evidence due to study limitations, inconsistency, indirectness, and imprecision) ( ).

## At 1 to 6 months post‐intervention
At 1 to 6 months, we found six studies with 1352 participants ( ; ; ; ; ; ). We found a difference in favour of interventions over controls (RR 0.65, 95% CI 0.50 to 0.84; I2 = 21%; P = 0.001; 1352 participants) ( ).

## At 7 to 24 months post‐intervention
At 7 to 24 months, we found two studies with 380 participants. Indicated prevention interventions may lead to a decrease in the incidence of mental disorders at 7 to 24 months, although the actual effect range indicates it may have little or no difference (RR 0.69, 95% CI 0.41 to 1.19; I2 = 0%; P = 0.18) ( ).

## 2. Quality of life
( ; ; )

## At 0 to 1 month post‐intervention
At 0 to 1 month post‐intervention, we found eight studies ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). Indicated prevention interventions may improve quality of life but the evidence is very uncertain (SMD ‐0.36, 95% CI ‐0.61 to ‐0.12; I2 = 68%; P = 0.004; 1136 participants; very low‐certainty evidence due to inconsistency, publication bias, and indirectness) ( ).

## At 1 to 6 months post‐intervention
At 1 to 6 months, indicated prevention interventions may have little or no effect on improving quality of life (SMD ‐0.04, 95% CI ‐0.23 to 0.16; I2 = 34%; P = 0.70; 4 studies, 847 participants) ( ).

## At 7 to 24 months post‐intervention
At 7 to 24 months, indicated prevention interventions may lead to a decrease in the incidence of mental disorders, although the actual effect range indicates it may have little or no difference (SMD ‐0.80, 95% CI ‐3.53 to 1.93; I2 = NA; P = 0.57; 1 study, 94 participants) ( ).

## 3. Adverse events experienced during the intervention
( )
At 0 to 1 month post‐intervention, only reported that no participants experienced adverse events in the intervention and control groups.

## Secondary outcomes

## 1. Psychological functioning and impairment
( ; ; )
Indicated prevention interventions probably make little or no difference at 0 to 1 month post‐intervention (SMD ‐0.12, 95% CI ‐0.39 to 0.15; I2 = 38%; P = 0.39; 4 studies, 663 participants; moderate certainty due to indirectness) ( ). At 1 to 6 months ( ), the actual effect range indicates it may make little or no difference (SMD ‐0.10, 95% CI ‐0.60 to 0.41; I2 = 77%; P = 0.71; 2 studies, 594 participants), as well as at 7 to 24 months (SMD ‐0.21, 95% CI ‐0.47 to 0.04; I2 = 38%; P = 0.10; 2 studies, 241 participants) ( ).

## 2. Changes in service utilization and contact coverage
No studies reported on this outcome.

## 3. Changes in mental health symptoms captured on rating scales (i.e. depressive symptoms, anxiety symptoms, distress/PTSD symptoms)
( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; )
At 0 to 1 month post‐intervention, we found 18 studies evaluating depressive symptoms. Indicated prevention interventions may have little to no effect in reducing depressive symptoms compared to control groups but the evidence is very uncertain (SMD ‐0.16, 95% CI ‐0.30 to ‐0.03; I2 = 56%; P = 0.02; 2341 participants; very low‐certainty evidence due to inconsistency, publication bias, and study limitations) ( ). At 1 to 6 months, we collected 11 studies confirming that the effect of the intervention was maintained (SMD ‐0.34, 95% CI ‐0.58 to ‐0.10; I2 = 88%; P = 0.005; 2609 participants) ( ). At 7 to 24 months, we found eight studies that suggested that indicated prevention interventions may lead to slightly decreased depressive symptoms, although the actual effect range indicates it may have little or no difference (SMD ‐0.10, 95% CI ‐0.22 to 0.01; I2 = 39%; P = 0.08; 2149 participants) ( ).
For anxiety symptoms at 0 to 1 month post‐intervention, the collected five studies ( ; ; ; ; ) identified that indicated prevention interventions may have a positive effect over controls but the evidence is very uncertain (SMD ‐1.19, 95% CI ‐2.02 to ‐0.35; I2 = 89%; P = 0.005; 250 participants; very low certainty due to study limitations and inconsistency) ( ). At 1 to 6 months, we collected four studies ( ; ; ; ) suggesting that the beneficial effect of the intervention was maintained (SMD ‐0.23, 95% CI ‐0.37 to ‐0.09; I2 = 84%; P = 0.002; 771 participants) ( ). At 7 to 24 months, indicated prevention interventions may slightly decrease anxiety symptoms, although the actual effect range indicates the effect of the intervention may have little or no difference (SMD ‐0.12, 95% CI ‐0.29 to 0.05; I2 = 92%; P = 0.17; 2 studies, 549 participants) ( ).
For distress/PTSD symptoms at 0 to 1 month post‐intervention, indicated prevention interventions may have a positive effect but the evidence is very uncertain (SMD ‐0.54, 95% CI ‐0.95 to ‐0.14; I2 = 95%; P = 0.009; 19 studies, 2536 participants; very low certainty due to inconsistency and publication bias) ( ). At 1 to 6 months, the effect of the intervention was maintained (SMD ‐0.29, 95% CI ‐0.51 to ‐0.07; I2 = 75%; P = 0.008; 9 studies, 1702 participants) ( ). At 7 to 24 months, the actual effect range indicates the effect of the intervention may have little or no difference (SMD ‐0.04, 95% CI ‐0.45 to 0.38; I2 = 91%; P = 0.86; 5 studies, 1081 participants) ( ).

## 4. Social outcomes (e.g. perception of social inclusion)
( ; )
At 0 to 1 month and at 7 to 24 months post‐intervention, the actual effect range indicates the effect of the intervention may make little or no difference on social outcomes. At 1 to 6 months, no studies reported on this outcome.

## 5. Resource use
No studies reported on this outcome.

## 6. Carer mental health
No studies reported on this outcome.

## Comparison 4. Primary‐level health worker and/or community worker‐led universal prevention or promotion interventions for children (n = 8 studies)
We identified eight RCTs (six cluster‐RCTs (75%) and two individual RCTs (25%)) contributing to meta‐analyses in this comparison. Total sample size was 1496 (760 participants (50.8%) for the intervention group and 736 participants (49.2%) for the control group).
As for the type of PWs, all interventions (n = 8 studies, 100%) were delivered by community workers (CWs) but, in one study (12.5%), the intervention was also delivered by primary health workers (PWs) (see for a complete list of studies regarding the classification of PWs). CWs included, for instance, school teachers, yoga teachers, staff, and student facilitators, whereas PWs included midwives. For most of the studies, participants in the control group were allocated to usual care (n = 5 studies, 62.5%); for one study (12.5%) the control group was guided by a PW without training and/or supervision and, for the remaining two studies (25%), the control group was active control or waiting list. All eight studies (100%) had been conducted in schools. From a wider geographical perspective, seven studies (87.5%) were conducted in an urban context and one in a rural context. Five studies (62.5%) were undertaken in upper‐middle‐income countries and three (37.5%) in low‐income countries. As for the condition, most included studies (n = 5, 62.5%) targeted the prevention of child mental disorders and three studies (37.5%) aimed at improving psychological well‐being.

## Primary outcomes

## 1. Diagnosis (or a proxy thereof, as assessed by scoring above a cut‐off for a screening tool) of mental disorders

## At 0 to 1 month post‐intervention
No studies reported on this outcome.

## At 1 to 6 months post‐intervention
No studies reported on this outcome.

## At 7 to 24 months post‐intervention
No studies reported on this outcome.

## 2. Quality of life
( )

## At 0 to 1 month post‐intervention
At 0 to 1 month post‐intervention, we found two studies ( ; ) showing that universal prevention/promotion interventions may show a positive effect of the interventions versus control in improving the quality of life (SMD ‐0.25, 95% CI ‐0.39 to ‐0.11; I2 = 0%; P = 0.0003; 2 studies, 803 participants; low certainty due to study limitations and indirectness) ( ).

## At 1 to 6 months post‐intervention
No studies reported on this outcome.

## At 7 to 24 months post‐intervention
No studies reported on this outcome.

## 3. Adverse events experienced during the intervention
( )
One study ( ) provided information on this outcome at 0 to 1 month reporting that no participants experienced adverse events in either study arm.

## Secondary outcomes

## 1. Psychological functioning and impairment
( ; ; )
At 0 to 1 month post‐intervention ( ), it is uncertain whether universal prevention/promotion interventions improve psychological functioning (SMD 0.04, 95% CI ‐0.90 to 0.98; I2 = 82%; P = 0.93; 2 studies, 212 participants; low certainty due to study limitations, inconsistency, indirectness and imprecision). At 1 to 6 months follow‐up ( ), universal prevention/promotion interventions may lead to increased psychological functioning, although the actual effect range indicates it may have little or no difference (MD ‐0.29, 95% CI ‐0.93 to 0.35; I2 = NA; P = 0.37; 1 study, 90 participants). At 7 to 24 months ( ), one study ( ) identified a difference in favour of the intervention over the control condition (MD ‐3.33, 95% CI ‐5.03 to ‐2.63; I2 = NA; P = 0.0001; 183 participants).

## 2. Changes in service utilization and contact coverage
No studies reported on this outcome.

## 3. Changes in mental health symptoms captured on rating scales (i.e. depressive symptoms, anxiety symptoms, distress/PTSD symptoms)
( ; ; ; ; ; ; )
For depressive symptoms, we found one study ( ) reporting that interventions may improve symptoms at 0 to 1 month post‐intervention (SMD ‐3.04, 95% CI ‐6.00 to ‐0.08; I2 = NA%; P = 0.04; 160 participants; low certainty due to study limitations and imprecision) ( ), but the effect was not maintained at 1 to 6 months (SMD ‐0.00, 95% CI ‐0.20 to 0.20; I2 = 0%; P = 0.98; 3 studies, 385 participants) ( ). At 7 to 24 months, no studies reported on this outcome.
For anxiety symptoms at 0 to 1 month post‐intervention, we found one study ( ) reporting that universal prevention/promotion interventions may reduce anxiety symptoms (MD ‐2.27, 95% CI ‐3.13 to ‐1.41; I2 = NA; P < 0.00001; 183 participants; low certainty due to study limitations and imprecision) ( ). At 1 to 6 months, the difference was not important (MD ‐0.13, 95% CI ‐0.41 to 0.15; I2 = NA; P = 0.37; 1 study, 125 participants) ( ) while, at 7 to 24 months, the study of confirmed a positive effect of the intervention (SMD ‐2.27, 95% CI ‐3.10 to ‐1.44; I2 = NA; P < 0.00001; 183 participants) ( ).
For distress/PTSD symptoms at 0 to 1 month post‐intervention, it is uncertain whether interventions improve distress (SMD ‐0.83, 95% CI ‐2.48 to 0.82; I2 = 98%; P = 0.33; 2 studies, 800 participants) ( ) while, at 1 to 6 months, we found one study ( ) reporting that universal prevention/promotion interventions improved symptoms of distress/PTSD (MD ‐4.51, 95% CI ‐5.86 to ‐3.16; I2 = NA; P < 0.00001; 106 participants) ( ). No data were available on this outcome at 7 to 24 months follow‐up.

## 4. Social outcomes (e.g. perception of social inclusion)
( ; ; )
At 0 to 1 month post‐intervention ( ), universal prevention/promotion interventions may lead to increased psychological functioning, although the actual effect range indicates it may have little or no difference (SMD ‐0.32, 95% CI ‐0.76 to 0.12; I2 = 67%; P = 0.15; 3 studies, 321 participants) and at 1 to 6 months (SMD ‐0.27, 95% CI ‐0.82 to 0.28; I2 = 75%; P = 0.34; 2 studies, 215 participants) ( ). At 7 to 24 months, we collected one study ( ) reporting a positive effect of the intervention over the control group (MD ‐0.70, 95% CI ‐1.07 to ‐0.33; I2 = NA; P = 0.0002; 183 participants) ( ).

## 5. Resource use
No studies reported data on this outcome.

## 6. Carer mental health
No studies reported data on this outcome.

## Comparison 5. Primary‐level health worker and/or community worker‐led selective prevention interventions for children (n = 7 studies)
We identified seven RCTs (four cluster‐RCTs (57.1%) and three individual RCTs (42.9%)) contributing to meta‐analyses in this comparison. The total sample size was 1572 (800 participants (50.9%) for the intervention group and 772 participants (49.1%) for the control group).
As for the type of PWs, most of the interventions (n = 6 studies, 85.7%) were delivered by community workers (CWs) whereas, in only one study (14.3%), the intervention was delivered by primary health workers (PWs) (see for a complete list of studies regarding the classification of PWs). CWs included, for instance, teachers, facilitators, and coaches, whereas PWs included nursing students. For most of the studies, participants in the control group were allocated to usual care (n = 6 studies, 85.7%); for the remaining study (14.3%), the control group was a waiting‐list condition. Four studies (57.1%) had been conducted in schools, one (14.3%) in hospitals, and the remaining two (28.6%) in other settings, such as local churches and multiple community spaces. From a wider geographical perspective, three studies (42.9%) were conducted in an urban context, one (14.3%) in a rural context, one (14.3%) in both urban and rural contexts and, for the remaining two studies (28.6%), it was not specified. One study (14.3%) was undertaken in an upper‐middle income country, one (14.3%) in a low‐middle income country, and the remaining five studies (71.4%) in low‐income countries. As for the condition, the majority of studies (n = 6 studies, 85.7%) targeted the prevention of child mental disorders and one study (14.3%) aimed at improving psychological well‐being.

## Primary outcomes

## 1. Diagnosis (or a proxy thereof, as assessed by scoring above a cut‐off for a screening tool) of mental disorders

## At 0 to 1 month post‐intervention
No studies reported on this outcome.

## At 1 to 6 months post‐intervention
No studies reported on this outcome.

## At 7 to 24 months post‐intervention
No studies reported on this outcome.

## 2. Quality of life
( )

## At 0 to 1 month post‐intervention
At 0 to 1 month post‐intervention, we found one study ( ) indicating that it is uncertain whether selective prevention interventions improve quality of life (MD ‐1.10, 95% CI ‐3.32 to 1.12; I2 = NA; P = 0.33; 115 participants; very low certainty due to study limitations and imprecision) ( ).

## At 1 to 6 months post‐intervention
No studies reported on this outcome.

## At 7 to 24 months post‐intervention
No studies reported on this outcome.

## 3. Adverse events experienced during the intervention
No studies reported data on this outcome.

## Secondary outcomes

## 1. Psychological functioning and impairment
( )
At 0 to 1 month post‐intervention, there is no evidence that selective prevention interventions improves functional impairment (MD ‐0.02, 95% CI ‐0.09 to 0.05; I2 = NA; P = 0.57; 1 study, 479 participants; low certainty due to indirectness and imprecision). At 1 to 6 and 7 to 24 months, no studies reported on this outcome.

## 2. Changes in service utilization and contact coverage
No studies reported on this outcome.

## 3. Changes in mental health symptoms captured on rating scales (i.e. depressive symptoms, anxiety symptoms, distress/PTSD symptoms)
( ; ; ; ; ; ; )
For depressive symptoms, selective prevention interventions probably make little or no difference to symptoms at 0 to 1 month post‐intervention (SMD 0.00, 95% CI ‐0.16 to 0.15; I2 = 0%; P = 0.96; 2 studies, 638 participants; moderate certainty due to imprecision) ( ). We did not identify any important difference between the intervention and control group at 1 to 6 months and 7 to 24 months ( ; ).
For anxiety symptoms, selective prevention interventions may make little or no difference to symptoms at 0 to 1 month post‐intervention (MD 4.50, 95% CI ‐12.05 to 21.05; I2 = NA; P = 0.59; 1 study, 28 participants; low certainty due to imprecision) ( ). At 1 to 6 months, one study reported a worsening of anxiety symptoms (MD 1.42, 95% CI ‐0.00 to 2.84; I2 = NA; P = 0.05; 1 study, 143 participants) ( ). At 7 to 24 months, no studies provided information on this outcome.
For distress/PTSD symptoms at 0 to 1 month post‐intervention, we found one study ( ) reporting that interventions probably improve symptoms of distress/PTSD (MD ‐2.14, 95% CI ‐3.77 to ‐0.51; I2 = NA; P = 0.01; 159 participants; moderate certainty due to imprecision) ( ). Selective prevention interventions have an uncertain effect at 1 to 6 months (SMD ‐0.40, 95% CI ‐2.49 to 1.69; I2 = NA; P = 0.71; 1 study, 213 participants) ( ). No data were available on this outcome at 7 to 24 months follow‐up.

## 4. Social outcomes (e.g. perception of social inclusion)
( )
At 0 to 1 month post‐intervention, we did not find any differences between the intervention and control group. No data were available for the other time points.

## 5. Resource use
No studies reported data on this outcome.

## 6. Carer mental health
No studies reported data on this outcome.

## Comparison 6. Primary‐level health worker and/or community worker‐led indicated prevention interventions for children (n = 9 studies)
We identified nine RCTs (five cluster‐RCTs (55.6%) and four individual RCTs (44.4%)) contributing to meta‐analyses in this comparison. The total sample size was 3029 (1684 participants for the intervention group and 1345 participants for the control group).
As for the type of PWs, most of the interventions (n = 7 studies, 77.8%) were delivered by community workers (CWs) whereas, in one study (11.1%), the intervention was delivered by primary health workers (PHWs) and, in another study (11.1%) there was a self‐help intervention (see for a complete list of studies regarding the classification of PWs). CWs included, for instance, adult refugee facilitators, teachers, paraprofessional interventionists, lay counsellors, whereas PWs included social workers. For most of the studies, participants in the control group were allocated to usual care (n = 8 studies, 88.9%); for the remaining study (11.1%), the control group was allocated to active control. Eight studies (88.9%) had been conducted in schools and one (11.1%) in a refugee camp. From a wider geographical perspective, one study (11.1%) was conducted in an urban context, three (33.3%) in a rural context, one (11.1%) in both urban and rural contexts and, for the remaining four studies (44.4%), it was not specified. Three studies (33.3%) were undertaken in upper‐middle income countries, four (44.4%) in low‐middle income countries and two studies (22.2%) in low‐income countries. As for the condition, all included studies (n = 9 studies, 100%) targeted the prevention of child mental disorders.

## Primary outcomes

## 1. Diagnosis (or a proxy thereof, as assessed by scoring above a cut‐off for a screening tool) of mental disorders
( ; )

## At 0 to 1 month post‐intervention
At 0 to 1 month post‐intervention, we found one study ( ) with 220 participants. It is uncertain whether indicated prevention interventions reduce the incidence of mental health diagnosis (RR 0.77, 95% CI 0.51 to 1.17; I2 = NA; P = 0.22; 1 study, 220 participants; very low certainty due to study limitations indirectness and imprecision) ( ).

## At 1 to 6 months post‐intervention
At 1 to 6 months, we found one study ( ) that indicated prevention interventions may lead to decreased incidence, although the actual effect range indicates the effect of the intervention may have little or no difference (RR 0.77, 95% CI 0.51 to 1.17; I2 = NA; P = 0.19; 220 participants) ( ).

## At 7 to 24 months post‐intervention
No studies reported on this outcome.

## 2. Quality of life
( )

## At 0 to 1 month post‐intervention
It is uncertain whether indicated prevention interventions improve quality of life at 0 to 1 month post‐intervention (SMD ‐0.65, 95% CI ‐2.09 to 0.79; I2 = 0%; P = 0.38; 2 studies, 152 participants; very low certainty due to study limitations, indirectness, and imprecision) ( ).

## At 1 to 6 months post‐intervention
No studies reported on this outcome.

## At 7 to 24 months post‐intervention
No studies reported on this outcome.

## 3. Adverse events experienced during the intervention
No studies reported data on this outcome.

## Secondary outcomes

## 1. Psychological functioning and impairment
( ; )
At 0 to 1 month post‐intervention, we collected two studies ( ; ) reporting a difference in favour of the intervention over the control group (SMD ‐0.29, 95% CI ‐0.47 to ‐0.10; I2 = 0%; P = 0.003; 448 participants; high certainty) ( ). At 1 to 6 months, we failed to identify any difference between intervention and control groups ( ). At 7 to 24 months, no studies reported on this outcome.

## 2. Changes in service utilization and contact coverage
No studies reported on this outcome.

## 3. Changes in mental health symptoms captured on rating scales (i.e. depressive symptoms, anxiety symptoms, distress/PTSD symptoms)
( ; ; ; ; ; ; )
For depressive symptoms, we found four studies ( ; ; ; ) reporting a beneficial effect of the intervention over control at 0 to 1 month post‐intervention (SMD ‐0.18, 95% CI ‐0.32 to ‐0.04; I2 = 0; P = 0.01; 771 participants; high certainty) ( ). At 1 to 6 months, this effect was not maintained while, at 7 to 24 months, we found one study by that indicated prevention interventions were more effective than controls in reducing depressive symptoms (MD ‐1.27 95% CI ‐1.90 to ‐0.64; I2 = NA; P < 0.0001; 904 participants) ( ).
For anxiety symptoms, it is uncertain whether indicated prevention interventions improve symptoms at 0 to 1 month post‐intervention (SMD ‐0.09, 95% CI ‐0.22 to 0.04; I2 = 0%; P = 0.19; 3 studies, 888 participants; very low certainty due to study limitations and indirectness) ( ). At 1 to 6 months follow‐up, we did not find any important difference between intervention and control groups ( ). At 7 to 24 months, no studies reported data on this outcome.
For distress/PTSD symptoms at 0 to 1 month post‐intervention, prevention interventions may make little or no difference to symptoms (SMD 0.24, 95% CI ‐1.28 to 1.76; I2 = 0%; P = 0.76; 2 studies, 448 participants; low certainty due to inconsistency and imprecision) ( ). At 1 to 6 months, we failed to identify any important difference between intervention and control groups ( ). No study provided data at 7 to 24 months.

## 4. Social outcomes (e.g. perception of social inclusion)
( ; )
At 0 to 1 month post‐intervention, we failed to identify any difference between intervention and control groups ( ) while at 1 to 6 months, we collected two studies ( ; ) that indicated prevention interventions were more effective than control groups in improving social outcomes (SMD ‐0.22, 95% CI ‐0.41 to ‐0.03; I2 = 0%; P = 0.02; 421 participants) ( ). No study provided data at 7 to 24 months.

## 5. Resource use
No studies reported data on this outcome.

## 6. Carer mental health
No studies reported data on this outcome.

## Subgroup and sensitivity analyses
We presented all the meta‐analyses according to the type of prevention intervention (universal, selective, indicated).
Due to the low number of studies available for each type of prevention intervention, we were not able to perform all the planned subgroup and sensitivity analyses.
Category of health worker (e.g. primary care professionals, non‐professional health workers, community workers). This analysis was not performed as most interventions were delivered by community and para‐professional workers.
Setting of care.
Community settings, camps, schools: this analysis was not performed given the small number of RCTs for each category.
Chronic or acute humanitarian versus non‐humanitarian settings: the number of RCTs conducted in humanitarian crises was very low compared to those in LMICs not exposed to the acute phase of a humanitarian crisis.
Type of promotion intervention (individual, group): it was not possible to conduct this analysis as most of the interventions were delivered in a group setting.
Specific risk, protective, or promotive factor targeted; RCT reports did not provide specific information on the targeted risk, protective, or promotive factors to conduct this analysis.

## Subgroup analyses
All the analyses were conducted according to the type of prevention interventions and, for this reason, no subgroup analyses were needed on this variable. We were able to conduct subgroup analyses considering the category of health workers and the setting of care. These analyses did not identify any differences across subgroups in relation to the assessed outcomes (P > 0.05). We were not able to conduct subgroup analyses considering chronic or acute humanitarian versus non‐humanitarian settings, the type of promotion intervention in terms of individual versus group modality, and the risk, protective, or promotive factor targeted. No sufficient information was reported in the included studies to clearly identify the variables listed above.

## Sensitivity analyses
We conducted sensitivity analyses including only studies with low risk of bias, as specified in incomplete outcome data and selective reporting. The effect of indicated prevention interventions for adults on psychological functioning and impairment was statistically significant at 0 to 1 month post‐intervention after excluding studies with high risk of bias and those having some concerns. For mental health symptoms, both for depressive and PTSD symptoms, the effect of indicated prevention interventions was no longer statistically significant at 0 to 1 month post‐intervention, after excluding studies with high risk of bias and those having some concerns.
We also conducted analyses excluding trials with methodological characteristics that might generate the highest heterogeneity in meta‐analysis (I² > 75%). The effect of indicated prevention interventions on the diagnosis of mental disorders was statistically significant after excluding studies generating the highest heterogeneity, and I2 was lowered to 0%. For quality of life, no differences were detected at 0 to 1 month post‐intervention study endpoint, while the effect of the intervention was not statistically significant at 1 to 6 months.
We were not able to conduct sensitivity analysis considering only published studies, and sensitivity analysis including only studies measuring the incidence of mental disorders (i.e. studies in which all participants at baseline scored below defined symptom thresholds on rating scales).

## Discussion
This review included 113 randomized trials evaluating the effectiveness of promotion and prevention interventions delivered through a task‐shifting approach in 39 LMICs. The majority of studies were focused on adult populations (83 RCTs), while only a minority assessed promotion and prevention interventions for children (30 RCTs).

## Summary of main results
This review aimed to assess the effectiveness of promotion and prevention interventions delivered through a task‐shifting approach by primary level and community workers to the child and adolescent, and adult populations in LMICs.
With regard to primary outcomes in adults, promotion/universal prevention and selective prevention interventions were not effective in reducing the likelihood of receiving a diagnosis of mental disorders at any time points. Indicated prevention interventions had a significant effect in reducing the frequency of diagnosed mental disorders at 1 to 6 months while, at other time points, we failed to identify a significant effect. For quality of life, promotion/universal prevention interventions were effective at 7 to 24 months follow‐up, while selective and indicated prevention interventions had a beneficial effect at the study endpoint, that in the selective prevention interventions was maintained at 1 to 6 months. In respect to adverse events, the outcome was poorly reported and no inference could be drawn. With regard to secondary outcomes, we found a small‐to‐moderate effect of interventions in reducing psychological symptoms. Functioning was assessed only in indicated prevention studies without detecting any significant difference at any time point. For social outcomes, promotion/universal prevention and selective interventions were more effective than controls at the study endpoint, and the positive effect was maintained at 7 to 24 months for selective prevention interventions. Indicated prevention interventions did not provide any beneficial effect for this outcome.
In children, only studies on indicated prevention interventions provided data on the diagnosis of mental disorders and failed to identify a beneficial effect of prevention interventions over controls. For the quality of life outcome, promotion/universal prevention interventions significantly improved this outcome at the study endpoint, while selective and indicated prevention studies failed to show a beneficial effect. The outcome of adverse events was reported only in one study in the promotion/universal prevention category without showing any difference against the control condition.
With regard to secondary outcomes, we found that promotion/universal prevention interventions improved functioning at 7 to 24 months, while indicated prevention interventions had a moderate effect in improving functioning and impairment at the study endpoint. Promotion/universal prevention interventions were more effective than controls in improving symptoms of depression and anxiety at the study endpoint, and in improving anxiety and distress at follow‐up (7 to 24 months and 1 to 6 months, respectively). Selective prevention interventions provided a beneficial effect on distress symptoms at the study endpoint. Indicated prevention interventions were more effective than controls in improving depressive symptoms at the study endpoint and at 7 to 24 months while, for anxiety and distress, we failed to identify a significant effect. For social outcomes, promotion/universal prevention interventions were significantly more effective than controls at 7 to 24 months, while indicated prevention was more effective at 1 to 6 months.
Though we could not do subgroup analyses per health worker group, those represented were community and social workers, teachers, nurses, lay counsellors, and facilitators receiving specific training for intervention delivery. This task‐shifting approach allows a broader scope of interventions in primary care when specialists are unavailable, and this review confirms that intervention delivery through PWs may improve many relevant clinical outcomes, as already highlighted in previous systematic reviews on treatment interventions ( ; ).
Overall, these findings indicate the benefit of specific types of prevention interventions for reducing the likelihood of being diagnosed with any mental disorders, and improving the quality of life for adults living in LMICs, but show a lack of effect for specific types of prevention interventions and over longer follow‐up. This lack of effect could be related to different factors. Firstly, to the characteristics of interventions, which were sometimes short in duration and focused not only on mental health but also on other areas (e.g. home‐care practices and health‐seeking behaviours). Secondly, to the social determinants of mental health, like exposure to ongoing and chronic adversities that participants had to manage in low‐resource settings, exposure to traumatic events, and unsecured food, water, and housing ( ). Available data failed to show a strong and beneficial effect in reducing the likelihood of being diagnosed with any mental disorders or improving the quality of life. There were only a few included studies reporting on this outcome, i.e. diagnosis of mental disorders, as the majority of promotion/universal and selective prevention interventions focused on the reduction of symptoms. Additionally and as expected, we identified heterogeneity in outcome measure tools and population groups. An in‐depth mediation analysis would help to shed light on the mechanisms of action of interventions, and the complementary appraisal of moderators would contribute to optimizing the delivery modality, and would allow matching participants with the most appropriate interventions ( ; ).
Based on the review results, we identified a significant gap in the scientific literature on intervention for promoting mental health or preventing mental health conditions, and also a lack of tailored task‐shifted interventions for specific conditions with proven efficacy in treatment settings. Future research trajectories might include the design and implementation of RCTs with a clear prevention design, i.e. aimed at reducing the incidence of mental disorders as a primary outcome. Only a minority of the trials included in this review were primarily designed with this goal. Finally, data suggest that research on children should be expanded as, in comparison with adults, little evidence was available to draw firm conclusions on this population.

## Overall completeness and applicability of evidence
Interventions were categorized according to the characteristics of their target population group following a public mental health approach ( ; ). Promotion and universal prevention interventions were categorized under the same label, as it was often complex to distinguish multi‐component interventions aimed at strengthening well‐being and improving mental health, which fall into the promotion category ( ; ; ), and interventions to universally prevent mental health conditions ( ; ; ; ). For example, promotion/universal prevention included social skills programmes for all the students attending selected grades, interventions for building self‐esteem, keeping calm, thinking resourcefully, identifying and accessing support networks, considering the perspective of others, and keeping the peace ( ; ). Examples of selective prevention interventions included psychosocial structured activities delivered in school settings and designed for trauma recovery, interventions with physical exercises, facilitation of self‐efficacy and decision‐making skills, problem‐solving, and maintaining a balanced lifestyle. Indicated prevention interventions, delivered to those already showing some signs of disorders (i.e. psychological symptoms below cut‐offs of rating scales) without meeting the criteria for a psychiatric diagnosis ( ), included counselling based on the principles of cognitive‐behavioural therapy, mindfulness, and yoga‐inspired techniques. Some of the indicated prevention interventions included in this review belong to the range of scalable psychological interventions developed by the WHO for use in settings affected by adversity ( ; ). Amongst these, we find the WHO Self‐Help Plus intervention, a short strategy based on Acceptance and Commitment Therapy that was tested in a large sample of adult refugees resettled in Turkey ( ; ). Overall, all analyzed interventions aimed at enhancing protective factors (e.g. increased social skills, coping strategies to manage stress, and problem‐solving ability; building social connectedness and community relationships; and encouraging family support and positive community network) for the prevention of mental health disorders. This is in line with the promotion and prevention component of the WHO community‐based rehabilitation guidelines ( ). Almost all included interventions adopted a community‐based approach, were implemented in the life context of the participants, and were undertaken together with a significant person for the participant (i.e. caregiver, parent, partner). This explains the increased number of interventions addressing the everyday social impacts on mental health in LMICs, considering the interaction between the local social environment and psychosocial well‐being. In line with this, the majority of interventions assessed in the included RCTs were designed and delivered for preventing common mental health conditions, like depression, PTSD, and anxiety, which are the most prevalent conditions in low‐resource settings affected by humanitarian crises ( ).
Within low‐resource settings, the task‐shifting approach has been developed and implemented for improving the efficacy and effectiveness of mental health services, starting with extending their accessibility ( ; ). The intervention gap between people in need of mental health interventions and those who actually access services is constantly increasing, thus requiring the adoption of innovative strategies, such as task‐shifting ( ; ; ). In line with this consideration, a recent systematic review with individual patient data meta‐analysis focused on psychological interventions in low‐ and middle‐income countries, and found an association between the task‐shifting approach and an increased reduction in the severity of depressive symptoms ( ).
The ways in which the organization of society, social interactions, and relationships affect the risk of, and protection from, mental disorders is called 'social domain'. There is widespread global evidence that mental disorders in populations are strongly socially determined, and our findings suggest a growth focus on the 'social domain' as a crucial social determinant of mental health, as reported in the UN Sustainable Development Goals ( ; ; ).
The included studies employed different types of primary workers, in line with the scientific literature on psychological and social interventions ( ; ). Some workers were existing cadres within the health sector (i.e. nurses, midwives), while others were additionally trained resources. Resources included for example teachers, peer mentors, lay counsellors, peer educators, social workers, field workers, and caregivers. Primary workers received short training before the intervention delivery and, in most cases, received supervision during the course of the study. The training was usually manualized and focused strictly on the intervention's content and delivery. While many studies presented this basic description of training and supervision procedures, many failed to report detailed information on these aspects. Nevertheless, it would be of great value for authors of RCTs to provide detailed descriptions of training contents and duration, to improve readers' understanding of the interventions ( ).
Regarding the control conditions, we found that the waiting list, no treatment, and treatment‐as‐usual were the most reported comparators, despite the methodological recommendation of using active psychological control groups in psychotherapy research ( ). The use of 'inactive' controls does not allow establishing whether any significant difference is related to some specific treatment ingredients, introduced by the experimental procedure, or to nonspecific factors, such as attention and opportunity for disclosure ( ; ; ). Regardless, inactive controls remain widely used ( ; ). As a consequence, we were not able to compare active prevention interventions against each other, although this would be vital to increase our understanding of the mechanism of action of prevention interventions ( ; ).
Data on children and adolescents were not available for some important outcomes or were not available at medium‐ and long‐term follow‐up. This paucity of research on children and adolescents is in line with what was highlighted in the WHO 2020 guidelines on mental health promotive and preventive interventions for adolescents, which indicated a crucial need for research on the topic, especially in low‐resource or high‐adversity settings ( ).
Promotion and prevention interventions were delivered in variable conditions of cultural contexts, which were not accounted for in our analyses. Factors that can facilitate or impede the implementation of mental health interventions vary across contexts and cultures and examination prior to, during, and after the process of implementation is relevant ( ).
Finally, we were not able to perform all the planned subgroup and sensitivity analyses. This was due to the low number of studies available for each type of prevention intervention.

## Quality of the evidence
Even though the RCT is the design of choice for evaluating the efficacy and acceptability of healthcare interventions ( ; ), the level of evidence generated by our review is poor as evaluated with the Cochrane risk of bias tool 2. This is consistent with our grading within the summary of findings tables (from very low to moderate) ( ; ; ; ; ; ).
This review included 113 trials, all of which were randomized and covered a wide range of interventions and settings. For studies included in the meta‐analyses, evidence for most outcomes was of low‐ to moderate‐certainty. The most often identified biases across studies in both children and adolescents and adults were risk of bias due to deviations from the intended interventions (effect of assignment to intervention and effect of adhering to intervention). This is due to the fact that participants randomized to psychological interventions typically know whether they have been randomized to the active intervention or to the control group, and the same is true for people delivering the interventions ( ). These biases are likely to be especially large in studies with waiting lists or treatment‐as‐usual controls ( ; ). Other identified biases were related to the risk of bias due to missing outcome data, and the risk of bias in the selection of the reported results, which has been associated with the risk of inflation of effect sizes, contributing to the current uncertainties in assessing the outcomes of psychological interventions ( ). On the contrary, the domain related to the randomization process was evaluated as being at low risk of bias in the majority of studies on adults, and in all the studies focused on children and adolescents.
For the adult population, only four studies had an overall low risk of bias. The remaining studies had a high risk of bias or some concerns. Although the number of trials available on the child and adolescent population was smaller, the risk of bias identified was consistent with RCTs for adults.
Additional possible sources of bias not included in the risk of bias assessment were those specifically related to the topic of this review: socio‐cultural differences in relation to psychological suffering across countries; transposition of mental health concepts from western to non‐western cultures ( ), with very different understandings and ways of dealing with psychological distress; and social norms and ways of discussing distress with strangers ( ). Moreover, researchers did not always report details on language and nationality, social/economic class, education, geography, age, and background of the people delivering the interventions. These characteristics might have an influence on the establishment of relationships and trust, and thus on some study outcomes. Finally, even though we did not explore the risk of bias related to research allegiance, that is a specific intellectual conflict of interest that is consistent with one’s professional or personal commitment to one type of intervention and may consequently distort the outcomes ( ), the use of the task‐shifting approach in which those people delivering the interventions were not involved in its development should lower the probability of this risk.

## Potential biases in the review process
Although we tried to include any primary level and community worker categories, it is possible that some studies have been missed. Moreover, although it is unlikely that RCTs would be conducted and would not be publicly accessible, not all those conducting research may necessarily value academic publications, so work may be disseminated through other channels. In addition, primary level and community workers do not have standard widely accepted definitions yet, so some readers may disagree with the definitions that we used or with how this review has aggregated interventionists.
In addition, when we were unable to collect data on our primary outcome, in some cases, we used the number of participants with symptom levels below cut‐offs as a proxy of the cases diagnosed with formal diagnostic instruments, such as the MINI Neuropsychiatric Interview ( ). In the present review, we included interventions with broadly similar aims and methods in countries with similar incomes. However, the diversity of prevention approaches and the different sociocultural and healthcare system contexts in which these interventions were delivered might explain the identified heterogeneity in results for some outcomes.
In general, only a small proportion of RCTs focused on children and adolescents, even though it is known that psychological suffering and exposure to traumatic events during childhood and adolescence can negatively impact future achievements (also at academic and work levels) and raise serious risks for health, such as substance abuse, psychological symptoms and suicidal ideation ( ; ). A Lancet Commission on Adolescent Health and Well‐being suggested investing in child mental health in light of triple dividends of benefits: now, into future adult life, and for the next generation of children ( ).

## Agreements and disagreements with other studies or reviews
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first systematic review assessing the effects of prevention interventions delivered through a task‐shifting approach for reducing the frequency of mental disorders and improving psychological outcomes.
Our findings indicated that there is a scarcity of evidence on child and adolescent populations compared to adults, and are consistent with those of a Cochrane Review on prevention interventions in LMICs affected by humanitarian crises that collected seven trials with 2398 participants ( ). The review of Papola and colleagues is the only review we are aware of with a primary outcome on the incidence of mental disorders. This work did not identify any RCT providing data on this outcome at any time point. In relation to the improvement of psychological symptoms in adults, our findings align with those of a Cochrane Review of psychological therapies in humanitarian settings in LMICs ( ), and with a systematic review carried out by Tol and colleagues in 2011 ( ), which identified substantial beneficial effects of psychological interventions versus control conditions for adults with symptoms of PTSD. Our results of a positive effect of preventive psychological interventions in reducing depressive symptoms in adults are in line with the results of a systematic review and Individual Participant Data (IPD) meta‐analysis collecting 13 RCTs with IPD from 11 RCTs with 4145 participants. Included interventions were CBT, behavioural activation, problem‐solving therapy, and supportive therapy, and all of them were delivered using a task‐shifting approach ( ). Authors found that task‐shared psychological interventions were associated with a larger reduction in depressive symptom severity and a greater chance of response and remission than control measures, confirming the results of other reviews conducted in LMIC settings ( ; ).
For children and adolescents, the review by Tol and colleagues detected a non‐substantial trend in favour of interventions versus control conditions for PTSD symptoms, along with a substantial effect for internalizing symptoms. A systematic review with IPD meta‐analysis collected data on 3143 children from 11 trials in humanitarian settings in LMICs. This review collected evidence‐based psychotherapeutic interventions within the focused psychosocial support layer of the IASC pyramid ( ). These interventions involved techniques inspired by psychotherapeutic approaches such as cognitive‐behavioural therapy, but not following complete standard treatment protocols, and the inclusion of additional techniques aimed at establishing strengths, such as creative expressive techniques (e.g. drama, dance, music, art, and games), social support‐building activities (e.g. cooperative games, trust‐focused activities, sharing difficulties, and coping methods), or mind–body‐oriented skills (e.g. meditation and breathing exercises). Authors identified a beneficial effect of interventions in reducing PTSD symptoms and functional impairment, and in increasing hope, coping, and social support ( ).
Our results on secondary outcomes align also with those of a systematic review on the effectiveness of mental health promotion interventions for young people in LMICs, which collected 22 studies (RCTs and quasi‐randomized studies) on 20 school‐based and community interventions ( ). The review found significant positive effects on students’ emotional and behavioural well‐being, including reduced depression and anxiety and improved coping skills ( ). Taking into account primary‐level worker interventions for people with mental disorders and distress in LMICs, found a difference in the effectiveness of interventions between adult and child populations. As a matter of fact, for adult populations (adults with depression and anxiety, women with depression related to pregnancy and childbirth, and adults in humanitarian settings with post‐traumatic stress or depression and anxiety), treatments from lay health workers may reduce symptoms of depression, whereas, for children in humanitarian settings with post‐traumatic stress or depression and anxiety, LHW‐led interventions may have little to no effect on post‐traumatic stress and depressive symptoms.

## Authors' conclusions

## Implications for practice
Very low‐ to high‐certainty evidence suggests the effectiveness of prevention psychological interventions delivered through a task‐shifting approach across a range of psychological outcomes for people living in LMICs. Prevention interventions were effective in reducing psychological symptoms and improving the quality of life in adults, with a large effect of the interventions. The concept of task‐shifting is highly relevant for improving access to prevention interventions in underserved areas, and several factors could be considered in implementing this approach. Challenges in implementation might be related to psychological distress amongst the workforce delivering the interventions, and acceptance of the added workforce by other healthcare staff ( ). For this reason, the use of task‐shifting should be complemented by a systematic assessment of the available workforce in diverse settings and its interest and capacity to learn and/or assume relevant tasks. In the present review, we identified a variety of effective task‐sharing strategies employing different workers like teachers, nurses, community workers, and peers. This allows for potentially broad and efficient use of health human resources, especially as health systems worldwide struggle to maintain essential services and particularly while responding to the COVID‐19 pandemic.
Evidence‐based guidelines may facilitate the implementation of promotion and prevention programmes delivered in LMICs through a task‐shifting approach. Guidelines may be developed also considering the needs of specific categories of populations, such as carers of people with Alzheimer's, pregnant women, diabetes‐2 patients, and school students.

## Implications for research
Results from this systematic review show that prevention interventions are effective in decreasing the diagnoses of mental disorders and improving psychological symptoms, functioning, quality of life, and social outcomes in adult and child populations. We found a beneficial effect with a large effect size for some clinically relevant outcomes, such as the decrease in psychological symptoms and quality of life improvement. For children, there was a paucity of evidence for many outcomes. This review revealed a gap in the knowledge base in the longer term and in the child and adolescent population. Future trials should be randomized, should be specifically designed according to a preventative aim (i.e. incidence), using socioculturally appropriate and validated instruments to measure outcomes. Moreover, the following issues should be carefully considered when planning the prevention research agenda in global mental health.
To develop a core outcome set for RCTs investigating prevention and promotion interventions implemented through a task‐shifting approach in LMICs, in order to facilitate the collection of the same important outcomes across studies. The choice of outcome measures should be pragmatic, and meaningful for LMIC settings, with implementation and process outcomes specific to the task‐shifting approach. Moreover, the consensus process should involve LMIC stakeholders to guarantee that the priorities for interventions amongst patients, families, healthcare professionals, and paraprofessionals are appropriately considered ( ).
To identify specific outcome measures that are related to the prevention of mental disorders and promotion of well‐being, overcoming a medicalizing approach to mental health, in which 'mental health' is seen as synonymous with 'mental disorder' ( ).
To identify critical areas where there is a gap in research, for example, interventions for children and adolescents. This would imply the implementation of interventions across different age ranges using RCT designs.
To perform individual participant data component network meta‐analyses, in order 1) to compare active intervention strategies to each other; 2) to disentangle the efficacy of various intervention components (including delivery format, contents, and techniques), 3) and to understand how interventions work based on their specific ingredients. This methodology has already been used in mental health research ( ; ; ), and its application in the field of prevention interventions in global mental health would contribute to closing a significant research gap on the mechanism of action of psychosocial interventions.
To perform the cost‐effectiveness analyses of interventions while conducting RCTs.

## History
Protocol first published: Issue 3, 2021

## Notes
This review is based on standard text and guidance provided by Cochrane Effective Practice and Organisation of Care (EPOC).

## Risk of bias
 

## Acknowledgements
The Norwegian Satellite of Cochrane Effective Practice and Organisation of Care supported the authors in developing this review. The following people conducted the editorial process for this article:
Sign‐off Editor (final editorial decision): Simon Lewin, Norwegian University of Science and Technology;
Contact Editor (provided comments/methods review): Susan Munabi‐Babigumira, Norwegian Institute of Public Health;
Managing Editor (selected peer reviewers, collated peer‐reviewer comments, provided editorial guidance to authors, edited the article): Elizabeth Paulsen, Norwegian Institute of Public Health;
Information Specialist (provided support in designing, running and reporting the searches): Marit Johansen, Norwegian Institute of Public Health;
Copy Editor (copy editing and production): Anne Lethaby, Central Production Service; Christina Baswell, J&J Editorial; and Margaret Silvers, Copy Editor, J&J Editorial;
Peer‐reviewers (provided comments and recommended an editorial decision): Andrew Hutchings, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine (statistical review); Ingunn Marie Stadskleiv Engebretsen, University of Bergen (clinical/content review); Gloria Pedersen, Department of Psychiatry, Division of Global Mental Health, The George Washington University (clinical/content review); and Arvin Bhana, Centre for Rural Health, College of Health Sciences, UKZN University of KwaZulu‐Natal (clinical/content review).

We acknowledge the contribution of review authors to the complementary treatment review (Weng Chin, Yen Chian Lim, Rakesh Singh, Hakan Foss, Ambika Thapa‐Pachya, Ujala Shahmalak, Sarah McMullen, Antonio Rojas‐Garcia, Ussif Mohammed Al‐Amin).
We also acknowledge all the researchers and authors whom we consulted to ensure the eligibility of their studies in this review. The following authors provided their written consent to be acknowledged: Hull DM, Skar AMS, Duru Asiret G, Devries K, Rotheram‐Borus MJ, Fabbri C, Lachman JM, Hinton L, Walker SP, Mc Conachie H, Yusoff MSB, Barnes R, Krutikova S, Ansai JH, Khuzwayo N, Hartmann M, Diedrichs P.

## Appendices

## Appendix 1. Search strategies
 
CINAHL (Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature) 1980 to date searched, EBSCO (searched 29 November 2021)
 

## Appendix 2. References to studies for the classification of PWs according to comparisons
Appendix. References to studies for the classification of PWs according to comparisons

## Comparison 1. Lay health worker or community worker‐led universal prevention or promotion interventions for adults (n = 11 studies)
 

## Comparison 2. Lay health worker or community worker‐led selective prevention interventions for adults (n = 20 studies)
 
*For one study ( ), it was not specified (NA)

## Comparison 3. Lay health worker or community worker‐led indicated prevention interventions for adults (n = 42 studies)
 
*For one study (Chang 2015), intervention was delivered by both types of PWs.

## Comparison 4. Lay health worker or community worker‐led universal prevention or promotion interventions for children (n = 8 studies)
 
*For one study ( ), the intervention was delivered by both types of PWs.

## Comparison 5. Lay health worker or community worker‐led selective prevention interventions for children (n = 7 studies)
 

## Comparison 6. Lay health worker or community worker‐led indicated prevention interventions for children (n = 9 studies)
 
*For one study ( ), it was not specified (NA).
CW: community worker PHW: primary‐level health worker PW: primary‐level worker

## Data and analyses
 

## Characteristics of studies

## Characteristics of included studies [ordered by study ID]
 

## Characteristics of excluded studies [ordered by study ID]
 

## Characteristics of studies awaiting classification [ordered by study ID]
 

## Characteristics of ongoing studies [ordered by study ID]
 

## Differences between protocol and review
In the protocol phase, we planned to include interventions for preventing substance misuse and neuropsychiatric conditions, but we ultimately did not include these conditions as most RCTs failed to collect outcomes related to mental health. Moreover, it was difficult to distinguish prevention and treatment interventions due to extremely high heterogeneity with the consequent risk of misclassification.
Promotion interventions and universal prevention interventions were merged as a unique category in the meta‐analyses given the overlap of interventions' ingredients, potential mechanism of action, and target population groups. In the analyses of dichotomous data, available case analysis was used in place of imputing negative outcomes for missing dichotomous outcomes because all the outcomes measures were negative. This is a conservative approach as this way we increase the resulting percentage of participants with a negative outcome, therefore diluting the estimation of the outcome and the beneficial effect of the intervention.

## Contributions of authors
Conceiving the review: MP, CB, WT, NvG.
Designing the review: MP, CB.
Co‐ordinating the review: MP, CB.
Designing search strategies: MJ, MP, NvG.
Writing the review: MP, CB, WT, EP, CCad, CL, MJ, NvG, JA, RC, DP, EU, CC, EP, LA, FA.
Providing general advice on the protocol: CB, CL, FA, MJ, WT.
Securing funding for the review: CB.
Performing previous work that was the foundation of the current study: MP, CB, EP, WT, CL, MJ, DP, NvG, JA, RC.

## Sources of support

## Internal sources
University of Verona, Italy
N/A

## External sources
None, Other
N/A

## Declarations of interest
Conflicts of interest: MP, EP, CC, CCad, JA, FA, LA, RC, MJ, CL, DP, EU, NvG, WT, CB: none known.
Financial conflicts of interest: MP, EP, CC, CCad, JA, FA, LA, RC, MJ, CL, DP, EU, NvG, WT, CB: none known.
Review authors involved in the conduct, analysis, and publication of a study that could be included in the review were not involved in study eligibility decisions, data extraction, risk of bias or GRADE assessments for that study.