pmcPLOS Glob Public HealthPLOS Glob Public Health4390plosgph9918283779606676plosPLOS Global Public Health2767-3375PLOSPMC12626289PMC12626289.112626289126262894125238110.1371/journal.pgph.0005467PGPH-D-25-008191Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesInfectious Disease ControlVaccinesPeople and PlacesGeographical LocationsOceaniaTongaBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationMedicine and Health SciencesPublic and Occupational HealthPreventive MedicineVaccination and ImmunizationBiology and life sciencesOrganismsVirusesDNA virusesPapillomavirusesHuman PapillomavirusBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyMedical MicrobiologyMicrobial PathogensViral PathogensPapillomavirusesHuman PapillomavirusMedicine and Health SciencesPathology and Laboratory MedicinePathogensMicrobial PathogensViral PathogensPapillomavirusesHuman PapillomavirusBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsVirusesViral PathogensPapillomavirusesHuman PapillomavirusResearch and Analysis MethodsResearch DesignSurvey ResearchSurveysBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationVaccine DevelopmentMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationVaccine DevelopmentMedicine and Health SciencesPublic and Occupational HealthPreventive MedicineVaccination and ImmunizationVaccine DevelopmentComputer and Information SciencesSoftware EngineeringComputer SoftwareEngineering and TechnologySoftware EngineeringComputer SoftwareSocial SciencesSociologyEducationWorkshopsRE-AIM evaluation of a community-based vaccine education and communication program to improve human papillomavirus vaccine uptake in Tonga
Evaluating a vaccine education and communication program in Tongahttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-7406-8639MohamedYasminConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationValidationVisualizationWriting – original draft https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9710-6113OvermarsIsabellaConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisMethodologyProject administrationValidationVisualizationWriting – review & editing TukiaOfakiokalaniConceptualizationMethodologyResourcesSupervisionWriting – review & editing LueyEmmaFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesValidationWriting – review & editing Toluta’u‘AsinateFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationValidationWriting – review & editing LomuMeleaneFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationWriting – review & editing VodonaivaluLuisaConceptualizationInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationWriting – review & editing TeiAfuMethodologyResourcesWriting – review & editing ‘OfanoaReynoldConceptualizationMethodologySupervisionValidationWriting – review & editing Kata‘UngateaFormal analysisMethodologyResourcesSupervisionValidationWriting – review & editing LeaskJulieConceptualizationFunding acquisitionResourcesSupervisionWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1877-5395SealeHollyConceptualizationFunding acquisitionMethodologySupervisionWriting – review & editing JenkinsKylieConceptualizationMethodologySupervisionWriting – review & editing JoshiKshitijMethodologyResourcesSupervisionWriting – review & editing DattHaliteshConceptualizationMethodologyResourcesWriting – review & editing SaganSonyaConceptualizationMethodologyResourcesWriting – review & editing DynesMichelleMethodologyResourcesVisualizationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5139-4183KaufmanJessicaConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionMethodologySupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – review & editing DanchinMargieConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionMethodologySupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – review & editing 1
Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia2
Department of Paediatrics, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia3
Tonga Ministry of Health, Nuku’alofa, Tonga4
Tupou Tertiary Institute, Nuku’alofa, Tonga5
School of Public Health, The University of Sydney, Camperdown, New South Wales, Australia6
School of Population Health, The University of New South Wales, Kensington, New South Wales, Australia7
UNICEF Pacific, Suva, Fiji8
UNICEF East Asia and Pacific, Bangkok, Thailand9
The Royal Children’s Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, AustraliaRobinsonJuliaEditor ]. There is a global drive to eliminate cervical cancer through vaccination against the human papillomavirus (HPV), cervical screening, and treatment [ ]. All currently available HPV vaccines are highly effective against the two virus types causing over 70% of cervical cancer cases, and additionally protect against many other forms of cancer [ ]. A single dose schedule has been shown to be effective [ ], yet globally only 27% of eligible girls are vaccinated against HPV [ ]. Unlike early childhood vaccines, the HPV vaccine is generally delivered to adolescents in schools, which can present logistical challenges. Persistent vaccine concerns and misinformation also affect acceptance [ ].
The Kingdom of Tonga is an upper-middle income Pacific Island Country [ ] comprising 176 islands [ ]. Most of the population of 100,000 live on Tongatapu Island [ , ]. Full immunisation coverage for children aged 12–23 months is 93.5% [ ], and there are high levels of trust and confidence in the childhood vaccination program [ ]. In November 2022, Tonga introduced the bivalent HPV vaccine [ ]. A free one-dose schedule is integrated into the national immunisation schedule for 10-year-old girls and available for girls aged 11–14 years through a catch-up campaign. Prior to vaccine introduction, a survey of caregivers in Tonga indicated that only 37% had heard of the HPV vaccine [ ]. After learning about it through the survey, 92% stated they intended to vaccinate their child against HPV [ ], but by February 2023 the Ministry of Health estimated that only 20% of eligible girls had received the vaccine [ ], leading them to seek strategies to bridge the intention-uptake gap.
While most caregivers in Tonga get information about vaccines from health workers, over one third (35%) report friends, family, and neighbours as their main source of information [ ]. Engaging trusted members of the community, including those outside the health sector, can increase vaccine confidence and trust and improve vaccine uptake [ ]. Interventions that engage communities to build knowledge and trust in vaccines have been used globally to increase uptake of routine childhood and adult COVID-19 vaccines [ , ], and community leaders have an important role in communication activities around HPV vaccine implementation [ ]. A recent systematic review of behavioural interventions to increase vaccination rates found that engaging vaccine champions to encourage vaccination was an effective strategy, provided they received adequate training and support [ ]. Systematic reviews also support the use of multi-level interventions to increase HPV vaccine uptake [ ].
This study aimed to evaluate the implementation and impact of the Vaccine Champions program, a comprehensive vaccine education and communication skills training program for diverse community advocates to improve acceptance and uptake of the HPV vaccine in Tonga. The program targets multiple drivers of vaccine uptake by improving knowledge, addressing community concerns and misinformation, capitalising on social norms, and reminding people about vaccination [ , ]. We used the RE-AIM framework to measure and describe reach, effectiveness, adoption, implementation, and maintenance [ ].

## Methods
This paper presents the results of a mixed methods evaluation of the Vaccine Champions program, focusing on how each phase of the program was implemented and its outcomes. The next section provides an overview of the three phases of the program itself, then moves on to details of the evaluation methods.

## Program overview
The Vaccine Champions program is a community engagement approach that trains healthcare workers and community leaders to become effective vaccine advocates, providing them with the knowledge, communication skills, and required resources to run vaccine information sessions in their communities [ , ]. The three program phases are outlined in . It was initially developed in Australia to facilitate COVID-19 vaccine uptake [ ], and has since been implemented and evaluated in Fiji [ ] and Viet Nam with a focus on COVID-19 and routine childhood vaccines. In 2023 in partnership with the Tonga Ministry of Health, UNICEF Pacific, and the Tupou Tertiary Institute, we adapted, implemented, and evaluated the program in Tonga. This was the first time the program had focused on the HPV vaccine.
 Phase 1 was a half-day co-design workshop to adapt the program for Tonga. The Ministry of Health invited representatives from government, non-government organisations, and community groups. An overview of routine childhood and HPV vaccine coverage rates in Tonga was followed by an activity identifying and mapping barriers and drivers of HPV vaccine uptake using the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Behavioural and Social Drivers of vaccination (BeSD) framework [ ]. Participants then voted on program features using dot voting to prioritise from a range of options. The core components of the program were predetermined, however the features decided at the co-design workshop included vaccine focus, who should be a Vaccine Champion, how to incentivise Champions, and length of Champions’ training. The study team or Ministry of Health invited individuals or organisations to attend the Vaccine Champions training.
Phase 2 was a two-day training workshop in Tongatapu to train Vaccine Champions, delivered in English with local staff from Tupou Tertiary Institute and the Ministry of Health translating as required. Training materials were available in Tongan and English and were provided online for a participant with a visual impairment to process with appropriate software. Training topics included the HPV vaccine, routine childhood vaccines, vaccine communication skills including conversations with vaccine hesitant people, addressing misinformation, and practical tips on hosting community information sessions. Champions practiced communication skills through structured role plays [ , ]. They were given some suggestions for what to cover in a community information session and were encouraged to use their vaccine knowledge and communication skills to share information about the HPV vaccine with their community in any way that worked for them. To support their community information sessions, Champions received Tongan language materials including copies of the training presentations, an activity workbook, a guide on running a community session, and a program t-shirt.
In Phase 3, Vaccine Champions were asked to run up to three vaccine information sessions. Champions were encouraged to tailor the sessions, which could include speaking at an existing gathering; organising a specific meeting to talk about vaccines; or opportunistically discussing vaccination with individuals. The community members who attended a Vaccine Champion’s information session were included as “community attendees” in the program evaluation. The Tongan research team regularly contacted Champions by phone or Facebook Messenger to encourage them to run sessions, answer questions, and provide logistical support. Champions received a phone card for 20 Tongan Pa’anga (around USD$8.50) for each session they ran.

## Evaluation design
We evaluated program implementation and impact using the RE-AIM framework, assessing intervention reach, effectiveness, adoption, implementation, and maintenance [ , ]. This framework is commonly used to evaluate public health and behaviour change interventions [ ]. It enables understanding of individual and community-level outcomes, as well as exploring how and why the intervention works [ ]. The RE-AIM domains measured for each program phase are outlined in .
 

## Participants and data collection
We evaluated the three program phases using qualitative and quantitative methods ( ). Study participants were co-design participants (Phase 1), Vaccine Champions (Phase 2), and community members attending Champions’ sessions (Phase 3). Recruitment started at the co-design on 28 March 2023 and finished on 31 December 2023.

## Phase 1: Co-design participants
Co-design participants were invited to complete a survey in English immediately after participating in the co-design workshop. Interviews with co-design participants involved in program implementation were conducted in English by the first author.

## Phase 2: Vaccine Champions
Vaccine Champions completed surveys before and immediately after training, measuring knowledge, vaccine confidence and trust, and communication self-efficacy, as in our Fiji program evaluation [ ]. Knowledge questions were developed by the research team. Vaccine confidence and trust were measured through seven items adapted from the WHO tools for understanding the behavioural and social drivers of vaccination [ ]. We measured communication self-efficacy with four questions adapted from Bandura’s self-efficacy scale [ ].
Vaccine Champions completed a reflection form after each community session, capturing their experiences and personal reflections, and recording the number (collected as a range in increments of five) and type of community members invited to and attending the session. Champions measured attendees’ intention to get the HPV vaccine for their daughters with a show of hands before and after each session. All data collection forms for Champions were available in Tongan and interviews were conducted by the local research team in Tongan or English.

## Phase 3: Community attendees
Community attendees (people attending a vaccine information session run by a Vaccine Champion) completed a short paper survey in Tongan post-session, collecting demographic details and satisfaction. Self-reported changes in vaccine confidence and trust were measured with four questions adapted from the WHO BeSD tools [ ], using a 3-point scale from “less than before” to “more than before”. Community attendees were also asked if they would like to take part in an interview. If they did, they had the option of adding their contact details to the Champions’ reflection form and were later contacted and invited to take part in a qualitative interview in Tongan, conducted by Tongan members of the research team.
Qualitative question guides for all interviews were adapted from the WHO BeSD tools [ ] and drew on Ripple Effect Mapping methods, a participatory approach for evaluating complex community-based programs [ ].
Survey and interview data from co-design participants were collected in English by the first author. Data collection with Vaccine Champions and community attendees was conducted by Tongan members of the research team in Tongan or English.

## Sampling
All co-design participants, Vaccine Champions, and community attendees were invited to complete surveys. A purposive sample of community attendees were invited to be interviewed. All Champions and a purposive sample of co-design participants involved in program implementation were invited to take part in an interview at the program’s end.

## Ethical approval
Ethical approval was obtained from the Royal Children’s Hospital Human Research Ethics Committee (HREC: 84863), and the Tonga National Health Ethics and Research Committee (MH 53:02). All participants provided written consent (for co-design participants and Vaccine Champions), verbal informed consent (for community attendee interviews), or implied consent (for community attendee surveys). Community surveys were anonymous, optional and did not collect any identifying data; surveys had a Participant Information Statement and completion of the survey was considered as consent to participate. In the case of verbal consent, the local research team provided community attendees with information outlining what the study was about, how their responses would be kept confidential, and what the data would be used for. All consent processes were finalised in collaboration with our local research partners and the Ministry of Health and approved by the ethics committees in Tonga and Australia.

## Data analysis
Quantitative categorical responses are presented as numbers and percentages at each timepoint. Knowledge is reported as the percentage of participants who correctly identified misinformation about vaccines, recommended the correct communication techniques, and correct information on childhood vaccines. Trust and confidence in vaccines is reported as the percentage of participants responding “very much”, and communication self-efficacy as those who responded “very confident”. McNemar’s chi-squared test was done on the pre-post responses, with responses collapsed to binary variables. Training satisfaction is reported as those responding “very satisfied”. The number of community attendees at each session was completed as a range; the mean of the upper and lower estimates was used to estimate the average, range, and total number of attendees. We used STATA statistical software version 18.0 for analysis.
Qualitative data were collected to supplement the quantitative findings and provide additional in-depth insights [ ]. Qualitative data (transcripts, reflection forms and field notes) were transcribed and translated where necessary, then analysed by the first author with NVivo version 12, using a deductive content approach [ ]. The research team discussed and agreed upon the coding framework for analysis, then mapped the codes to the different dimensions of the RE-AIM framework. Here we present quotes that are illustrative of common perspectives from across the qualitative findings as well as individual divergent perspectives.

## Patient and public involvement
Community members were involved in the design and the delivery of the intervention. Members of local community groups attended the co-design workshop to discuss and identify key barriers and facilitators to immunisation and to inform the design of the intervention. Trusted community members who are leaders in their communities were involved in the delivery of the intervention as trained Vaccine Champions.

## Results
 provides an overview of evaluation participants at all levels. Findings are detailed below.
 

## Co-design workshop
The results of the voting by co-design participants were a program focused on the HPV vaccine; a two-day training workshop for Vaccine Champions; a more diverse range of Champions with smaller numbers in each group; and most Champions to come from the main island of Tongatapu.

## Reach
Twenty-nine of 37 invited stakeholders (78%) attended the co-design workshop in March 2023 with most being female (26/29; 90%). Stakeholders included representatives from the Ministries of Health, Education and Training, and Internal Affairs; UNICEF; Tonga Red Cross; health workers; university and tertiary institute staff; and representatives from faith organisations, sporting groups, a women’s empowerment organisation, and the national youth congress. Those who did not attend included representatives from non-government disability organisations, family health organisations, and the rugby association.

## Effectiveness
After the workshop, 21/29 (72%) participants completed a short evaluation survey. Most surveyed (18/21; 86%) were satisfied with the workshop; everyone understood the purpose of the day and felt they were able to share their perspectives. Feedback on the session from surveys and interviews was generally positive: “It was really very interactive, and even [had] new ways of how to get the key stakeholders engaged.” (Key informant 2)
While most co-design participants were satisfied with the length, two survey participants felt the session could have been longer, to include more small group discussions. In an end of program interview, one co-design participant from the Ministry of Health felt it would have been beneficial to have the most senior staff from the Ministry attend the entire workshop to maximise high-level program support. Another interviewee thought there was good representation from health and non-health stakeholders.
An academic partnership between MCRI and the Tupou Tertiary Institute in Tonga arose from the co-design workshop.

## Vaccine champions training

## Reach.
Twenty-seven of the 45 invited community leaders (60%) attended both days of the workshop, with another three attending only the first day for unspecified reasons. Invited Champions who did not attend included representatives from local and national government, local non-government organisations, media, and family health organisations. Of the Champions who did attend both days of the training, most were female (19/27; 70%) and two were nurses (2/27; 7%; ). Champions included teachers; school nurses; local government officials; staff from non-government organisations; representatives from disabled people’s organisations; and members of youth, sports, and faith groups.
 

## Effectiveness.
Twenty Vaccine Champions (20/27; 74%) completed matched pre- and post-training surveys. Knowledge of vaccines increased after the training, and the proportion who identified appropriate communication techniques decreased ( ). Trust and confidence in HPV and routine vaccines were high among the Champions and increased after the training ( ). Vaccine Champions reported their confidence to communicate about vaccines increased after the training in all four areas assessed ( ). This was also reflected in the interviews, with Champions describing how the training gave them confidence to speak about sensitive issues in front of a group. There was a statistically significant increase in the proportion of Champions who felt very confident to talk about vaccine side effects (pre-training 13/20; 65%; post-training 19/20; 95%; p = 0.031). None of the other changes were statistically significant ( ).
 Most Champions were very satisfied with the training (19/21; 90%) and the materials provided to run sessions (20/21; 95%). Champions also spoke highly about the training in interviews, highlighting that it was informative, included the right people and addressed key community concerns. One Champion felt it would have been better to only include women in the training given the sensitive nature of the HPV vaccine and another thought the training could have been longer.
One co-design participant felt the training should have been longer, and that the Tongan translation of materials could be improved. Conversely, a Vaccine Champion thought the translated information was “communicated simply and honestly” (Champion 4).

## Adoption.
Most Vaccine Champions (23/27; 85%) ran at least one vaccine information session, and 44% (12/27) ran three or more, with four Champions running five sessions. Interviewed Champions spoke about their motivations for becoming a Vaccine Champion. Many described wanting to help their communities, especially the children and young people. Two spoke specifically about a desire to protect their own children: “as mothers we want our children to grow up healthier than us who were not able to have this opportunity” (Champion 24). Champions felt that having the support of local government and church leaders facilitated organising and running sessions.
We interviewed several Champions who did not run multiple sessions. The barriers they highlighted to running one or more sessions included lack of time, low interest from parents, and not being able to obtain approval from school principals to run sessions with students. One Champion (teacher) left the program after running one session because of their own personal beliefs about the HPV vaccine.
“I just withdrew from this [program] cause I know I don’t have the same beliefs with what was being done. Because I didn’t believe in the vaccine.” (Champion 3)
Another Vaccine Champion chose not to run any more sessions because they felt discouraged after an attendee publicly shared some misinformation about the HPV vaccine during their first session. This male Champion also reported feeling uncomfortable speaking about the HPV vaccine in front of women.
“Women’s [issues or bodies] was brought up, that made me feel embarrassed to hear discussions about that. […] the truth is it is better for only women to talk about those things.” (Champion 18)

## Community sessions

## Reach.
Vaccine Champions ran a total of 57 community information sessions, reaching an estimated 1138 people. Sessions had a mean of 22 attendees, with a range of less than five people to 55 community members present. Attendees included parents, teachers, students, members of sports or church groups, and people living with disability. Almost one quarter of attendees completed a post-session survey (24%; 269/1138); most survey participants were female (209/269; 78%) and resided in Tongatapu (183/269; 69%). Community members who completed surveys attended sessions run by 19 different Champions, with only four Champions who ran sessions having no surveys completed about at least one of their sessions. There were survey participants from all island groups within Tonga including one participant from the Niuas ( ).

## Effectiveness.
The proportion of community members who planned to get their child vaccinated against HPV increased from 70% to 88% after attending a Vaccine Champion session ( ).
 Three quarters of community members who completed the survey (199/269; 74%) reported being satisfied with the session. Community attendees reported more confidence in the importance of vaccines and being more likely to recommend the HPV vaccine to caregivers of eligible girls after attending the session ( ).
 Vaccine Champions spoke about the benefits of their sessions, including connecting more with their communities. For example, a Champion working as a local government officer described members of their community choosing to get the HPV vaccine for their daughters after listening to their information sessions.
“I talked to the town officers for feedback, and they said that a higher percentage of those were vaccinated after we did the sessions.” (Champion 15)

## Adoption.
Of those who completed the community attendee survey, 68% were more likely to start a conversation about vaccines with others after attending a Vaccine Champion session (179/263). We interviewed seven community members who attended one Vaccine Champion’s session. All spoke positively about the session and reported sharing information about the HPV vaccine with family members and friends afterwards.
“I talked to my aunt about [the HPV vaccine] and she said she heard about it before and now that she confirmed it is good she is going to take her two daughters to be vaccinated, and they did the following day.” (Attendee 6)
More specifically, one attendee said she would now encourage her younger sister to get the HPV vaccine after hearing about the benefits. Another described listening to her cousin’s concerns about the vaccine, answering her questions and then explaining the vaccine’s purpose and importance.

## Overall program

## Implementation.
The HPV vaccine was already available in Tonga during program implementation, and an awareness campaign was run by the Ministry of Health in August 2023. This campaign comprised communication activities including radio and television promotion and nationwide training for nurses. In Tonga, HPV vaccine coverage increased from 20% in February 2023 to 32% in October 2023 according to routinely collected national data [ , ].
Vaccine Champions customised their community information sessions. Most were in front of small groups and focused on the HPV or routine vaccines for children. One Champion chose to do phone calls with individual parents as this fitted better with their role and availability.
Champions described challenges with running sessions including a lack of vaccine confidence and trust in the community since the COVID-19 vaccine rollout; concerns about side effects of the HPV vaccine; community expectations that health information should be shared by trained health workers; a lack of materials to support their session; and not enough time to share their message. One Champion would have liked pamphlets to run their sessions; another thought the materials provided were helpful in supporting vaccine conversations.
Co-design participants and Vaccine Champions had suggestions for improving program implementation. Some thought that having Champions with fulltime jobs who could only run sessions out of work hours made it difficult for them to link with nurses providing the HPV vaccine. They suggested including people who have more time during the day such as pastor’s wives, stay-at-home parents, or church ministers. Conversely, another Champion thought that the right people had been chosen as many of them were mothers and had “the right attitude” (Champion 12). While one Champion felt that men were not the right people to talk about a vaccine to prevent cervical cancer, a co-design participant felt it was a strength to have male Champions.

## Maintenance.
All co-design participants interviewed felt the program should be continued. Most interviewed Champions wanted to remain involved and share information about the HPV vaccine with their communities “because it benefits our women.” (Champion 15). Community attendees also wanted to attend more sessions in the future.
To support sustainability, Champions and co-design participants thought some form of incentive was needed for the Champions. This could be a monetary payment or reimbursement for the cost of running a session such as travel, refreshments, and venue hire. Culturally appropriate materials to support the sessions such as pamphlets or flip charts were also seen as important.
Co-design participants and Champions described the importance of developing stronger links between Champions and nurses if the program were to continue. This could include involving nurses in choosing the Champions.
“It is a very good program because nurses need support in the community. But when we identify the [right] Champion, it will be much better. It will strengthen the working in partnership with the community.” (Co-design participant 1)

## Discussion
Our Vaccine Champions program trained 27 diverse health and non-health Champions in HPV vaccine knowledge and communication skills, reaching over one thousand community members across the four main island groups in Tonga. Most trained Champions ran community sessions and remained engaged in the program, despite not having a health background. Training improved Champions’ vaccine knowledge and confidence to communicate about vaccines. Champions’ sessions increased community members’ intention to vaccinate their daughters against HPV. Co-design participants believed the program was beneficial for supporting culturally appropriate HPV vaccination in Tonga. The majority of Vaccine Champions and co-design participants wanted the program to continue, with suggested adaptations. Given the positive response and success of the program in Tonga, the Ministry of Health is extending the program in 2025 using a train-the-trainer model to maximise reach, local ownership and long-term sustainability.
The Vaccine Champions program engages community leaders in design and implementation. A recent systematic review of community engagement interventions in low- and middle-income countries found a small but significant positive effect on childhood immunisation coverage and timeliness [ ]. In addition to health providers, the role of trusted community members in improving vaccine acceptance and uptake is increasingly recognised, particularly since the COVID-19 pandemic [ – ] and was demonstrated in our Vaccine Champions program in Fiji [ ]. One Champion chose to leave the program, stating that the HPV vaccine did not fit with their beliefs. Outlining clear selection criteria for future Champions could mitigate this unintended consequence, ensuring that people who support vaccination are chosen.
Our program included male and female Vaccine Champions. While some female Champions and co-design participants saw this as a strength of the program, one male Champion did not feel that it was his place to speak about women’s reproductive health. In Tongan culture, “anga faka’apa’apa” or respectful behaviour includes not discussing reproductive health issues with both males and females together [ ]. This cultural concept may also mean that the male Champion was not able to speak freely when interviewed by a female member of the research team. Ensuring that male Champions only speak with groups of men and including men in the research team could have helped address this challenge. A global move towards gender-neutral HPV vaccination suggests that men and boys do have a role to play in promoting the HPV vaccine [ ]. While mothers tend to be the primary decision-maker about childhood immunisations in Tonga, fathers do still have an important role to play in vaccine decision-making and sharing information with other fathers [ , ]. Whether or not male Champions are included in the program in future should be carefully considered.
Similar to other studies, Champions’ knowledge and confidence to communicate about vaccines increased post- training, with a statistically significant increase in Champions who felt very confident to talk about vaccine side effects [ , ]. There was a non-significant reduction in the proportion of Champions able to correctly identify an effective communication technique from a list of options. Given our small sample size, this corresponds to one additional Champion answering the question incorrectly. One Champion was not confident to respond to misinformation from a session attendee. This suggests the need for training improvements such as incorporating more experiential learning techniques [ ], longer sessions, more emphasis on role-playing and practicing skills, or including prereading materials. Incentives for Vaccine Champions should also be considered. While financial incentives can be challenging to maintain, appropriately compensating community volunteers is important to maintain their motivation and engagement [ ]. The continuation of the Vaccine Champions program in Tonga in 2025 includes monetary incentives for Champions.
Community intention to vaccinate their daughters against HPV increased after attending a Vaccine Champion session, and satisfaction was high. Other studies in the region also show that higher parental knowledge and satisfaction with information correlate with increased intention to vaccinate [ , ]. Our community survey results show increased support for vaccines after attending a Vaccine Champion session, highlighting the importance of social mobilisation for increasing HPV vaccine acceptability [ ]. A similar program in Nigeria that trained volunteer community mobilisers also found an improvement in attitudes towards immunisations [ ]. However, one fifth of our community survey participants reported being less confident about the HPV and routine childhood vaccines after attending a session. This could be due to translation challenges, or to attendees becoming more aware of the HPV vaccine and having additional questions. Having a nurse support the Vaccine Champion sessions, or encouraging follow up between Champions and community members, could mitigate this unintended outcome.

## Strengths and limitations
Mixed methods at all levels of data collection allowed for data triangulation and strengthened the validity of our findings. Structuring our data collection around the RE-AIM framework improved the quality and comparability of our evaluation [ ]. One key strength essential for successful implementation was engagement of a local research team from Tupou Tertiary Institute in Tonga, who maintained regular contact with the Champions. The study also had strong support from the Tonga Ministry of Health and UNICEF, essential to implementation and long-term sustainability.
There were several limitations. Electronic data collection methods were not possible due to variable internet and paper-based surveys were not always completed. While interviews provided more depth, a limited number of community attendees were able to be recruited from Vaccine Champion sessions due to resource constraints. We were also unable to contact three of the four trained Champions who did not run any sessions and were unable to explore their reasons.
Our translated surveys were reviewed by the local research team to maximise understanding but self-reported measures of confidence and satisfaction may be impacted by social desirability bias. The combination of response bias and social desirability bias may mean that those who completed the surveys had a more positive view of the program than those who did not. This is particularly true for the community surveys, where only 24% of attendees completed a survey. All Champions were asked to distribute surveys at their sessions and survey participants attended sessions run by most Champions. However, it is possible that those whose sessions went well were more likely to hand out the survey to community attendees. Our overall sample size for the surveys is small, limiting the statistical power of our analysis.
Effectiveness for the Champions was assessed through change in vaccine knowledge, trust and confidence, and communication self-efficacy and for the community attendees through change in intention to vaccinate and support for vaccines. We did not measure vaccine uptake as the study was not controlled or powered to show a difference between an intervention and control group. Over the study period, HPV vaccine coverage increased by 12% [ , ] and the Ministry of Health believed the program had been well received in the community. However, the Ministry ran an HPV vaccine campaign in schools in August and September 2023 and as such, it is difficult to isolate the contribution made by the Vaccine Champions program. This would need to be explored in a randomised controlled trial

## Conclusions
Engaging diverse community leaders outside the health sector including teachers, local officials, nurses, and representatives from disability, youth, and sports groups to become vaccine advocates in their community can improve vaccine trust and confidence. This community engagement intervention showed impact at the co-design, Champions and community level according to the RE-AIM evaluation indicators. The study also identified important lessons that may be useful for other countries in the Pacific region and beyond to improve HPV vaccine uptake. Although HPV vaccine coverage increased in Tonga during the program period, there were other external influencing factors. We are planning hybrid cluster randomised controlled trials measuring vaccine coverage as well as implementation and cost outcomes in other countries in the region to build robust evidence of the program. The Vaccine Champions program is continuing in Tonga in 2025, with key adaptations to implementation and a focus on local ownership and sustainability.

## Supporting information
S1 Table

## Effectiveness of Vaccine Champions training.
(DOCX)
S2 Table

## Characteristics of community attendees completing post-session survey (N = 269).
(DOCX)
S1 Checklist

## Inclusivity in global research.
(DOCX)

The authors would like to thank the study participants for their valuable time and contributions, and Suzanna Vidmar for her data analysis support.
 10.1371/journal.pgph.0005467.r001Decision Letter 0
KokkiniasKatherine DemiStaff Editor© 2025 Katherine Demi Kokkinias2025Katherine Demi Kokkiniashttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
27 Jun 2025

PGPH-D-25-00819
RE-AIM evaluation of a community-based vaccine education and communication program to improve human papillomavirus vaccine uptake in Tonga
PLOS Global Public Health
Dear Dr. Mohamed,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS Global Public Health. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS Global Public Health’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
==============================
Please note that we have only been able to secure a single reviewer to assess your manuscript. We are issuing a decision on your manuscript at this point to prevent further delays in the evaluation of your manuscript. Please be aware that the editor who handles your revised manuscript might find it necessary to invite additional reviewers to assess this work once the revised manuscript is submitted. However, we will aim to proceed on the basis of this single review if possible. 
The reviewer has raised a number of concerns that need attention. They have mentioned several points to clarify in the methods and results sections. They also mention limitations that should be included and suggest adding a section on male vaccine champions. Additionally, they highlight a few sections of the manuscript that could have improved sentence structure and flow.  
Could you please revise the manuscript to carefully address the concerns raised?
==============================
Please submit your revised manuscript by Aug 10 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at globalpubhealth@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pgph/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Katherine Demi Kokkinias, Ph.D.
Staff Editor
PLOS Global Public Health
Journal Requirements:
1. Please include a complete copy of PLOS’ questionnaire on inclusivity in global research in your revised manuscript. Our policy for research in this area aims to improve transparency in the reporting of research performed outside of researchers’ own country or community. The policy applies to researchers who have travelled to a different country to conduct research, research with Indigenous populations or their lands, and research on cultural artefacts. The questionnaire can also be requested at the journal’s discretion for any other submissions, even if these conditions are not met. Please find more information on the policy and a link to download a blank copy of the questionnaire here: https://journals.plos.org/globalpublichealth/s/best-practices-in-research-reporting. Please upload a completed version of your questionnaire as Supporting Information when you resubmit your manuscript.
2. In the ethics statement in the Methods, you have specified that verbal consent was obtained. Please provide additional details regarding how this consent was documented and witnessed, and state whether this was approved by the IRB.
3. Please provide separate figure files in .tif or .eps format.
For more information about figure files please see our guidelines:

https://journals.plos.org/globalpublichealth/s/figures

https://journals.plos.org/globalpublichealth/s/figures#loc-file-requirements

4. In the online submission form, you indicated that [The de-identified datasets used and/or analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.].
All PLOS journals now require all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript to be freely available to other researchers, either
a. In a public repository,
b. Within the manuscript itself, or
c. Uploaded as supplementary information.
This policy applies to all data except where public deposition would breach compliance with the protocol approved by your research ethics board. If your data cannot be made publicly available for ethical or legal reasons (e.g., public availability would compromise patient privacy), please explain your reasons by return email and your exemption request will be escalated to the editor for approval. Your exemption request will be handled independently and will not hold up the peer review process, but will need to be resolved should your manuscript be accepted for publication. One of the Editorial team will then be in touch if there are any issues.
Additional Editor Comments (if provided):
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Does this manuscript meet PLOS Global Public Health’s publication criteria?>
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?-->?>
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available (please refer to the Data Availability Statement at the start of the manuscript PDF file)??>
The PLOS Data policy
Reviewer #1: No
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English??>
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
Reviewer #1: Thank you for the opportunity to review this paper and learn about this program. HPV vaccination uptake is a critical public health issue, and this program is a feasibly and potentially highly effective intervention. I have a few comments and questions, primarily regarding the quantitative methods:
Abstract
-The word diverse is used twice in the sentence starting “Between March and December 2023” – consider more varied language
-Can you clarify when the program was actually run (dates), what data were collected, and who the participants were? The current abstract makes it sound as though the main focus was the co-design workshop.
Intro
-In the intro, there’s a focus on the intention-uptake gap, but this intervention seems to focus on intention. I recognize that you couldn’t measure uptake, but can you comment a bit on why intention and programs like the Vaccine Champion program, are still relevant?
Methods
-Is there a citation for roll out in Vietnam? (p5 line 92)
-Was any specific type of voting using in co-design workshop (ranked choice, consensus-building methods)?
-The data collection section is slightly confusing. It goes from a high level overview of the phases, to data collection among the vaccine champions, then finishes with the co-design participants. Can you reorganize so it follows the structure of the table and the progress of the study phase? I’d suggest [study phase], [participants], [data collection methods].
Results
-What were the results of the voting on program characteristics in the co-design-workshop?
-What are disability groups, in this context?
-What was the average size of the vaccine info sessions? Any variability by region/vaccine champion/other factors?
-Did you consider conducting any statistical analyses of your outcomes by sociodemographic characteristics?
-Did you consider the effect of clustering by vaccine champion (e.g., participants in sessions run by the same champion may be more similar to each other than participants in sessions run by a different vaccine champion)?
Discussion
-In the on-going program, will there be any additional compensation for vaccine champions as suggested by participants?
-Thank you for the discussion of gender-inclusive HPV vaccine policies. In Tonga, who typically holds decision-making power for medical decisions for children (mothers vs fathers)? Could male vaccine champions be useful in speaking with fathers?
-A key limitation is social desirability bias, both in how people respond to survey questions and who even responds in the first place. Can you discuss the impact of low participation in the post-event surveys on your results?
**********
what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy
Reviewer #1: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pgph.0005467.r002Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version1
17 Jul 2025

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Reviewer comments_8Jul25.docx
10.1371/journal.pgph.0005467.r003Decision Letter 1
Vall-llosera CampsMiquelStaff Editor© 2025 Miquel Vall-llosera Camps2025Miquel Vall-llosera Campshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
30 Sep 2025

PGPH-D-25-00819R1
RE-AIM evaluation of a community-based vaccine education and communication program to improve human papillomavirus vaccine uptake in Tonga
PLOS Global Public Health
Dear Dr. Mohamed,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS Global Public Health. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS Global Public Health’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Nov 14 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at globalpubhealth@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pgph/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Miquel Vall-llosera Camps
Staff Editor
PLOS Global Public Health
Journal Requirements:
If the reviewer comments include a recommendation to cite specific previously published works, please review and evaluate these publications to determine whether they are relevant and should be cited. There is no requirement to cite these works unless the editor has indicated otherwise. 
Additional Editor Comments:
We found necessary to invite an additional reviewer to assess your work. Please revise the manuscript to address all the reviewer's comments in a point-by-point response in order to ensure it is meeting the journal's publication criteria. Please note that the revised manuscript will need to undergo further review, we thus cannot at this point anticipate the outcome of the evaluation process.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********
publication criteria?>
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?-->?>
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available (please refer to the Data Availability Statement at the start of the manuscript PDF file)??>
The PLOS Data policy
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English??>
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
Reviewer #1: Thank you for the thorough and thoughtful response to my comments. I believe this paper makes an important contribution to the literature on HPV vaccination uptake, and I appreciate that the level of detail you have provided makes it possible for others in different contexts to draw on your experiences when building their own programs.
Reviewer #2: The purpose of this study was to evaluate an HPV vaccine uptake campaign in Tonga. The manuscript could be strengthened by clarifying differences in evaluating program planning/adaptation, facilitator training, and implementation of the program itself.
The introduction focuses exclusively on cervical cancer, although HPV causes multiple types of cancers. The first paragraph also only mentions girls being vaccinated, reinforcing the feminization of HPV. Why is the HPV vaccine not available for boys in Tonga?
When the Vaccine Champions program was evaluated in Fiji and Vietnam – was this also in relation to COVID-19 or HPV vaccine? Or, was this the first time it had been used for HPV vaccine?
There could be more of a focus in the title/abstract/introduction that this program was also adapted, not just evaluated.
The introduction states that the purpose of this study was to evaluate the Vaccine Champions Program – but the methods and results also include a lot of program planning.
It is mentioned that an implementation science approach is used- more information needed about that.
More information about what co-design is would be helpful.
It seems that phase 1 and 2 are more about program planning than program evaluation
Phase 2 mentions training, but not what the training entailed. Was this the Vaccine Champions themselves being trained,?
Phase 3 mentions community attendees – are they attending the Vaccine Champions program or the co-design workshop?
A clearer differentiation between adapting the program using co-design, training the vaccine champions, and then evaluating the implementation of the program itself would strengthen the paper.
In Table 1 – it seems that you are evaluating both the development of the program, the training of the Vaccine champions, and the implementation of the program – is that correct? (For example, with co-design participants it says the RE-AIM domain of implementation was included, but it’s unclear what program was implemented during this co-design)
It is not clear how the vaccine champions were trained – were they given the same program that they would then be teaching to others? In table one it mentions “Implementation: adaptations made to program implementation” – what does this mean?
I am a little bit confused about RE-AIM being applied to the adaptation of the program and the training of the champions as well as to the program itself. I know that RE-AIM has been used as a process framework to plan implementation and adaptations – so is it being used here for both process and outcome evaluation? Clarifying that in the study design would be helpful. Currently it is worded in a way that suggests outcome evaluation only.
“We evaluated the three program phases using qualitative and quantitative methods (Table 1).” – would be helpful to break this down into what is program planning, implementation, process and outcome eval.
How many team members coded each interview? How were themes determined within each area of RE-AIM?
In the results, it is mentioned that “one participant felt…”. Does this represent a theme or did only one participant feel that way? Unclear how it was decided what quotes and views are included.
“Over the study period, HPV vaccine coverage increased by 12 % and the 480 Ministry of Health believed the program had been well received in the community.” – need a citation for this
**********
what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
10.1371/journal.pgph.0005467.r004Author response to Decision Letter 2
Submission Version2
7 Oct 2025

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to reviewers_Oct25.docx
10.1371/journal.pgph.0005467.r005Decision Letter 2
RobinsonJuliaStaff Editor© 2025 Julia Robinson2025Julia Robinsonhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
28 Oct 2025

RE-AIM evaluation of a community-based vaccine education and communication program to improve human papillomavirus vaccine uptake in Tonga
PGPH-D-25-00819R2
Dear Ms Mohamed,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'RE-AIM evaluation of a community-based vaccine education and communication program to improve human papillomavirus vaccine uptake in Tonga' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Global Public Health.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact globalpubhealth@plos.org.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Global Public Health.
Best regards,
Julia Robinson
Executive Editor
PLOS Global Public Health
***********************************************************
Reviewer Comments (if any, and for reference):
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
publication criteria?>
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?-->?>
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available (please refer to the Data Availability Statement at the start of the manuscript PDF file)??>
The PLOS Data policy
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English??>
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: The authors addressed my commments.
**********
what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********