pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosoneplosPLOS One1932-6203PLOSPMC12500092PMC12500092.112500092125000924105203910.1371/journal.pone.0332108PONE-D-25-175281Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsBacteriaGut BacteriaPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsEthnicitiesBiology and Life SciencesNutritionMedicine and Health SciencesNutritionBiology and Life SciencesNutritionDietMedicine and Health SciencesNutritionDietEarth SciencesGeographyPeople and PlacesGeographical LocationsSocial SciencesAnthropologyCultural AnthropologyEthnic GroupsPeople and PlacesDemographyEthnic GroupsPeople and PlacesGeographical LocationsAsiaThailandEffects of ethnicity and geography on the fecal microbiota and dietary habits of Tibeto-Burman hill tribes in Northern Thailand
Effects of ethnicity and geography on the fecal microbiota of hill tribes in Northern ThailandSeetarasoTanaponData curationFormal analysisInvestigationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing GruneckLucsameFormal analysisVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing JinathamVasanaInvestigation KantakatSitananInvestigation https://orcid.org/0009-0001-2910-7616AlbertMarie-LouInvestigation https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1443-5270TherdtathaPhatthanaphongFormal analysisInvestigationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing IntaAngkhanaConceptualizationFunding acquisitionInvestigationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3457-2723SrikummoolMetaweeConceptualizationInvestigationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4687-104XKampuansaiJatupolConceptualizationInvestigationMethodologySupervisionValidationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4431-2810PopluechaiSiamConceptualizationFormal analysisMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionValidationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand2
Ph.D.’s Degree Program in Biology (International Program), Faculty of Science, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand3
Gut Microbiome Research Group, Mae Fah Luang University, Chiang Rai, Thailand4
School of Science, Mae Fah Luang University, Chiang Rai, Thailand5
Specialized Research in Microbiome and Metabolome for Health Laboratory, Division of Biotechnology, Faculty of Agro-Industry, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand6
Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medical Science, Naresuan University, Phitsanulok, Thailand7
Center of Excellence in Medical Biotechnology, Faculty of Medical Science, Naresuan University, Phitsanulok, ThailandRAJUKAMARAJEditor files.

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the paper and its files.

## Introduction
The human gut microbiota consists of trillions of microorganisms, including bacteria, fungi, archaea, and viruses, that reside in the digestive tract, primarily in the intestines [ , ]. These microorganisms play diverse roles in host health, including digestion, immune homeostasis, colonization resistance against pathogens and metabolism. The gut microbiota is mainly composed of two major phyla: Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes. Firmicutes includes common genera such as Clostridium, Enterococcus, Lactobacillus, and Ruminococcus, while Bacteroidetes includes Bacteroides and Prevotella. Other phyla, such as Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria, Verrucomicrobia, and Euryarchaeota, are present in smaller amounts [ , ]. Variations in gut microbiota are shaped by host and environmental factors, such as genetic background, diet, lifestyle, disease, medications, and gender [ – ]. Many studies suggest that dietary intake is the most influential parameter affecting the gut microbiota. For example, fiber-rich diets tend to promote a beneficial microbial composition, including an increased abundance of Bifidobacterium and Prevotella, while Western diets tend to promote Ruminococcus [ , ].
While diet is recognized as one of the most influential modulators of gut microbiota, the interplay between ethnicity and geographic location further shapes dietary behaviors, which in turn influence gut microbiota composition [ , ]. Ethnicity often dictates cultural and traditional dietary practices, shaping long-term food consumption patterns and preferences [ , ]. Previous studies have shown distinct gut microbiota profiles between different ethnic groups, such as Chinese, Indian, Malay, and Jakun populations in Peninsular Malaysia [ ], as well as between multi-ethnic populations in Amsterdam [ ]. Geographic location also contributes to variations in gut microbiota by influencing local food availability, dietary habits, and environmental microbial exposure [ , – ]. A recent comparative study between Han and non-Han populations across seven Chinese provinces found that geography had a greater impact on gut microbiota composition than ethnicity alone [ ]. Thus, the interaction between ethnicity, geographic location, and dietary behavior plays a crucial role in determining gut microbiota composition, highlighting the need to study these factors together to better understand their combined effects.
Hill tribes are various ethnic groups that primarily inhabit the high mountainous regions of Northern and Western Thailand. These groups can be classified into three primary linguistic families based on their spoken language: the Sino-Tibetan, Austroasiatic, and Hmong-Mien populations [ ]. One of the major branches of the Sino-Tibetan family is the Tibeto-Burman-speaking population, which constitutes most of the hill tribe communities in Thailand, including the Karen, Akha, Lahu, and Lisu ethnic groups [ ]. Their original homeland is believed to be Mongolia and the eastern regions of the Tibetan Plateau. Subsequently, they migrated to western China and further to evergreen forests, settling in areas approximately 500 m above sea level in Myanmar and Thailand [ , ]. A previous study on school-aged children from hill tribe backgrounds investigated the association between ethnicity and gut microbiota composition among five ethnic groups: Akha, Chinese, Lahu, Thai, and Thai Yai in Chiang Rai Province of Northern Thailand. The results indicated that ethnicity, although modest in influence, contributed to gut microbiota composition [ ]. However, research investigating the effects of ethnicity and geography on the gut microbiome in Thailand remains limited, with existing studies constrained by small sample sizes, geographically restricted cohorts, and a focus on children, leaving adult populations underrepresented.
To address this gap, the present study is, to the best of our knowledge, the first to examine the effects of ethnicity and geography on the gut microbiota composition of adult Tibeto-Burman-speaking hill-tribe populations in Northern Thailand using quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) for absolute quantification and comparison of specific gut bacterial taxa. We accounted for ethnic backgrounds (Akha, Lahu, and Lisu) and geographic regions (Chiang Mai and Chiang Rai Provinces) and employed multivariate analyses to explore the associations between multiple variables and variation in gut microbiota. Our findings provide preliminary insights into how ethnic and geographic factors are associated with the gut microbiota in these underrepresented communities, contributing valuable data for future research on the health of populations in Thailand.

## Materials & methods

## Ethical statement
This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai University (STUDY CODE: NONE-2565–08787, Research ID: 8787). Participant rights and confidentiality were rigorously protected throughout the study. All procedures adhered strictly to relevant ethical guidelines and regulations, in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants prior to interviews and sample collection, either by signature or, for those unable to sign, by fingerprint in the presence of an impartial witness.

## Study population
We collected samples from 102 unrelated individuals residing in high-altitude environments (> 600 m above sea level) from five Tibeto-Burman-speaking villages in Northern Thailand ( ). In Chiang Mai Province, the sampled individuals belonged to the Akha and Lahu ethnic groups, while in Chiang Rai Province, participants were from the Akha, Lahu, and Lisu communities. These ethnic groups were selected based on historical and ethnographic evidence from previous reports that supported their long-term settlement and cultural distinctiveness in the region [ – ]. Sampling and surveys were conducted from November 2022 to March 2023. To ensure consistency in participant backgrounds, we applied selection criteria established in a previous genetic study [ ]. Only adult volunteers aged over 20 years with no known ancestry from other ethnic groups within the past three generations were included. Personal data, including endonyms, self-reported unrelated lineages, languages, and migration histories, were collected through structured oral interviews. Additionally, all participants reported no use of antibiotics or anthelmintics for at least three months and were not experiencing diarrhea at the time of sampling.
 

## Characteristic factors and dietary behavior questionnaires
Anthropometric and physiological measurements including gender, age, weight, height, waist circumference, hip circumference, systolic blood pressure (SBP), and diastolic blood pressure (DBP) were recorded at the time of sample collection using standardized instruments. Body mass index (BMI) was calculated as weight (kg) divided by height squared (m2), while the waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) was determined by dividing waist circumference (cm) by hip circumference (cm). Dietary behavior data were collected using a Food Frequency Questionnaire, comprising 20 items that represented both non-processed (ten items) and processed (ten items) foods. This frequency-based questionnaire reflected general daily consumption behaviors across ethnicities. Consumption frequency was categorized into six levels: daily (6), 5–6 times a week (5), 3–4 times a week (4), 1–2 times a week (3), less than once a week (2), and never (1). Differences in mean ranks among groups were assessed using the Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test, followed by Dunn’s post-hoc test for multiple comparisons, with p–values adjusted using the Benjamini–Hochberg (BH) method.

## Sample collection, DNA extraction, and qPCR
After fasting for at least 8 h, stool samples were collected from the volunteers and immediately stored in sterilized containers at −80°C. Microbiota DNA was extracted from stool samples using the QIAmp Fast DNA Stool Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) following the manufacturer’s protocol. DNA yield and purity were determined using the Take 3 Micro-Volume Plate (Biotek, Winooski, VT, USA). Absolute quantification of bacteria was performed using qPCR on Real-Time Thermal Cyclers CFX96 Touch™ (Bio-Rad, Singapore). The primers targeting microbiota 16s rRNA genes used in this study are summarized in S1 Table in . Each reaction contained template DNA, forward and reverse primers, 1X SYBR Green (2X SensiFAST™ SYBR No-ROX mix, BIOLINE, UK), and nuclease-free water. Assay conditions and microbiota copy number calculations were conducted according to a previously described protocol [ , ]. The average estimates of microbiota abundance, obtained by converting cycle threshold values, were expressed as the logarithmic copy number per gram of wet-weight feces.

## Direct statistical analysis
In this study, statistical analyses were conducted at two primary levels: ethnicity (Akha, Lahu, and Lisu) and geographic location [Chiang Mai (CM) and Chiang Rai (CR) Provinces]. Ethnicity-based sublevel comparisons were performed within Chiang Mai province [AkhaCM (Akha ethnic group residing in Chiang Mai Province) vs. LahuCM (Lahu ethnic group residing in Chiang Mai Province)] and within Chiang Rai Province [AkhaCR (Akha ethnic group residing in Chiang Rai Province) vs. LahuCR (Lahu ethnic group residing in Chiang Rai Province) vs. LisuCR (Lisu ethnic group residing in Chiang Rai Province)]. Geographic sublevel comparisons were conducted within the Akha ethnic group (AkhaCM vs. AkhaCR) and within the Lahu ethnic group (LahuCM vs. LahuCR). The raw data, including group categories of ethnicities and geographic locations, participant characteristic factors, dietary behavior data, and microbial abundance (log10 copy number per gram of wet weight feces), are provided in S1 File in . All analyses were performed using the R software version 4.4.3 [ ]. Normality and homogeneity of variance were assessed using the Shapiro–Wilk test and Levene’s test, respectively (stats package version 4.4.3) [ ]. Statistical methods were selected based on data distribution. Differences in gender proportion between or across groups were determined using Chi-square and Fisher’s exact test (rcompanion package version 2.5.0) [ ]. Differences in the abundance of gut microbiota between or across groups were determined using unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test, Welch’s t-test, the Mann–Whitney test, one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), Welch’s ANOVA, and the Kruskal–Wallis test, followed by multiple comparisons using Tukey’s post-hoc test, the Games-Howell test (PMCMRplus package version 1.9.12) [ ], and Dunn’s test with BH p-value correction (hereafter referred to as q-value). Relationships between the absolute abundances of gut microbiota and dietary habits were analyzed using Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient.

## Multivariate statistical analysis
Both unsupervised (multiple factor analysis, MFA) and supervised (partial least squares-discriminant analysis, PLS-DA) statistical approaches were conducted to examine individual profiles related to ethnicities, geographic locations, dietary behaviors, and participant characteristics, and to evaluate their influence on gut microbiota abundance. Raw qPCR data and all metadata used in the multivariate analyses are provided in S2–S4 Files in . The microbial abundances were visualized as a heatmap using ComplexHeatmap (version 2.22.0), with hierarchical clustering based on a Euclidean distance matrix [ , ]. PLS-DA was conducted using the mixOmics package version 6.30.0 [ ] to identify microbial taxa most relevant in distinguishing between groups. Variable importance in projection (VIP) scores were used to assess the contribution of each feature to classification, with VIP scores > 1 indicating important features and VIP scores < 1 indicating less important ones. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves and the area under the curve (AUC) were calculated to assess the validity of the supervised classification results. The classification accuracy of PLS-DA models was interpreted as follows: no discrimination (AUC = 0.5), low discrimination (AUC = 0.6–0.7), acceptable discrimination (AUC = 0.7–0.8), excellent discrimination (AUC = 0.8–0.9), and outstanding discrimination (AUC > 0.9) [ , ]. MFA was conducted using the FactoMineR package version 2.11 [ ] to assess the relationships between host variables (dietary behaviors and participant characteristics) and gut microbiota across different ethnicities and geographic locations. Associations were assessed between gut microbiota (24 variables) and dietary behaviors (19 variables, excluding rice, as it was consumed by all individuals), as well as between gut microbiota, dietary habits, and participants characteristics (six variables). All variables were included as active components in the MFA models to ensure that their full contributions were considered. The Factoextra package version 1.0.7 [ ] was used to visualize variable contributions and correlations in multidimensional space. Permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) analysis was conducted using the adonis2 function (vegan package version 2.6–10) [ ] to determine whether overall gut microbiota profile and dietary behaviors differed significantly by ethnicity and geographic locations, adjusting for confounders (such as age, gender, BMI, DBP, SBP) identified as contributing factors in MFA. To ensure comparability, raw dietary data, age, BMI, DBP, and SBP were standardized using z-score transformation prior to analysis. Dissimilarities were computed using a Euclidean distance matrix. Permutational analysis of multivariate dispersion (PERMDISP) was performed using the betadisper function with 999 permutations based on a Euclidean distance matrix, as implemented in the vegan package (version 2.6–10) [ ], to assess group dispersion. Principal coordinates analysis was conducted based on the same distance matrix used for PERMANOVA. Ordination scores were extracted using the vegan:scores function and visualized in ggplot2 (package version 3.5.1) [ ] to depict the spread of samples around their group centroids. Collinearity analysis was performed using Variance inflation factors (VIFs) and Generalized variance inflation factors (GVIFs) in R (car package version 3.1–3) [ ] to assess potential multicollinearity among predictor variables. Low collinearity, including for multi-categorical variables, was detected, as all VIF and GVIF (GVIF1/(2*Df)) values were within a low range (below 5) [ ].

## Results

## Participant characteristics
We evaluated differences in age, BMI, WHR, DBP, and SBP among ethnic groups in Chiang Mai and Chiang Rai Provinces. No significant differences were observed in these parameters across ethnic groups within each province. A significant difference in age was only observed between the AkhaCM and AkhaCR groups (p = 0.036), while no significant differences in age, BMI, WHR, DBP, or SBP were found within the Lahu group residing in different locations. ( ).
 

## Analysis of gut microbiota, dietary habits, and participant characteristics across ethnicities

## Differences in the abundance of gut microbiota associated with ethnicity.
The abundance of gut microbiota across different ethnic groups residing in Chiang Mai and Chiang Rai Provinces was compared. The results indicated a significant variation in microbial abundance among ethnic groups within each geographic location (S2 Table in ). In Chiang Mai province, a significant difference was detected in Actinobacteria, whose abundance was significantly higher in AkhaCM than in LahuCM (q = 0.044; ). PLS-DA analysis, employed to identify key discriminatory microbial taxa, revealed that Actinobacteria (VIP = 2.52) and Bacteroides fragilis (VIP = 2.21) were the most discriminative taxa in the Akha ethnic group, whereas Enterococcus spp. (VIP = 1.16) and Staphylococcus spp. (VIP = 1.32) were enriched in individuals of the Lahu ethnic group in Chiang Mai Province (Component 1: 27% explained variance, AUC = 0.82, p < 0.001; S1A Fig in ). In LahuCM, Coprococcus spp. (VIP = 1.05) was the most discriminative bacterium in (Component 2: 29% explained variance, AUC = 0.88, p < 0.001; S1B Fig in ).
 In Chiang Rai Province, significant differences were observed in the abundance of Firmicutes (q = 0.038), Gammaproteobacteria (q = 0.033), Ruminococcus (q = 0.01), Actinomyces (q < 0.001), and Christensenella minuta (q = 0.008), which were more abundant in AkhaCR than in LisuCR (S3 Table in ). Conversely, Actinomyces (q = 0.002) and Lactobacillus (q < 0.001) were more abundant in LahuCR than in LisuCR. The results aligned with the PLS-DA, clearly distinguishing the enrichment of Actinomyces (VIP = 2.01) in AkhaCR from the abundance of that genus in LahuCR and LisuCR (Component 1, 36% explained variance, AUC = 0.68, p = 0.023) (S1C Fig in ). Both direct comparisons and supervised analyses consistently highlighted the enrichment of Actinomyces, a genus within the Actinobacteria phylum, as being enriched the most in AkhaCR, whereas this particular gut bacterium was least prevalent in LisuCR.

## Association between gut microbiota and dietary habits.
We assessed the frequency-based questionnaire of dietary habits, which reflected general daily consumption behaviors across ethnicities. Individuals from different ethnic backgrounds exhibited variations in dietary consumption. In Chiang Mai Province, the consumption of fresh meat (q = 0.002), vegetables (q = 0.002), and milk (q = 0.044) was significantly higher in AkhaCM than in LahuCM ( and S4 Table in ). In Chiang Rai Province, AkhaCR consumed more non-processed foods (q = 0.02) and less bread (q = 0.017) than LahuCR. Fresh meat consumption was significantly higher by AkhaCR than by LahuCR (q = 0.001) and by LisuCR than by LahuCR (q < 0.001). Similarly, egg consumption was greater by AkhaCR than by LahuCR (q = 0.009) and by LisuCR than by LahuCR (q = 0.032). Grain consumption was higher in LisuCR compared to AkhaCR (q = 0.021), while sticky rice was consumed the least by AkhaCR (q < 0.001; and S5 Table in ). Correlations between dietary habits and gut microbiota further revealed moderate negative correlations between egg consumption and Streptococcus spp. (r = −0.58, q = 0.047) and between vegetable consumption and Fusobacterium spp. (r = −0.59, q = 0.040) in AkhaCM. Fresh meat consumption exhibited a strong negative correlation with C. minuta among LahuCM individuals (r = −0.65, q = 0.048; S6 Table in ). In Chiang Rai Province, energy drink and fresh meat consumption showed a strong positive correlation with Methanobrevibacter smithii (r = 0.79, q < 0.001) and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii (r = 0.62, q = 0.040) in AkhaCR. Fruit consumption showed the strongest negative correlation with Fusobacterium spp. (r = −0.75, q = 0.027) among LahuCR individuals. Sausage consumption showed a strong positive correlation with B. fragilis (r = 0.63, q = 0.039), whereas instant noodle consumption displayed a strong negative correlation with Enterococcus spp. (r = −0.62, q = 0.041) in LisuCR (S7 Table in ). Notably, the Akha ethnic group exhibited a consistently higher fresh meat consumption than the Lahu group, regardless of geographic location.
 Further integration of dietary habits and gut microbiota profiles using MFA showed no strong associations between gut microbiota and dietary habits among ethnic groups in Chiang Mai Province (S2 Fig in ). Instead, ethnicity accounted for a greater proportion of dietary variation at this location, particularly along Dim 2 (explained variance: 11.56%, contribution: 38.02%). AkhaCM exhibited a higher consumption trend for fresh meat, milk, and vegetables than LahuCM. A similar pattern was observed in Chiang Rai Province, where ethnicity contributed substantially to dietary variations in Dim 2 (40.94% contribution), whereas the influence of ethnicity on variations in gut microbiota was relatively low in Dim 1 (6% contribution; S3 Fig in ). Consumption of energy drinks (r = 0.56, p < 0.001) was less prevalent in LahuCR (coordinate = 1.73, p < 0.001) than in AkhaCR (coordinate = −1.25, p < 0.001) in Dim 2 (9.75%), while bread consumption (r = 0.55, p < 0.001) showed the opposite trend. In Dim 3 (7.88%), LisuCR (coordinate = 1.02, p < 0.001) exhibited a distinct association pattern in dietary habits and gut microbiota compared to AkhaCR (coordinate = −0.53, p = 0.004) and LahuCR (coordinate = −0.53, p < 0.001), characterized by lower coffee consumption (r = −0.46, p < 0.001) and increased abundance of M. smithii (r = 0.46, p < 0.001). These two variables were nevertheless moderately correlated to Dim 3. These results demonstrate that ethnicity was predominantly associated with variations in dietary patterns, while its influence on gut microbiota was less pronounced when both variables (dietary habits and gut microbiota) were considered together.

## Associations between gut microbiota, dietary habits, and participants characteristics.
Participant characteristics were also taken into account to evaluate their influence, in conjunction with dietary habits, on gut microbiota composition. Integration of these variables using MFA revealed no association among these factors between the two ethnic groups within Chiang Mai Province (Dim 1: 20.15%; S4 Fig in ). The contribution of ethnicity and gender to variations in dietary habits was stronger than that of gut microbiota, which was captured by Dim 2 (10.17%) and Dim 3 (9.34%), respectively. LahuCM (coordinate = 0.99, p < 0.001) displayed a contrasting profile to AkhaCM (coordinate = −0.99, p < 0.001) in Dim 2, where BMI (r = 0.64, p < 0.001) and instant noodle consumption (r = 0.53, p < 0.001) were positively associated with LahuCM. These two variables also showed a positive trend among females (coordinate = 0.75, p = 0.001). In contrast, milk (r = −0.53, p = 0.0037) and fresh meat consumption (r = −0.51, p < 0.001) were higher among AkhaCM and males (coordinate = −0.75, p = 0.001). However, gender contributed more to Dim 3, where males and females exhibited contrasting dietary habits, particularly in the consumption of coffee (r = −0.50, p < 0.001), grain (r = −0.48, p = 0.001), and energy drinks (r = 0.46, p = 0.002). The first two dietary components were consumed more by females (coordinate = −1.02, p < 0.001), whereas energy drinks were consumed more by males (coordinate = 1.02, p < 0.001). While MFA emphasized a stronger contribution of ethnicity than gender, PERMANOVA revealed that dietary habits also differed significantly between the ethnic groups (Fby margin = 2.19, p = 0.005) after adjusting for BMI and gender. However, significant group dispersion was observed, particularly within the AkhaCM group, where dietary patterns exhibited greater variability (FPERMDISP = 9.29, p = 0.005; S5 Fig in ). This indicated that unequal within-group dispersions may have partially influenced the significant PERMANOVA results. Additionally, a significant interaction between ethnicity and gender (Fby term = 1.53, p = 0.006) as well as between ethnicity and BMI (Fby term = 1.49, p = 0.02) was detected; however, the effect sizes of these interactions on microbial abundance were relatively small across ethnic groups. Moreover, no significant differences in the overall gut microbiota profile were observed within Chiang Mai Province.
Furthermore, the variations patterns in gut microbiota and dietary habits with ethnicity in Dim 1 (17.04%) and Dim 2 (8.37%) remained consistent for individuals within the Chiang Rai Province (S6 Fig in ). The influence of gender was independently captured by Dim 3 (7.75%), where males (coordinate = 1.02, p < 0.001) consumed more coffee (r = 0.51, p < 0.001) and less yogurt (r = −0.49, p < 0.001) than females (coordinate = −1.02, p < 0.001). In Dim 4 (7.21%), which explained the association between dietary habits and gut microbiota, grain consumption (r = 0.46, p < 0.001) showed an inverse relationship with Gammaproteobacteria (r = −0.46, p < 0.001). While grain consumption in LisuCR was higher, the abundance of this bacterial class tended to decrease (coordinate = 1.04, p < 0.001). This relationship was reversed in AkhaCR (coordinate = −0.82, p < 0.001). Additionally, PERMANOVA demonstrated that ethnicity exerted a stronger influence on variations in overall dietary habits (Fby margin = 2.35, p = 0.001) than on gut microbiota (Fby margin = 1.75, p = 0.046) after adjusting for participant characteristics (age, BMI, gender, and DBP), with no significant dispersion. Pairwise comparisons revealed that dietary habits of LahuCR differed significantly from those of AkhaCR (Fpairwise = 3.11, q = 0.01) and LisuCR (Fpairwise = 2.33, q = 0.02), whereas AkhaCR displayed distinct gut microbiota profiles compared to LahuCR (Fpairwise = 2.26, q = 0.046) and LisuCR (Fpairwise = 2.41, q = 0.047). While age and BMI were independently (both by terms and by margin) associated with dietary habits, these confounders did not exert an independent effect on gut microbiota composition (by margin). After adjusting for ethnicity, gender, BMI, and DBP, age exhibited a greater independent effect on overall dietary patterns among individuals from Chiang Rai Province (Fby margin = 5.46, p = 0.001). Specifically, age was negatively associated with the consumption of four out of ten processed food items (carbonated drinks, bread, instant noodles, and yogurt) indicating a declining trend in the consumption of processed food among older individuals in this province, irrespective of ethnicity. When considering interaction effects, age exhibited a moderate effect on dietary habits (Finteraction = 2.43, p = 0.001), whereas BMI (Finteraction = 1.75, p = 0.003), gender (Finteraction = 1.69, p = 0.005), and DBP (Finteraction = 1.53, p = 0.008) had relatively small effects. In addition, age (Finteraction = 1.70, p = 0.01) showed a small interaction effect with ethnicity in relation to microbial abundance.
Considering all factors together, ethnicity was associated with variations in the overall dietary patterns within Chiang Mai Province, and with both dietary patterns and gut microbiota composition within Chiang Rai Province. These results indicated a possible link between ethnicity and variations in dietary habits.

## Analysis of gut microbiota, dietary habits, and participants characteristics across geographic locations

## Differences in the abundance of gut microbiota associated with geographic location.
The gut microbiota profiles were compared among ethnic groups residing in different geographic locations. Significant differences were observed in 13 taxa, including two phyla, seven genera, three species, and one archaeon, all of which were significantly more abundant in AkhaCR ( and S8 Table in ). PLS-DA highlighted the enrichment of these taxa (such as Roseburia, Firmicutes, and Bacteoidetes; VIP = 1.65, 1.64 and 1.61, respectively) in AkhaCR, distinctly separating them from those in AkhaCM (Component 1: 46% explained variance, AUC = 0.91, p < 0.001; ). In the Lahu ethnic group, 17 taxa–including three phyla, eight genera, six species, and one archaeon–were significantly more abundant in LahuCR compared to LahuCM (S9 Table in ). PLS-DA also illustrated distinct differences in microbiota enrichment between LahuCR and LahuCM, with Firmicutes (VIP = 1.58), Bacteroidetes (VIP = 1.40), and Bacteroides spp. (VIP = 1.35) being the top three taxa distinguishing LahuCR from LahuCM (AUC = 0.96, p < 0.001; ). Notably, both AkhaCR and LahuCR shared a similar trend of higher gut bacterial abundance among the top five taxa–Bacteroidetes, Streptococcus, Coprococcus, Prevotella, and Bacteroides–compared to the ethnic groups in Chiang Mai Province. The combined results, derived from both direct comparisons of gut microbiota abundances and PLS-DA, demonstrated that gut microbiota composition may vary in relation to geographic location.
 

## Association between gut microbiota and dietary habits.
Dietary habits significantly differed between the ethnic groups based on geographic location. In the Akha group, AkhaCM consumed more grain (q < 0.001) and sticky rice (q = 0.016), whereas fruit consumption was significantly higher in AkhaCR (q = 0.016; and S10 Table in ). Similarly, within the Lahu ethnic group, grain consumption was also significantly higher in LahuCM (q = 0.012), while processed food (q = 0.012) and milk consumption (q = 0.046) were more prevalent in LahuCR (S11 Table in ).
MFA, integrating dietary habits and gut microbiota revealed significant variations between geographic locations. A contrasting relationship between gut microbiota profiles and grain consumption contributed to individual variation in Dim 1 (28.08%; S2C data in S2 File in ). The abundance of the top five gut microbiota taxa including Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Cl. coccoides, Roseburia, and Bacteroides, showed an increasing trend in AkhaCR (coordinate = 1.56, p < 0.001), while grain consumption was lower (r = −0.53, p < 0.001). In contrast, AkhaCM exhibited the opposite pattern (coordinate = −1.56, p < 0.001). In Dim 2 (9.94%), egg consumption (r = −0.52, p < 0.001) was negatively associated with Actinobacteria abundance (r = 0.51, p < 0.001). A lower egg consumption with a higher abundance of Actinobacteria was observed in AkhaCM (coordinate = 0.73, p < 0.001) compared to AkhaCR (coordinate = −0.73, p < 0.001; S7 Fig in ). A similar trend in microbial abundance was detected in the Lahu group. Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Bacteroides, Cl. coccoides, and Methanogens were more abundant in LahuCR (coordinate = 1.62, p < 0.001) than in LahuCM (coordinate = −1.62, p < 0.001), as shown in Dim 1 (29.92%; S8 Fig in and S2D data in S2 File in ). In Dim 2 (11.40%), coffee consumption (r = −0.52, p = 0.0011) and snack consumption (r = −0.51, p = 0.0015) were negatively correlated with the abundances of Gammaproteobacteria (r = 0.55, p < 0.001) and Osilobacterium spp. (r = 0.54, p < 0.001) in LahuCM (coordinate = 0.63, p = 0.003). The inverse trend was observed in LahuCR (coordinate = −0.63, p = 0.003). Variation in Dim 2 was more driven by the relationship between coffee consumption and Gammaproteobacteria, with a clear contrast between the LahuCM and LahuCR profiles, highlighting association between gut microbiota and dietary habits. In summary, both AkhaCM and LahuCM shared a consistent profile in the prevalence of grain consumption and microbial abundance compared to their counterpart in Chiang Mai Province.

## Associations between gut microbiota, dietary habits, and participants characteristics.
When participant characteristics were integrated into MFA of dietary habits and gut microbiota, geographic location remained the primary determinant of variations in microbial abundance, as reflected in Dim 1 for both the Akha and Lahu ethnic groups. In the Akha group, the association between gut microbiota and grain consumption, along with individual variations between AkhaCR and AkhaCM, remained consistent in Dim 1. In Dim 2 (9.49%), non-processed food was a major contributor to the observed variation, with gender exerting a greater influence than geographic location. Egg consumption was lower (r = −0.56, p < 0.001), while grain consumption was higher among females (r = 0.52, p < 0.001; coordinate = 0.85, p < 0.001). Males displayed the opposite trend (coordinate = −0.85, p < 0.001). Variations in specific taxa, such as Bifidobacterium spp. (r = 0.48, p < 0.001) and Actinobacteria (r = 0.46, p = 0.0013), were also captured in Dim 2, with a higher abundance trend observed in females. In Dim 3 (8.30%), gender was the primary driver of variations in energy drink consumption (r = 0.52, p < 0.001), with males (coordinate = 0.85, p < 0.001) consuming more than females (coordinate = −0.85, p < 0.001; - ). Furthermore, grain consumption appeared to have a more stable and independent influence across different MFA models. These results highlighted the influence of geographic location on both gut microbiota composition and dietary preferences, while also pointing toward a link between gender and dietary habits. Moreover, PERMANOVA confirmed the independent effect of geographic location on microbial abundance (Fby margin = 4.93, p = 0.001) and dietary habits (Fby margin = 2.92, p = 0.001) after adjusting for all other factors (age, gender, BMI, SBP, and DBP), with a stronger effect on gut microbiota and no significant group dispersion. An interaction effect between geographic location and age on dietary habit was also detected (Finteraction = 2.31, p = 0.001). Age, which significantly differed between AkhaCM and AkhaCR, exhibited an independent influence on dietary habits both by term (Fby term = 3.01, p = 0.001) and by margin (Fby margin = 2.78, p = 0.002). Notably, bread consumption (r = −0.65, q = 0.02) and the relative abundance of Roseburia (r = −0.66, q = 0.007) exhibited a negative correlation with age among AkhaCR individuals, indicating a declining trend in both variables among older participants. Moreover, the interaction effect between geographic location and gender (Finteraction = 1.62, p = 0.01) demonstrated that gender-based dietary patterns varied by region, as evidenced in the MFA results.
 The individual variation patterns in gut microbiota between LahuCR and LahuCM remained consistent in Dim 1 (24.60%; - ). In Dim 2, the variation explained by gender was stronger than that explained by geographic location, in which females (coordinate = 0.96, p < 0.001) consumed more yogurt (r = 0.55, p < 0.001) than males (coordinate = −0.96, p < 0.001). The abundance of Osilobacterium spp. also increased among females, despite a weaker correlation with Dim 2 (r = 0.48, p = 0.003). Gender-based contrasts in dietary patterns were detected in Dim 4 (7.80%) and Dim 5 (6.99%), with females consuming more bread in Dim 4 and more milk in Dim 5 than males. Further PERMANOVA demonstrated that geographic location significantly affected both dietary habits (Fby margin = 2.13, p = 0.01) and gut microbiota (Fby margin = 11.50, p = 0.001) within the Lahu ethnicity, after adjusting for all other factors (gender, BMI, and SBP). Although no significant multivariate dispersion was detected for gut microbiota with respect to geography, unequal variance in dietary habits was observed (FPERMDISP = 13.09, p = 0.002). This indicated that dietary behaviors varied greatly among individuals in Chiang Rai Province (particularly within the LahuCR group) (S9 Fig in ), and that part of the observed differences in dietary patterns could be attributed to this dispersion effect. Additionally, participant characteristics (gender, BMI, and SBP) showed no independent effect on either gut microbiota composition or dietary habits. However, the effect of geographic location on both gut microbiota composition (Finteraction = 4.71, p = 0.001) and dietary habits (Finteraction = 1.70, p = 0.003) varied depending on gender across the two locations, indicating a significant interaction effect between geographic location and gender.
When examining the contribution of all variables to individual variations, geographic location was associated with differences in both microbial abundance and dietary habits, with a relatively stronger association with gut microbiota composition. However, substantial dietary variability within the Lahu group should be considered in contextualizing these findings.

## Independent effects of ethnicity and geographical location on dietary habits and gut microbiota
Both ethnicity and geographic location were independently included in the MFA model, along with participant characteristics, dietary habits, and gut microbiota, to assess their independent effects and draw broader conclusions. MFA indicated that both factors influenced variations in dietary habits and gut microbiota; however, ethnicity was more closely associated with gender in explaining dietary variations in a multidimensional space. Differences between individuals from Chiang Rai and Chiang Mai Provinces were mainly attributed to higher gut microbiota abundances in the former and greater grain consumption in the latter, as reflected in Dim 1 (18.79%; ). Ethnicity contributed to variations in specific taxa and dietary habits, particularly in Dim 2 (8.40%) and Dim 3 (6.89%), respectively. In Dim 3, both gender and ethnicity influenced energy drink consumption, which was higher in the Lahu group irrespective of geographic location. This relation became more distinct when considering gender, revealing contrasting consumption patterns between males and females. In Dim 4 (5.82%), an inverse relation in bread consumption was observed between the Lahu and Akha groups. The consumption of this dietary component also exhibited gender-based differences, although gender was less influential than ethnicity. PERMANOVA confirmed a substantial independent effect of geographic location on gut microbiota (Fby margin = 12.96, p = 0.001) after adjusting for all other factors (ethnicity, age, gender, BMI, SBP, and DBP), with no significant dispersion. Overall, both geographic location and ethnicity were associated with variations in gut microbiota and dietary habits, with geographic location showing a stronger association with gut microbiota composition.
 

## Discussion
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study in Thailand that investigates the influence of both ethnicity and geographic location on gut microbiota composition using absolute quantification (qPCR) of 24 bacterial taxa, while also considering dietary habits and participant characteristics. We collected stool samples from 102 unrelated individuals belonging to Tibeto-Burman-speaking hill-tribe groups residing in Chiang Mai and Chiang Rai Provinces in Northern Thailand. We examined how these factors were associated with gut microbiota profiles across different ethnicities and geographic locations. To minimize confounding effects, we controlled for ethnic backgrounds (Akha, Lahu, and Lisu) and geographic locations (Chiang Mai and Chiang Rai Provinces). Our results revealed that both geographic location and ethnicity were associated with gut microbiota composition, with geographic location exhibiting a relatively stronger association.
Ethnicity has been widely recognized as a significant factor influencing the composition of human gut microbiota [ , , ]. Our findings support this, revealing that while overall gut microbiota composition in Chiang Mai Province did not differ significantly by ethnicity, specific microbial taxa showed notable differences. In contrast, in Chiang Rai Province, ethnicity had a clear impact on both overall gut microbiota composition and specific taxa. These results align with broader trends identified in larger population studies. For instance, Deschasaux et al. (2018) reported ethnicity-associated differences in gut microbiota among Dutch, Ghanaian, Moroccan, African Surinamese, South-Asian Surinamese, and Turkish populations residing in Amsterdam, the Netherlands [ ]. Similarly, Dwiyanto et al. (2021), observed gut microbiota variations among Chinese, Indian, Malay, and Jakun individuals in Southern Peninsular Malaysia [ ]. Furthermore, both direct statistical testing and PLS-DA consistently identified Actinobacteria as more prevalent in AkhaCM, and Actinomyces (belonging to the Actinobacteria phylum) as notably enriched in the AkhaCR group, while it was least abundant in LisuCR. These findings are consistent with a study comparing gut bacterial communities between Han and Tibetan populations on the Tibetan Plateau, which reported differing abundances of Actinobacteria between these two ethnic groups [ ]. Given that our study population was drawn from communities residing at higher altitudes (> 600 m above sea level), these converging findings suggest that the relationship between ethnicity and gut microbiota may be influenced by environmental factors, which could contribute to differentiation in microbial composition at specific taxonomic levels.
Multivariate analyses further indicated that ethnicity was more strongly associated with dietary habits than with gut microbiota composition. For instance, the Akha ethnic group tended to consume higher amounts of fresh meat than the Lahu ethnic groups across both geographic locations, suggesting that these dietary patterns might be influenced by ethnic identity. Furthermore, the consumption of non-processed meat showed contrasting associations with specific microbial taxa in these two ethnic subgroups (positive with M. smithii and F. prausnitzii in AkhaCR, but negative with C. minuta in LahuCM). These results imply that the relationship between gut microbiota and dietary habits may be influenced by ethnic-specific factors (e.g., cultural practice), as seen in previous studies [ ], in which different levels of gut bacteria (Lachnospira and Ruminococcus-1) across racial/ethnic groups were linked with opposing effects of vegetable and red meat consumption on microbial abundance. While such associations can fluctuate across studies, our findings highlight how ethnic-specific dietary behaviors can differentially influence gut microbiota across populations.
Our findings demonstrated that geographic location was associated with gut microbiota composition across both the Akha and Lahu ethnic groups. The greater intra-ethnic variation in gut microbiota across geographic regions, compared to inter-ethnic variation within the same region, aligns with previous studies on Han and seven ethnic minority groups [ ], as well as with a large-scale study involving Tibetan, Han, Hui, Miao, Mongolian, Uygur, Bai, Naxi, and Dong groups in China [ ]. These studies have consistently reported that geographic location is an important factor associated with gut microbiota composition, even when controlling for ethnicity. Furthermore, clear microbial differences emerged between participants residing in Chiang Rai and Chiang Mai Provinces for both ethnic groups. Specifically, both AkhaCR and LahuCR had elevated bacterial abundance among the top five taxa (Bacteroidetes, Streptococcus, Coprococcus, Prevotella, and Bacteroides) when compared to their respective counterparts in Chiang Mai Province. Although the Akha and Lahu have distinct cultural backgrounds, this shared pattern may reflect common environmental exposures (e.g., living at elevations > 900 m above sea level) in Chiang Rai Province. However, dietary practices and food availability were not assessed in this study. As Lin et al. (2020) suggested that regional or ethnic characteristics tend to become more similar over time due to the mutual adoption of local dietary cultures, further investigation is needed to clarify the potential role of these factors [ ].
Beyond geographic influences alone, the integration of dietary data further revealed that diet-geography interactions were associated with differences in gut microbiota. In the Akha ethnic group, we identified a negative association between grain consumption and gut microbial abundance, with lower grain intake linked to higher microbial abundance in AkhaCR, while the opposite trend was observed for AkhaCM. Our results are consistent with those of prior studies showing that geographic relocation–such as migration from Thailand to the US–can induce notable gut microbiome shifts due to changes in dietary patterns, beyond the influence of ethnicity alone [ ]. Although LahuCR exhibited greater variability in dietary behaviors compared to LahuCM, which could potentially mask the effect of geographic location, this intra-group variation did not influence the gut microbiota. The greater dietary variability observed in LahuCR may be attributed to lifestyle differences; however, the effect of geographic location on gut microbiota remained unaffected. This indicated that the observed association between geographic location and gut microbiota composition may persist despite variations in diet; however further investigation is needed to clarify this relationship. Furthermore, in the Akha ethnic group, both age and gender interacted with geographic location to explain part of the variability in microbiota and diet. In contrast, among the Lahu, only gender interacted with geographic location. This suggested that demographic factors may modulate the relationship between geography and gut microbiota and/or dietary habits in an ethnic-specific manner. Collectively, our study indicates that geographic location was more prominently associated with variations in gut microbiota, with dietary habits acting as key mediators, particularly within the Akha ethnic group.
Finally, our study demonstrated that variations in gut microbiota were primarily associated with geographic differences, whereas ethnicity was more closely linked to dietary patterns. Higher gut microbiota abundance in individuals from Chiang Rai Province, suggested that environmental factors tied to specific regions may influence microbial abundance. These results contribute to a growing body of literature emphasizing that regional factors, including environmental exposures and dietary consumption patterns, play a dominant role in shaping gut microbial communities, often surpassing the effects of ethnic identity [ , ]. Participant characteristics, particularly gender, emerged as relevant factors that interacted with ethnicity and thus contributed to variations in dietary patterns. However, in comparison to the prominent effect of geographic location on gut microbiota, the influence of participant characteristics was relatively limited.
A key strength of this study is its design, which enabled us to disentangle the independent effects of ethnicity and geographic location on gut microbiota composition in populations residing in rural mountainous areas of Northern Thailand. By recruiting participants who self-identify with the same ethnic background for at least three generations, we were able to control for host genetic and cultural backgrounds, thereby reducing confounding influences and improving the robustness of our findings. However, several limitations should be acknowledged. First, the relatively small sample size, which resulted from the reliance on voluntary participation within a specific population (the Tibeto-Burman hill tribes), may have limited the statistical power to detect subtle effects. In addition, the age range of participants was random, introducing potential age-related variation that could influence both dietary habits and gut microbiota. Second, while dietary data were collected based on consumption frequency, detailed information on specific food items, portion sizes, and nutrient content was lacking, which may have limited our ability to fully capture the relationship between gut microbiota and dietary behaviors. Third, environmental exposures such as water sources [ ], sanitation [ ], and occupational activities [ ], which could influence gut microbiota composition and potentially confound the effects of geography should be incorporated into future studies. Finally, although qPCR enabled sensitive and specific quantification of targeted bacterial taxa [ ], this approach limited our ability to capture the full breadth of microbial diversity and community composition. Therefore, this study provides a preliminary and focused overview of key gut microbes in relation to ethnicity and geography. Future studies should incorporate next-generation sequencing approaches to achieve a more comprehensive understanding of gut microbial diversity and function.
To deepen our understanding of the observed patterns, future research with larger sample sizes should incorporate additional host-related factors, such as genetic background, blood chemistry, lifestyle patterns, socio-economic status, and cultural practices all of which may be related to the gut microbiota in these populations.

## Conclusion
We employed an absolute quantification (qPCR) approach to examine the abundance of gut microbiota among Tibeto-Burman-speaking hill-tribe populations in Northern Thailand and explored how ethnicity and geographic location may influence gut microbiota composition. Both direct comparisons and multivariate analyses indicated that geographic location was the most strongly associated with variations in gut microbiota, while ethnicity appeared to be more closely linked to differences in dietary habits and, to a lesser extent, gut microbiota composition across the two investigated regions (Chiang Mai and Chiang Rai Provinces). Gut microbiota profiles tended to be more similar between ethnic groups within the same location than among individuals of the same ethnicity residing in different regions. Considering dietary behaviors and participant characteristics, dietary habits varied in their association with gut microbiota across ethnic and geographic groups. Host factors such as age, gender, and BMI had a comparatively smaller influence on microbial variation in this study.

## Supporting information
S1 TextS1 Fig. Partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) of gut microbiota across ethnic groups. Discriminant analysis identifying key features (microbial taxa) associated with each ethnic group in Chiang Mai province, where the median values are maximized along Component 1 (A) and Component 2 (B). (C) Discriminant analysis identifying key features (microbial taxa) associated with each ethnic group in Chiang Rai province, where the median values are maximized along Component 1. Bar lengths represent the loading weights, reflecting the contribution of each taxon (ranked from bottom to top). Red = AkhaCM; Light red = AkhaCR; Blue = LahuCM; Light blue = LahuCR; Light purple = LisuCR; CM = Chiang Mai; CR = Chiang Rai. S2 Fig. Multiple factor analysis (MFA) integrating gut microbiota and dietary habits between ethnic groups in Chiang Mai Province. (A) Bar plot showing the contribution of groups to Dimensions 1 and 2 (Dim 1 and Dim 2). (B) Correlation plot illustrating the relationship between dietary habits and dimensions. (C) Correlation circle plot showing the association between quantitative variables (microbial taxa) and dimensions. (D) Factor map displaying individual profiles grouped by ethnicity. Red = AkhaCM; Blue = LahuCM; CM = Chiang Mai; Dim = dimension. S3 Fig. Multiple factor analysis (MFA) integrating gut microbiota and dietary habits across ethnic groups in Chiang Rai Province. (A) Bar plot showing the contribution of groups to Dimensions 1 and 2 (Dim 1 and Dim 2). (B) Correlation plot illustrating the relationship between dietary habits and dimensions. (C) Correlation circle plot showing the association between quantitative variables (microbial taxa) and dimensions. (D) Factor map displaying individual profiles grouped by ethnicity. Light red = AkhaCR; Light blue = LahuCR; Light purple = LisuCR; CR = Chiang Rai; Dim = dimension. S4 Fig. Multiple factor analysis (MFA) integrating gut microbiota and dietary habits, and participant characteristics between ethnic groups in Chiang Mai Province. (A) Bar plot showing the contribution of groups to Dimensions 1 and 2 (Dim 1 and Dim 2). (B) Correlation plot illustrating the relationship between dietary habits and dimensions. (C) Correlation circle plot showing the association between quantitative variables (microbial taxa and participant characteristics) and dimensions. (D) Factor map displaying individual profiles grouped by ethnicity. Red = AkhaCM; Blue = LahuCM; CM = Chiang Mai; Dim = dimension. S5 Fig. Beta dispersion analysis based on a Euclidean distance matrix illustrating variation in the dispersion of dietary behaviors between two ethnic groups in Chiang Mai province. A: ordination plot, B: PCoA coordinate plot. Red = AkhaCM; Blue = LahuCM; CM = Chiang Mai. S6 Fig. Multiple factor analysis (MFA) integrating gut microbiota and dietary habits, and participant characteristics between ethnic groups in Chiang Rai Province. (A) Bar plot showing the contribution of groups to Dimensions 1 and 2 (Dim 1 and Dim 2). (B) Correlation plot illustrating the relationship between dietary habits and dimensions. (C) Correlation circle plot showing the association between quantitative variables (microbial taxa and participant characteristics) and dimensions. (D) Factor map displaying individual profiles grouped by ethnicity. Light red = AkhaCR; Light blue = LahuCR; Light purple = LisuCR; CR = Chiang Rai; Dim = dimension. S7 Fig. Multiple factor analysis (MFA) integrating gut microbiota and dietary habits between geographic locations within the Akha ethnic group. (A) Bar plot showing the contribution of groups to Dimensions 1 and 2 (Dim 1 and Dim 2). (B) Correlation plot illustrating the relationship between dietary habits and dimensions. (C) Correlation circle plot showing the association between quantitative variables (microbial taxa) and dimensions. (D) Factor map displaying individual profiles grouped by geographic location. Red = AkhaCM; Light red = AkhaCR; CM = Chiang Mai; CR = Chiang Rai; Dim = dimension. S8 Fig. Multiple factor analysis (MFA) integrating gut microbiota and dietary habits between geographic locations within the Lahu ethnic group. (A) Bar plot showing the contribution of groups to Dimensions 1 and 2 (Dim 1 and Dim 2). (B) Correlation plot illustrating the relationship between dietary habits and dimensions. (C) Correlation circle plot showing the association between quantitative variables (microbial taxa) and dimensions. (D) Factor map displaying individual profiles grouped by geographic location. Blue = LahuCM; Light blue = LahuCR; CM = Chiang Mai; CR = Chiang Rai; Dim = dimension. S9 Fig. Beta dispersion analysis based on a Euclidean distance matrix illustrating the variation in dispersion of dietary behaviors between the LahuCM and LahuCR groups. A: ordination plot, B: PCoA coordinate plot. Blue = LahuCM; Light blue = LahuCR; CM = Chiang Mai; CR = Chiang Rai.
(ZIP)
S2 TextS1 Table. Primer pairs targeting bacterial 16S rRNA genes. S2 Table. Mean differences in gut microbiota abundance between ethnic groups within Chiang Mai Province. S3 Table. Mean differences in gut microbiota abundance between ethnic groups within Chiang Rai Province. S4 Table. Median differences in dietary consumption frequencies between ethnic groups within Chiang Mai Province. S5 Table. Median differences in dietary consumption frequencies between ethnic groups within Chiang Rai Province. S6 Table. Significant Spearman’s rank Correlations (p < 0.05) between gut microbiota and dietary habits in Chiang Mai province. S7 Table. Significant Spearman’s rank Correlations (p < 0.05) between gut microbiota and dietary habits in Chiang Rai province. S8 Table. Mean differences in gut microbiota abundance between geographic locations within the Akha ethnic group. S9 Table. Mean differences in gut microbiota abundance between geographic locations within the Lahu ethnic group. S10 Table. Median differences in dietary consumption frequencies between geographic locations within the Akha ethnic group. S11 Table. Median differences in dietary consumption frequencies between geographic locations within the Lahu ethnic group.
(ZIP)
S3 TextS1 File. Raw data for downstream analyses. S2 File. Raw data and MFA results on associations between gut microbiota and dietary habits across ethnicities and geographic locations. S3 File. Raw data and MFA results on associations between gut microbiota, dietary habits, and participant characteristics across ethnicities and geographic locations. S4 File. Raw data and PERMANOVA of gut microbiota and dietary habits across ethnicities and geographic locations.
(ZIP)

We would like to thank all volunteers for providing fecal samples, anthropometric measurements, and dietary behavior data from five villages in Chiang Mai and Chiang Rai provinces. Special thanks to Mr. Suwapat Satupak, Mrs. Maneesawan Dansawan, and Mr. Chayapa Sombat for their technical assistance in collecting samples.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0332108.r001Decision Letter 0
RAJUKAMARAJAcademic Editor© 2025 KAMARAJ RAJU2025KAMARAJ RAJUhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
3 Jul 2025

PONE-D-25-17528Effects of ethnicity and geography on the fecal microbiota and dietary habits of Tibeto-Burman hill tribes in Northern ThailandPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Popluechai,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Aug 17 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org . When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols . Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols .
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
KAMARAJ RAJU, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1.Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. Please note that funding information should not appear in any section or other areas of your manuscript. We will only publish funding information present in the Funding Statement section of the online submission form. Please remove any funding-related text from the manuscript.
3. PLOS requires an ORCID iD for the corresponding author in Editorial Manager on papers submitted after December 6th, 2016. Please ensure that you have an ORCID iD and that it is validated in Editorial Manager. To do this, go to ‘Update my Information’ (in the upper left-hand corner of the main menu), and click on the Fetch/Validate link next to the ORCID field. This will take you to the ORCID site and allow you to create a new iD or authenticate a pre-existing iD in Editorial Manager.
4. We note that Figure 1 in your submission contain map/satellite images which may be copyrighted. All PLOS content is published under the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY 4.0), which means that the manuscript, images, and Supporting Information files will be freely available online, and any third party is permitted to access, download, copy, distribute, and use these materials in any way, even commercially, with proper attribution. For these reasons, we cannot publish previously copyrighted maps or satellite images created using proprietary data, such as Google software (Google Maps, Street View, and Earth). For more information, see our copyright guidelines: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/licenses-and-copyright.
 We require you to either (1) present written permission from the copyright holder to publish these figures specifically under the CC BY 4.0 license, or (2) remove the figures from your submission:
 1. You may seek permission from the original copyright holder of Figure 1 to publish the content specifically under the CC BY 4.0 license. 
 We recommend that you contact the original copyright holder with the Content Permission Form (http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=7c09/content-permission-form.pdf) and the following text:
“I request permission for the open-access journal PLOS ONE to publish XXX under the Creative Commons Attribution License (CCAL) CC BY 4.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). Please be aware that this license allows unrestricted use and distribution, even commercially, by third parties. Please reply and provide explicit written permission to publish XXX under a CC BY license and complete the attached form.”
Please upload the completed Content Permission Form or other proof of granted permissions as an "Other" file with your submission.
 In the figure caption of the copyrighted figure, please include the following text: “Reprinted from [ref] under a CC BY license, with permission from [name of publisher], original copyright [original copyright year].”
 2. If you are unable to obtain permission from the original copyright holder to publish these figures under the CC BY 4.0 license or if the copyright holder’s requirements are incompatible with the CC BY 4.0 license, please either i) remove the figure or ii) supply a replacement figure that complies with the CC BY 4.0 license. Please check copyright information on all replacement figures and update the figure caption with source information. If applicable, please specify in the figure caption text when a figure is similar but not identical to the original image and is therefore for illustrative purposes only.
The following resources for replacing copyrighted map figures may be helpful:
 USGS National Map Viewer (public domain): http://viewer.nationalmap.gov/viewer/
The Gateway to Astronaut Photography of Earth (public domain): http://eol.jsc.nasa.gov/sseop/clickmap/
Maps at the CIA (public domain): https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/index.html and https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/cia-maps-publications/index.html
NASA Earth Observatory (public domain): http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/
Landsat: http://landsat.visibleearth.nasa.gov/
USGS EROS (Earth Resources Observatory and Science (EROS) Center) (public domain): http://eros.usgs.gov/#
Natural Earth (public domain): http://www.naturalearthdata.com/
5. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Additional Editor Comments:
Dear Dr. Siam Popluechai,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript entitled "Effects of ethnicity and geography on the fecal microbiota and dietary habits of TibetoBurman hill tribes in Northern Thailand" to Plos One.
We have now received reports from two reviewers:
• Reviewer 1 has recommended a minor revision, noting a few areas where clarification or small adjustments would enhance the manuscript.
• Reviewer 2 has recommended the manuscript for acceptance in its current form, indicating satisfaction with the overall quality and contribution of your work.
Based on these reviews, the editorial team has decided to request a minor revision before we proceed with final acceptance. We kindly ask you to address the comments raised by Reviewer 1 and submit a revised version of your manuscript. Please include a detailed point-by-point response to the reviewer’s suggestions, indicating the changes made or explaining your rationale if no changes were made.
Once the revised manuscript is received, we will proceed to the next step, which may include a brief re-evaluation to confirm that the concerns have been adequately addressed.
We appreciate your contribution to the journal and look forward to receiving your revised manuscript soon.
Best regards,
Kamaraj Raju
Academic Editor
Plos One
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Reviewer Comments
This manuscript presents a comprehensive and well-performed study investigating influences of ethnicity and geography on gut microbiota composition and dietary intake with respect to Tibeto-Burman hill-tribe populations in Northern Thailand. Quantitative PCR, multivariate statistics (MFA, PLS-DA), and the sampling from carefully defined ethnic and geographic subgroups lend weight to this field. The manuscript is straightforward, the figures informative, and the statistical approaches proper. However, there are issues that should be addressed to strengthen the manuscript prior to publication.
Comments
- While qPCR could be considered an exact technique-matters for numbers, the authors would be wise to elucidate why they opted for qPCR instead of the more common 16S rRNA sequencing, especially concerning taxonomic range and resolution. Were there any drawbacks with taxonomic profiling?
- A total of 102 subjects divided into various subgroups (3 ethnic groups × 2 locations) renders per-group samples quite small for statistically conclusive interpretations. Please consider conducting a power analysis or discussing the limitations presented by such small group sizes.
- The manuscript tends to assert causal relationships between geography and gut microbiota composition. However, strong causal claims are not supportable due to the cross-sectional design of the study. It is requested that the language state association rather than causality.
- Environmental exposures beyond what has been considered in diet and elevation have not been discussed (i.e., water sources, sanitation, occupational activities). These exposures could alter the gut microbiota and potentially confound effects of geography. Consider mentioning this as a limitation.
- The authors state that all relevant data are available in the manuscript and supporting information. The authors should also please consider making raw qPCR data and all metadata used in the multivariate analyses
- Clarify how the participants were confirmed to have no kinship relation and to be representative of their ethnic groups.
- The manuscript also states that illiterate participants signed a consent form with a fingerprint. Please specify if this procedure is aligned with national and international procedures for ethical consideration.
- Heatmaps and similar figures (e.g., Figs 2 and 3) require better contrast and simpler and clearer legends to be more interpretable.
- Use the same ethnic group names consistently throughout (e.g., "AkhaCM" vs. "Akha CM") and explain the abbreviations at first use both in the text and in figure legends.
- Some sentences could be clearer (e.g., lines 295–298). A thorough proofreading is recommended.
Recommendation: Minor Revision
This study addresses an important gap in the literature and provides valuable insights into how geography and ethnicity influence gut microbiota in underrepresented populations. With minor revisions and clarifications, the manuscript would be suitable for publication.
Reviewer #2: Dear Editor,
I have carefully reviewed the manuscript titled "Effects of ethnicity and geography on the fecal microbiota and dietary habits of Tibeto-Burman hill tribes in Northern Thailand" submitted to Plos One. The authors have presented a well structured and scientifically sound study that contributes valuable insights to the field of Gut Microbiome Study.
Strengths of the Manuscript:
• The research question is clearly defined and relevant.
• The methodology is appropriate and well executed.
• Data analysis is thorough and supports the conclusions drawn.
• The discussion effectively contextualizes the findings with existing literature.
• The manuscript is well written and easy to follow.
Recommendation: I recommend acceptance of this manuscript in its current form / with minor editorial revisions (grammar, formatting), if needed by the journal.
Congratulations to the authors on their work.
Sincerely,
Sivagami Subramanian
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #1: Yes:  Pratheep Thangaraj
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/ . PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org . Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0332108.r002Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version1
30 Jul 2025

Editor
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming.
Response: We have carefully reviewed the manuscript and supporting files to ensure that all formatting and file naming conventions comply with PLOS ONE’s style requirements, as outlined in the journal’s guidelines.
2. Please note that funding information should not appear in any section or other areas of your manuscript. We will only publish funding information present in the Funding Statement section of the online submission form. Please remove any funding-related text from the manuscript.
Response: We have removed all funding-related information from the manuscript and have provided the relevant details exclusively in the Funding Statement section of the online submission form, in accordance with the journal’s requirements.
3. PLOS requires an ORCID iD for the corresponding author in Editorial Manager on papers submitted after December 6th, 2016. Please ensure that you have an ORCID iD and that it is validated in Editorial Manager. To do this, go to ‘Update my Information’ (in the upper left-hand corner of the main menu), and click on the Fetch/Validate link next to the ORCID field. This will take you to the ORCID site and allow you to create a new iD or authenticate a pre-existing iD in Editorial Manager.
Response: We appreciate the reminder. We have successfully verified the corresponding author’s ORCID iD and updated our information in Editorial Manager as instructed.
4. We note that Figure 1 in your submission contain map/satellite images which may be copyrighted. All PLOS content is published under the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY 4.0), which means that the manuscript, images, and Supporting Information files will be freely available online, and any third party is permitted to access, download, copy, distribute, and use these materials in any way, even commercially, with proper attribution. For these reasons, we cannot publish previously copyrighted maps or satellite images created using proprietary data, such as Google software (Google Maps, Street View, and Earth).
Response: We were unable to obtain permission from the original copyright holder to publish the map/satellite images in Figure 1 under the CC BY 4.0 license. Therefore, we have removed Figure 1 and replaced it with Table 1, which presents the relevant sampling information.
5. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Response: We have carefully reviewed our reference list. All references remain current, relevant, and valid for the scientific context of our study.
Reviewer 1
This manuscript presents a comprehensive and well-performed study investigating influences of ethnicity and geography on gut microbiota composition and dietary intake with respect to Tibeto-Burman hill-tribe populations in Northern Thailand. Quantitative PCR, multivariate statistics (MFA, PLS-DA), and the sampling from carefully defined ethnic and geographic subgroups lend weight to this field. The manuscript is straightforward, the figures informative, and the statistical approaches proper. However, there are issues that should be addressed to strengthen the manuscript prior to publication.
Response: We are grateful for the reviewer’s thoughtful feedback and careful evaluation of our manuscript. We sincerely thank you for the insightful and constructive comments and suggestions, which have significantly helped us improve the overall structure and clarity of the manuscript. Below, we provide a point-by-point response to each comment.
Comments
1. While qPCR could be considered an exact technique-matters for numbers, the authors would be wise to elucidate why they opted for qPCR instead of the more common 16S rRNA sequencing, especially concerning taxonomic range and resolution. Were there any drawbacks with taxonomic profiling?
Response: We thank the reviewer for this insightful comment. As this study aimed to quantify and compare specific gut bacteria of interest across different ethnic groups and geographic locations, we employed a qPCR-based approach, which enabled rapid detection with high sensitivity and specificity (Yan et al., 2024). This method provided a preliminary overview of how ethnic and geographic factors may influence gut microbiota in these underrepresented communities. While qPCR provides high sensitivity and specificity for selected taxa, we acknowledge that qPCR does not provide a comprehensive overview of the microbial community structure or diversity, as would be achievable through 16S rRNA gene sequencing, which offers broader taxonomic resolution. We have discussed this as a limitation of our study in the Discussion section (lines 661-666).
2. A total of 102 subjects divided into various subgroups (3 ethnic groups × 2 locations) renders per-group samples quite small for statistically conclusive interpretations. Please consider conducting a power analysis or discussing the limitations presented by such small group sizes.
Response: We appreciate the reviewer’s comment regarding the small sample size within each subgroup and its implications for statistical interpretation. We conducted a power analysis for group comparisons using the pwr package in R. The analysis indicated that approximately 64 participants per group (for two-group comparisons) and 52 participants per group (for three-group comparisons) would be required to detect a medium effect size with 80% power at a significance level of 0.05. However, recruitment for this study was based on voluntary participation from specific communities, namely the Tibeto-Burman hill tribes, which resulted in a smaller sample size than the calculated requirement. This limitation, which stems from reliance on voluntary participation within a specific population, has been acknowledged in the revised manuscript (lines 651-654).
3. The manuscript tends to assert causal relationships between geography and gut microbiota composition. However, strong causal claims are not supportable due to the cross-sectional design of the study. It is requested that the language state association rather than causality.
Response: We greatly appreciate the reviewer’s thoughtful comment. We agree that, given the cross-sectional design of our study, the language should reflect associations rather than causal relationships. In response to this valuable suggestion, we have carefully revised the language throughout the manuscript to ensure that statements regarding geography and gut microbiota composition are presented as associations rather than implying causality.
4. Environmental exposures beyond what has been considered in diet and elevation have not been discussed (i.e., water sources, sanitation, occupational activities). These exposures could alter the gut microbiota and potentially confound effects of geography. Consider mentioning this as a limitation.
Response: Thank you for raising this important point. We agree that environmental exposures beyond diet and elevation, such as water sources, sanitation, and occupational activities, may serve as potential confounders influencing gut microbiota composition. We have acknowledged this as a limitation of our study and highlighted the importance of incorporating these variables in future research (lines 658-661).
5. The authors state that all relevant data are available in the manuscript and supporting information. The authors should also please consider making raw qPCR data and all metadata used in the multivariate analyses
Response: Thank you for your valuable suggestion. We have provided raw qPCR data and all relevant metadata used in the multivariate analyses in S1-S4 Files.
6. Clarify how the participants were confirmed to have no kinship relation and to be representative of their ethnic groups.
Response: Thank you for raising this important point. We confirmed that participants had no close kinship relationships and were representative of their respective ethnic groups through a sampling process aligned with a previous study (Kampuansai et al., 2023). The selection of ethnic groups was guided by historical and ethnographic data, including detailed accounts of cultural identity and community organization from Inta et al., 2023, as well as databases from the Health Center for Ethnic Group, Marginal People and Migrant Worker (HHDC), and the Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn Anthropology Centre (SAC). Participant recruitment involved direct interviews with volunteers and consultations with local community leaders who were knowledgeable about family lineages and community structure. This process ensured that participants were not closely related to others in the study for at least three generations. We have clarified this procedure in the revised Materials and Methods section (lines 112-116).
7. The manuscript also states that illiterate participants signed a consent form with a fingerprint. Please specify if this procedure is aligned with national and international procedures for ethical consideration.
Response: Thank you for highlighting this important point. We confirm that the procedure for obtaining informed consent from illiterate participants using fingerprint signatures strictly adhered to all relevant ethical guidelines and regulations, in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. The consent form was verbally explained to each participant in their native language, and an impartial witness was present throughout the process. The witness also signed a statement confirming that the participant understood the information and voluntarily agreed to participate. We have expanded the Materials and Methods section to clarify this procedure (lines 100-105) and have uploaded the translated consent form for reference.
8. Heatmaps and similar figures (e.g., Figs 2 and 3) require better contrast and simpler and clearer legends to be more interpretable.
Response: We have updated the figure numbers, which are now presented as Figure 1–2. In addition, we have simplified and clarified the figure legends to improve their interpretability for readers.
9. Use the same ethnic group names consistently throughout (e.g., "AkhaCM" vs. "Akha CM") and explain the abbreviations at first use both in the text and in figure legends.
Response: The ethnic group names in the revised manuscript have been corrected for consistency throughout the text, and all abbreviations have been clearly explained at their first occurrence in both the main text and figure legends.
10. Some sentences could be clearer (e.g., lines 295–298). A thorough proofreading is recommended.
Response: We thank the reviewer for the suggestion. The sentences have been revised to improve clarity and readability, as recommended (lines 316-319). Additionally, the manuscript has undergone professional proofreading by Editage. An editing certificate has been included for your reference.
Reviewer 2
I have carefully reviewed the manuscript titled "Effects of ethnicity and geography on the fecal microbiota and dietary habits of Tibeto-Burman hill tribes in Northern Thailand" submitted to Plos One. The authors have presented a well-structured and scientifically sound study that contributes valuable insights to the field of Gut Microbiome Study.
Strengths of the Manuscript:
• The research question is clearly defined and relevant.
• The methodology is appropriate and well executed.
• Data analysis is thorough and supports the conclusions drawn.
• The discussion effectively contextualizes the findings with existing literature.
• The manuscript is well written and easy to follow.
Recommendation: I recommend acceptance of this manuscript in its current form / with minor editorial revisions (grammar, formatting), if needed by the journal.
Congratulations to the authors on their work.
Response: We greatly appreciate the reviewer for your thorough evaluation and kind feedback. We are grateful for the positive comments regarding the clarity of our research question, the appropriateness of our methodology, and the strength of our analysis and discussion. To ensure clarity and consistency, the manuscript has been professionally proofread by Editage A certificate of editing has been included as an attachment for your reference. Additionally, the formatting has been revised to ensure consistency, as previously mentioned by the editor.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.pdf
10.1371/journal.pone.0332108.r003Decision Letter 1
RAJUKAMARAJAcademic Editor© 2025 KAMARAJ RAJU2025KAMARAJ RAJUhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
27 Aug 2025

Effects of ethnicity and geography on the fecal microbiota and dietary habits of Tibeto-Burman hill tribes in Northern Thailand
PONE-D-25-17528R1
Dear Dr. Popluechai,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager®  and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. For questions related to billing, please contact billing support .
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
KAMARAJ RAJU, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Dear Siam Popluechai,
As the Academic Editor responsible for handling your submission, I am pleased to inform you that your manuscript entitled “Effects of ethnicity and geography on the fecal microbiota and dietary habits of Tibeto-Burman hill tribes in Northern Thailand” has been accepted for publication in PlosOne.
Your work provides significant insights into the role of ethnicity and geography in shaping gut microbiota and dietary practices, particularly among Tibeto-Burman hill tribes in Northern Thailand. The reviewers and I agree that your study will be of considerable interest to readers and makes an important contribution to the field.
Thank you for choosing PlosOne the venue for your research.
With best regards,
Kamaraj Raju
Academic Editor
PlosOne
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0332108.r004Acceptance letter
RAJUKAMARAJAcademic Editor© 2025 KAMARAJ RAJU2025KAMARAJ RAJUhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.PONE-D-25-17528R1
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Popluechai,
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
You will receive further instructions from the production team, including instructions on how to review your proof when it is ready. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few days to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps.
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
You will receive an invoice from PLOS for your publication fee after your manuscript has reached the completed accept phase. If you receive an email requesting payment before acceptance or for any other service, this may be a phishing scheme. Learn how to identify phishing emails and protect your accounts at https://explore.plos.org/phishing.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access.
Kind regards,
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. KAMARAJ RAJU
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE