pmcIEEE Open J Eng Med BiolIEEE Open J Eng Med Biol4138ieeeojemb1017666310076400OJEMBIEEE Open Journal of Engineering in Medicine and Biology2644-1276Institute of Electrical and Electronics EngineersPMC10896418PMC10896418.110896418108964183841519710.1109/OJEMB.2024.33517171ArticleGrand Challenges at the Interface of Engineering and
Medicine
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8059-4659SubramaniamShankarSubramaniamShankar .
The manuscript provides a roadmap of needed technologies and concepts as well as a
discussion of the interdisciplinary training that will enable these challenges to be
addressed. Our main objective is to inspire students and researchers to think of
novel paradigms and bring new innovations and engineering ideas to human health and
medicine. 
While one of the great engineering challenges of the 20th century was
innovative design of implantable and prosthetic devices, the new paradigm we
describe here begins with the complete digital mapping of human health and disease.
This mapping heralds the birth of precision medicine across all scales with the
ultimate goal of creating an “avatar” for every human that can
prognosticate the health and wellness of the human in a non-invasive manner. The
avatar is not merely a digital twin but can be a physical manifestation of the human
tissue or organ that can be explored ex vivo. The
creation of avatars of human
physiology is one of the current grand challenges at the
interface of engineering and medicine. Implied in this concept is the design and
construction of precise engineering models of human physiology from in
silico models to actual realization.
One of the most intriguing concepts of this design is the notion of real time sensing
and adaptation to all input by human physiology, -which is a dynamic control and
optimization problem. The engineering notion of avatar also rests on the idea that
each component of the human avatar can be treated much like the individual tissues
and organs designed independently to function in a synergistic manner with other
components. These components can also be used as smart and implantable
devices to augment or in some cases replace their human
counterparts. This is a significant grand challenge at the
interface of engineering and human physiology.
The last decade of the 20th century was declared as the decade of the
human brain, albeit a little prematurely. The human brain arguably is the most
complex engineered physiological component of the human. Understanding the brain and
its myriad processes represents one of the major challenges of our time in terms of
the treatment of both neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disease. At the same
time in the age of artificial intelligence there remains no greater opportunity than
to build artificially intelligent machines that resemble our innate and organic
intelligence. In the vein of conceptualizing avatars, the greater challenge would be
the design and actuation of the human
exocortex, the design and mirroring of the functioning human
brain outside of the human body. A realistic implementation of such a brain would
revolutionize human existence ranging from improving perception to addressing
neurodegeneration. The revolution in stem cell-based regenerative technologies
offers the hope of realizing such a grand challenge.
Humans and microbes have coexisted since the origin of life on earth. The recent
pandemic has strongly reinforced the notion that human physiology is strongly
symbiotic with both living and non-living organisms, the latter carrying the
blueprint for replication. Humans have faced these real challenges of infection
since the dawn of history, characterized beautifully by Thucydides the
4th century BC historian describing the plague of Athens, perhaps the
first conceptualization of the immune system. Engineering the immune
system has immense consequences ranging from curing
infection to cancer and in humans overcoming next generation infections. We have
just recovered from one of the most challenging times of our century with the
pandemic. The remarkable contribution of engineering in the design and manufacturing
of RNA vaccines is a strong harbinger for the future of engineering in medicine.
At the highly granular level, the most revolutionary development in the past decades
is the sequencing of the human genome and epigenome. The blueprint of human
physiology only provides the most basic components for engineering design. Making
the whole larger than the parts, designing and modifying living systems from
engineering principles is not a utopian concept. Designing and
engineering genomes for repurposing organisms and introducing genomic
perturbations that can alter pathophysiology are already
beginning to happen, albeit at a phenomenological level. Developing the engineering
foundations for accomplishing this at a rational level has emerged as a grand
challenge.
These themes formed the core ideas of the “Grand Challenges at the Interface of
Engineering and Medicine Workshop” organized by the IEEE EMBS, JHU and UCSD.
We present below a detailed discussion of these grand challenges framed as Societal
Needs, Challenges, Enabling Technologies, and Multidisciplinary Teams and Core
Competencies.

II.

## Grand Challenge 1: Precision Medicine – Creating Avatars of Human
Physiology
A.

## Societal Need
The era of Classical Medicine, as practiced through the 18th century,
was based on cataloging of patient symptoms for diagnosis and empirical
selection of therapeutic approaches. Beginning in the 19th century,
scientific advances such as the germ theory of Robert Koch contributed
increasingly to our understanding of the mechanisms of disease, ushering in the
era of Modern Medicine in which both the disease diagnosis and treatment are
guided by knowledge of the mechanisms of disease. The second half of the
20th century has witnessed a molecular approach to understanding
and treating pathologies, introducing the concept of molecular medicine. Despite
these advances, misdiagnosis remains prevalent even for common conditions with
potential morbidity and mortality. In addition, a number of diseases including
cancer, cardiovascular and autoimmune disease show wide divergence to therapy in
a highly individual manner, requiring patient-specific approaches. This need has
led to calls for Precision Medicine in which the focus is on
identifying approaches that will be effective for an individual patient based on
comorbidities, and genetic, environmental, and lifestyle factors. We call this
new approach AccuMedicine, a combination of precision engineering and
precision medicine, and recognize that multiple layers of
challenges are involved at the interface of engineering and medicine.

B.

## Challenges
1)

## Develop Accurate Models of Physiology That Integrates Multimodal
Measurements and Physiological Function
Medicine will be “personalized” and will have
“precision” if and only if we understand how to bridge
individual patient data to diagnosis, risk prediction, and optimal
treatment. We need new high-throughput assays that probe an
individual's biological function at the molecular, cellular and organ
scales; validated modeling methods that harness these data across spatial
and temporal scales, along with high-throughput genomic, transcriptomic,
epigenetic, metabolomic and proteomic data, to diagnose, predict the risk
of, and treat disease. We also must continue to develop patient-specific ex
vivo tissue surrogates (e.g., organ-on-chip technologies) that could be used
for biological discovery and screening. Our grand challenge is to improve
the practice of medicine by making diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of
disease more accurate by using data-driven mechanistic and deep learning
models, within AccuMedicine. Notably, the US congress has recently approved
a bill allowing submission of physiological data obtained in
vitro instead of preclinical animal data, for investigational
drug applications.

2)

## Develop a Suite of Model-Derived Diagnostic and Therapeutic Choices to
Choose one That Best Addresses Comorbidities, Concomitant Medications,
Potential Risks and Costs
A large number of hospital deaths across the world are driven by infections
and poor hospital care. Developing models of patient state in many different
disease settings that enable accurate alerting of physicians to their status
has the potential to save millions of lives and reduce costs through
improved care and efficient utilization of expensive resources. To do so, we
need automated real time monitoring technologies, real time acquisition and
processing of data, and real time analysis and modeling.

3)

## Develop Sensors and the Digital Human With Dynamic Feedback
The past two decades have witnessed the emergence of wearable sensors, both
invasive and non-invasive, which measure physiological parameters in a
digital manner. More recently, this has been supplemented by unobtrusive
sensing often in the form of environmental monitors to infer health status,
which has the advantage that they do not suffer from adherence issues if the
user forgets or decides not to don a wearable device. Accurate diagnoses
require an unambiguous assessment of physiological state and how that state
has changed over time. Yearly check-ups do not have the temporal precision
or physiological acuity to predict the likelihood of many diseases such as a
stroke, heart attack or diabetes. Even regular monitoring of known health
problems can be imprecise and inefficient, requiring frequent visits to a
clinician. Ubiquitous technology would allow individuals and their providers
to determine lifestyle patterns that are most beneficial for each
individual, to predict disease exacerbations and intervene before the
emergence of acute events, and to track the efficacy of interventions in
real-time. A grand challenge is the integration of smart monitoring systems
that continuously sense and interpret multiple physiological variables
throughout the lifespan and their integration and analysis of their
streaming physiological data in real time to deliver a secure longitudinal
digital record of various aspects of human health. This dynamic feedback
will facilitate self-care and enable healthy lifestyle changes that will
help maintain a higher quality of life.

4)

## Engineering Digital Twins. Discovering the Rules and Operating Principles
of Biomedical Systems
Rapid advances in digital simulation and artificial intelligence are leading
to increasingly complex and realistic physiological models. To develop
models of a biomedical system requires a detailed understanding of the
system at multiple levels. The “digital twin” will enable
clinicians and caregivers to measure, analyze and treat pathologies prior to
their implementation in the “actual twin” and provide a deep
perspective of the intricate mechanisms of functional physiology and
pathophysiology. Take for example type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), a chronic
disease that affects 1 in 10 people around the world. Patients with T2DM
suffer from hyperglycemia requiring the maintenance of a stable blood
glucose level to decrease the risk of mortality and morbidity from
cardiovascular diseases. The grand challenge is to develop tools that will
lead to real-time prediction and decision-making for optimal diet and
optimal insulin usage.
The opportunity to construct digital twin technologies for the major organ
systems remains a grand challenge. Artificially intelligent engineered
systems of health and disease require data-driven mechanistic and deep
learning from the real twin. For instance, a digital twin of a T2DM patient
can be developed by integrating static data (e.g., comorbidities) with
real-time data (metabolomics, glucose, insulin, diet, exercise) as well as
with deterministic and stochastic rate models to develop a biology-informed
learning virtual system as a backbone of the T2DM digital twin.

5)

## Tissue and Organ Engineering Based on a priori
Quantitative Design Principles
Mathematical modeling, validated using experimental data, is increasingly
being used to provide mechanistic insights into complex biological systems
that have multiple interacting components, parallel pathways, and feedback
loops. These modeling efforts can also provide insights into emergent
properties that arise from inter-component interactions and guide design of
experiments. In contrast, translational efforts in tissue and organ
engineering have mostly relied on the experimental, trial-and-error approach
that can be costly and time-consuming. The translation pipeline can be
greatly accelerated by first performing in silico
experiments to optimize protocols for manufacturing regenerative medicine
products and treatment strategies, before embarking on the experimental
work. Mathematical modelling-based optimization of protocols for growing
bone tissue in a bioreactor is one example of the successful application of
this approach. For widespread application of this a priori
design-based approach to tissue and organ engineering, it would be critical
to develop appropriate mathematical modeling infrastructure, rigorously
validated mathematical models (mechanistic/phenomenological,
discrete/continuum, statistical) of relevant biological systems that can
integrate multiple data sources (e.g., molecular/cellular,
biomechanical/biochemical, imaging), and large-scale biological
databases.

C.

## Enabling Technologies
Several existing and future technologies will provide the basis for
AccuMedicine.
Sensors and instrumentation: Human health promises to be
transformed by real-time monitoring of the physical, chemical, and electrical
signals in the human body. This will require major advances in miniaturization
and biocompatibility that allow for sensors to operate unobtrusively within the
body harvesting and conserving energy. Data from ambient and environmental
sensors including imaging and activity sensors will provide additional
modalities.
Data science: Multimodal sensing to monitor and regulate health
generates vast amounts of data, which requires advances in biomedical data
science to integrate real-time mechanistic and data-driven models of human
biology into new kinds of hybrid, intelligent systems. Such data must be
simultaneously available and secure (e.g., stored in ways that comply with
regulatory requirements). The development of digital twins of tissues, organs
and body processes including biology-informed neural networks will require major
advances incorporating active and machine learning, innovative data
visualization techniques including those relying on virtual and augmented
reality.
Modeling and control: Automated systems to replace human
function must respond intelligently to the body. Doing so will require advances
in developing multiscale, dynamic models of physiological processes and control
algorithms that operate in the nonstationary, nonlinear environment of the human
body.
Chemistry and materials science: Material biocompatibility is of
primary concern for sensing technologies and materials for transducing
physiological events. Significant advances in material design and fabrication of
materials at the nanoscale are required to create the next generation of
biocompatible sensors and delivery systems. For long-term biochemical sensing,
reversible or sustainable material chemistry needs to be developed within the
implantable biomaterials space. Improved fabrication technologies are needed
that allow ex vivo modeling of physiological processes for biological discovery,
screening, and patient-specific precision medicine. Key focus areas should
include but not be limited to 3D printing/additive manufacturing,
BioMEMS-based microphysiological systems (“organ on chip”), and
three-dimensional polymer hydrogels.
Computational and mathematical modeling: A critical need exists
for the continued development of quantitative tools for tissue and organ
engineering, with inspiration from developmental and systems/synthetic
biology. Mathematical modelling and data science are important, and new ideas
and multi-scale approaches are needed.
Energy harvesting: Energy for sensing, computation, and
actuation requires integration with wearable and implantable energy source
technologies. This will require advances in energy harvesting technologies
attached to the human body. In addition to traditional wireless systems, the
conversion of mechanical or optical signals into electrical energy for sensors
and actuators offers great potential to advance the field.

D.

## Multi-Disciplinary Teams and Core Competencies
A major goal of biomedical engineering education is to train the next generation
of leaders who have a multidisciplinary background and can effectively integrate
their expertise in a team to perform research, develop diagnostic and
therapeutic tools, or design Precision Medicine treatments. The development of
smart and responsive systems to augment human function will require a
systems-level approach that considers fundamental principles from clinical
medicine, biology, computer science, and engineering - precisely the domains of
the biomedical engineer. The widespread adoption of smart and responsive systems
will create a paradigm shift in how healthcare is delivered with implementation
scientists facilitating the adoption of these new technologies and their
integration into the healthcare system.
Critical core competencies for Precision Medicine include: engineering
mathematics; data science and biostatistics; robust and resilient sensors and
instrumentation to detect relevant biological signals and behaviors; biology,
physiology and medicine to determine the appropriate responses; data science and
machine learning frameworks to infer actions from internal and external signals;
systems and controls to regulate the response locally or remotely; robotics to
manipulate the human body on the micro- and macro-scale; biomaterials and
bioelectronics to develop responsive devices and surrogate tissues that are
biocompatible; systems interoperability to ensure seamless integration across
platforms and formats; cybersecurity to protect personal data; engineering to
consider energy use and power delivery; human interface design to make devices
and data accessible and to optimize the user experience; and medical ethics to
consider the implications of augmented autonomous control.

III.

## Grand Challenge 2: SmartHuman – Developing Smart and Responsive Systems for
Human Function Augmentation
A.

## Societal Need
The length and quality of our life critically depends on the functionality of our
vital organs. As we live longer and better than ever before in the history of
humankind, our aging population has an increasing need to repair or replace our
tissues and organs lost to an injury, abnormality or disease. Organ
transplantation remains limited by the number of available donor organs and the
necessity for life-long immune suppression preventing organ rejection. The
artificial devices, such as kidney dialysis machines or lung support devices, do
not replace the entire organ function and are very difficult for the patient,
especially over extended periods of time.
The field of tissue engineering was created in the late 1980s by the convergence
of engineering with life sciences, in response to the need and opportunity to
repair or replace our tissues and organs by their lab-grown biological
substitutes. Originally, tissue engineering was defined as “the
application of the principles and methods of engineering and life sciences
toward the fundamental understanding of structure-function relationships in
normal and pathologic mammalian tissue and the development of biological
substitutes to restore, maintain, or improve function”. Interestingly,
this definition of the field has not changed, and neither has the fundamental
concept of “instructing” the cells to regenerate a specific tissue
or organ by biologically inspired molecular, structural and physical regulatory
signals.
The field has been transformed by the advent of human iPS cell technologies, gene
editing and sophisticated tissue engineering tools (biomaterial scaffolds,
bioreactors, sensors, nanotechnology), and “organs on a chip”,
designed to recapitulate organ level or even system level human functions in
health, injury, disease and regeneration and drive the development of new
therapeutic modalities. Progress in the field has been driven by understanding
the clinical needs, and the ability to provide patient-tailored treatments.
Today, tissue engineering is ready to meet its grand challenge: engineering
tissues and organs on-demand, to support human health and wellbeing. We propose
four challenges in tissue engineering for human health, each being motivated by
a major societal and medical need.

B.

## Challenges
1)

## Stem Cells for all
Our organs are maintained by the populations of resident stem/progenitor
cells. However, the intrinsic regenerative ability of organs is limited,
especially following injury, disease, or aging. Delivery of adult stem
cells, matched to the patient or derived from the patient's blood,
provides the ability to achieve tissue/organ regeneration resulting in
major improvements in physiological function. In addition, adult stem cells
or their derivatives, administered alone or with drugs, can be used to treat
diseases or to activate the pool of endogenous cells and use their
therapeutic capacity. Our grand challenge here is to develop approaches and
technologies that will lead to stem cell-based therapy that is readily
available and accessible to all. Appropriate gene editing has the potential
to generate universal allogeneic cells that are immune acceptable, scalable
and available off-the-shelf for therapies. immune acceptable, scalable and
available off-the-shelf for therapies. Understanding the epigenomic control
of cell identity and fate will enable more efficient derivation of desirable
cell types by using genetic engineering and extracellular signals. The
development of tunable and responsive biomaterials and the optimization of
minimally invasive delivery methods will be critical to achieve effective
therapies.

2)

## Development of Permanent Systems to Replace or Augment Human
Function
The human body is the most elegant of control systems, continuously sensing
and regulating its state to ensure homeostasis in different physical
environments, during different activities, and in response to injury or
disease. Artificial systems that replace critical parts of the human body
control must be endowed with similar levels of sophistication. They should
be able to sense a diversity of signals relevant to human health and select
the most appropriate intervention from a range of available chemical,
electrical, and mechanical stimuli. We envision that these systems could be
permanently implanted or worn by the user to treat chronic diseases and the
complications that arise from them. Exemplar systems include integrated
prosthetic limbs, artificial heart, local drug-delivery devices, and
brain-function devices driven by sense response and dynamical assessment of
need to maintain normal function. A critical challenge here will be to
integrate multi-modality/multi-fidelity signals in real time to make
artificial organs respond in real time. We provide two exemplars below.
Engineering a limb: Limb injuries can have devastating
consequences: from loss of joint mobility to extensive damage to soft tissue
and severely affecting limb function, the loss of individual or multiple
digits of the hand or foot, and the loss of an entire limb. Engineering a
limb presents an important and far-reaching challenge for biomedical
engineering. The societal needs are clear, and no regenerative treatments
are currently available. Over 1.5 million individuals have experienced limb
loss at this time, and this number is likely to increase over the next
decade. America's wounded warriors have suffered limb loss through
trauma. To accomplish limb regeneration, the convergence of several
disciplines, termed regenerative engineering, will be important to explore.
The approaches we need to develop include the use of materials that can
sense and respond to their local environment, stem cells and bioreactor
technologies, based on the lessons learned from developmental biology in
organisms that regenerate limbs. In addition, effective use of new clinical
models and clinical trials will be needed, making this grand challenge
ideally suited for collaborative endeavors with clinicians.
Engineering a lung: The clinical impact of lung
transplantation, the only cure for patients suffering from end-stage lung
disease, remains limited by the shortage of functional donor lungs, and the
need to prevent the rejection of the transplanted lung by life-long immune
suppression. Lung disease remains the third leading cause of death
worldwide, with more than half a million hospitalizations and more than
130000 deaths every year, in the United States alone. Bioengineering lungs
for transplant and intervening in situ to treat the
targeted areas of damage would be transformative for the many patients in
need. An additional challenge is to find biomarkers of early stages of
currently incurable diseases (such as cystic fibrosis) that would allow
curative measures before the damage has advanced too far. Finally, the
approaches for bioengineering the lung could be extended to other blood
perfused organs such as the liver, kidney and heart. The ability to engineer
complex organs such as the lung – containing over 50 cell types and
elaborate hierarchical networks of airway and vasculature, is a grand
challenge that requires a team effort of bioengineers, clinicians, and
experts in materials science, biomechanics, physiology, and cellular and
developmental biology.

3)

## Disease on a Chip
When an individual develops a disease, many treatment options may exist for a
given condition, and every individual tends to respond differently to any
given treatment, due to that person's unique genetics and physiology.
Moreover, every disease manifests itself differently in each patient due to
the heterogeneity of the disease itself and differences in the presence of
other medical conditions. Disease heterogeneity is a particular problem for
treating complex diseases such as cancer and autoimmune diseases. In the
absence of individualized approaches, treatment decisions are often made in
a trial-and-error fashion, increasing morbidity and mortality, reducing
quality of life, and adding cost to an already overburdened health care
system. Our challenge is to meet the need for patient-specific models of
diseases that can be used for diagnosis, prognosis and patient-specific drug
screening. Ideally, such models should be built from the patient's own
cells, such as blood-derived pluripotent stem cells and their progeny.
“Organs-on-a-chip” platforms should ideally represent integrated
systems with multiple organ units, and their success will be defined by the
ability to accurately predict patient-specific responses and provide precise
and personalized treatment plans with high efficacy and minimal side
effects.

D.

## Enabling Technologies
Several existing and future technologies will provide the basis for Human
Augmentation.
Stem cells: Developing technologies for economical production of
large-scale, consistent, high-quality stem cells, including distributed
manufacturing approaches, as well as shipping and storage methods that preserve
cell viability, is a first step.
Tissue engineering: The first step in engineering a tissue is to
isolate, expand, and differentiate patient-specific stem cells. To this end, we
need to develop novel biomanufacturing and processing technologies that are
scalable and affordable and with appropriate quality control.
Imaging and biomarker technologies: Imaging is necessary to
assess the state of the cells and the quality of the engineered tissues, along
with the consequent remodeling/regeneration of the native tissue/organ
function.
Tissue fabrication: For regeneration of whole organs and complex
multi-tissue structures, engineering design and fabrication technologies are
needed to co-culture or derive multiple cell types and organize them into
appropriate tissue structures, with functional vascularization, innervation, and
immune components. Development of advanced fabrication technologies including 3D
bio/printing and bioreactor technologies warrant new engineering
approaches.
Microphysiological platforms: Sophisticated technologies are
also needed to establish microphysiological platforms consisting of micro-sized
human tissues, linked to each other by vascular circulation.

E.

## Multi-Disciplinary Teams and Core Competencies
The design of smart and responsive systems that are integrated into human
physiology will mandate the collaborative engagement of physicians,
physiologists, biomedical engineers, biologists, electrical and device
engineers, and computer scientists. Embedded sensors in human physiology need to
be functional while not being adversely bioactive and this will warrant
understanding design principles of interactions between synthetic and living
matter. Similarly, designers of functional devices need to understand the
physiology of the tissue/organ. Multidisciplinary teams created to address
specific sensor-device design will be essential for this Challenge. Further,
stem cell biology has matured significantly, although growing tissues continues
to remain a challenge. Understanding the engineering principles of human
physiology will aid in designing ex vivo biological systems.
Further, the scaling of tissue and organ engineering is a complex problem that
will require industry engagement. In addition, regulatory and biomanufacturing
principles play a key role in the translation. Research in several areas
involving elucidating the design principles and rules of human tissue/organ
form and function, stem cell engineering, and integration of
sensing/feedback of implanted devices/tissues, will form the foundation
for this Grand Challenge.

IV.

## Grand Challenge 3: Engineering The Brain and Foundations for the ExoBrain
A.

## Societal Need
The human brain has been one of the few unconquered organs of human physiology;
every decade, new initiatives are launched with the hope of making sufficient
advances to understand and mimic brain function in its myriad complexity.
Engineers have made dramatic advances over decades to capture information on
brain structures and functions. Magnetic resonance imaging,
magnetoencephalography, and electroencephalography are commonplace methods used
in hospitals. Recent brain computer interface (BCI) wearable devices are
becoming more and more accessible, and electrical activity produced by the brain
(EEG) are being routinely monitored.
With the launch of the BRAIN initiative, there have been rapid advances in our
ability to record and manipulate the brain. Even with these advances in imaging,
sensing and AI technologies, there remain huge gaps in our understanding of the
functioning of the brain, and how to interface to it. This is so striking as our
brain is so personal and individual, our brains are “who we are”.
Turning to disease isn't better with the causative origins of brain
disorders often remaining undiagnosed until a stage that is too late for
intervention or cure. Sadly, brain disease is not rare with the burden of
neurological disorders being enormous, both in the US and worldwide. In the US
alone, more than 60 million people suffer from chronic pain, and or depression,
and 10’s of millions from neurodegenerative diseases. It is expected that
by 2035, one in five Americans will suffer from dementia leading to
Alzheimer's disease (AD), for which there is no cure. We need new
technologies for both early diagnosis and intervention. Avatars that can be
studied for disease progression in brains can go a long way in improving the
quality of life of aged population.
Leveraging the advances in sensing and computation, the challenge that remains is
to engineer the systems that will interface to the brain and will allow us to
intervene to make the brain tick normally. A healthy brain is precious for our
well-being. Over the past decade we have seen remarkable advances in our ability
to record and manipulate the brain which promises to revolutionize our
understanding of brain function and the causative natures of its malfunction.
Simultaneously, artificial intelligence is being named the 4th
industrial revolution presenting tremendous opportunities to advance our
understanding of the brain. Leveraging these advances, we propose as a grand
challenge to engineer the systems that will interface with and make the brain
tick normally.

B.

## Challenges
1)

## Measurement of Normal and Pathological Brain Function
We are mapping the human brain across nearly 10 orders of magnitude in
spatial scales, spanning nanoscale with electron microscopy, to microscale
including both the structural connectivity and electrophysiological
characterizations as well the molecular and cellular transcriptomic
identities, and the mesoscale with diffusion, anatomical, and functional
magnetic resonance imaging. Invasive measurements inside the brain are both
deleterious and are unable to broadly establish the alterations in molecular
physiology associated with the onset of neurodegeneration. Newly emerging
synaptic and cellular scale measurements rebuilding the true metric of the
brain cell by cell such as spatial transcriptomics is highly invasive. There
remains the major challenge of creating new methods that can be used in
human for multiscale, albeit non-invasive measurements of normal and
pathological brain function. In some cases such measurements can be invasive
coupled with a functional feedback. This points to the need and our ability
to engineer such innovative brain measurement devices.

2)

## Neuroaugmentation of Human Function: (Neuroprosthetics)
Our memory is the single most defining property of our personal human
identity. Even after all infectious diseases are cured, humanity will still
suffer from neurodegenerative diseases. Neuro-cognitive augmentation will
impact everyone, the aging, and their descendants. Multi-scale structural
and dynamical models of brain systems are emerging that encode information
storage and representation. Biological tasks such as memory are no longer an
abstraction; progress in cognitive science and Alzheimer's disease is
resulting in detailed understanding of the circuits associated to memory
behavior and loss. Such representations present the opportunity for almost
complete in-silico simulations of the behavior of neural circuits and for
the building of predictive models of neural activity and neurodegenerative
disease trajectories. The opportunities for integrating molecular function
with 3D-printed scaffolds derived from individualized stem cells enabling
biomedical engineers to synthesize and implant functional artificial neural
circuits for augmentation of cognitive process presents the next venue for
disruptive technologies. Given the advances in multiscale, multimodal brain
measurements, coupled to AI data-based modeling of anatomy, physiology, and
behavior, and new capabilities of synthesizing organoids and other 3D
technologies to manipulate neural activity, we believe our generation next
Grand Challenges is to build physiologically realistic brain organoids to
explore normal and pathological function. This can be complemented by memory
chips for augmenting the cognitive function of human memory. The grand
challenge then is to understand the design principles of the brain and its
circuitry and engineer biologically realistic organoids that will mimic one
or more aspects of brain function and enable deciphering and treating
pathologies.

3)

## Brain Organoids as Microphysiological Systems
Engineered models of the human brain are a great challenge and final frontier
in brain research. We have the ability to create human pluripotent stem cell
derived models of neurons, but to engineer them into complex brain organoids
is an enormous challenge and warrants new technologies and models. Such
brain organoids need to capture the complexity in terms of cells such as
neurons, astrocytes, endothelial cells and microglia in the brain, but also
the circuitry that mimics that in the brain. Further these organoids need to
be vascularized and have the equivalent of the blood-brain barrier to probe
the brain in a realistic manner. Such brain organoids that can serve as
avatars of normal and diseased brains have the immense potential through
multi-omics measurements to reveal the alterations in myriad functional
pathways in disease and offer therapeutic interventions. Towards this,
bringing an interdisciplinary approach involving engineering, human
physiology and medicine is not merely a challenge, but an imminent necessity
if we have to create engineering models of the brain and its pathological
alterations.

4)

## Engineering the Exocortex
A healthy brain is essential for our well-being. In the last few decades, our
ability to record and manipulate the brain has begun to revolutionize our
understanding of brain function and dysfunction. Interfacing between the
external device world and internal brain world through brain and computer
interfaces is progressing rapidly. Examples now abound of researchers using
noninvasive neural and brain computer interfaces to actuated neuroprosthetic
limbs and interface the human brain to robotic limbs and externally
controlled systems. The potential application of such a device for
paraplegic human patient activity is potentially transformational, but also
represents a vista into the grand possibilities of interfacing the external
internet/device world with the internals organic brain world. We propose
the grand challenge of combining AI, brain sciences and engineering to
design AI systems that will interface with the brain, a grand challenge that
we call “engineering the human exocortex”. This grand challenge
presents the opportunity to improve human health, happiness, and
productivity. The interfaces to the brain can be non-invasive and/or
invasive devices communicating with AI systems such as artificial neural
networks that will act as an extension of the human brain. The grand
challenge of engineering the human exocortex which will enable ex vivo
measurement of sensory inputs into the human brain and serve as an
“personalized avatar” of the human brain.

5)

## Neuroscience in the Everyday World
The sum is larger than the parts. There is a great need to enable scientists
to link brain activity to human movement, perception and cognition, and
social communication and interaction continuously, in real time, and in the
Everyday World. Such tools will provide profound new insights into not only
how the healthy brain works, but also when and why breakdowns occur in
movement, perception and cognition, and communication. The current state of
the art, led by fMRI, has driven profound advances in our understanding of
brain function under well-controlled and constrained conditions. While we
are gaining greater understanding of how the brain functions in
single-snapshot experiments under restricted lab settings, we do not know
how it works in dynamic, complex and multisensory real-world environments.
To push this important work forward, we need to be able to continuously
track human brain function and behavior in real time to understand how a
healthy brain works and how and when failures in simple human actions occur.
We call this effort “Neuroscience of the Everyday World,” and
biomedical engineers will play an important role in developing, adopting,
and applying the new technology needed to make this vision possible. As a
start, we envision the use of functional near infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS)
and EEG as two safe and non-invasive neuroimaging techniques that enable
brain imaging under naturalistic settings. fNIRS is an alternative to fMRI
that maps hemodynamic responses to brain activity and allows researchers to
collect data in ecologically valid settings, it is less susceptible to
motion artifacts than fMRI, and thus it has great potential for studying
natural behaviors and neurological populations. EEG measures fast electrical
responses associated with neuronal activity and has been widely used for
studying brain activity in naturalistic environments. EEG and fNIRS
complement each other through combining EEG's ability to capture neural
activity with millisecond time scale and fNIRS's ability to measure
slow and integrated hemodynamic changes with better spatial localization. In
addition, it will be necessary to combine fNIRS and EEG with
eye-tracking/pupillometry to time-lock the brain responses to behavioral
data and to obtain a more complete picture of brain activation patterns in
the Everyday World through vascular and neural responses and their
interactions. The grand challenge is the design of wearable sensors that are
not cumbersome to track human behavior in the context of society.

F.

## Enabling Technologies
Several existing and future technologies will provide the basis for Engineering
the Brain.
Brain computer interfaces and dynamic monitoring systems:
Clinical neurology, neuroimaging and neurosensing technologies have
significantly advanced over the last two decades, dramatically accelerating our
understanding of the functioning human brain. Non-invasive and invasive
technologies are becoming more and more powerful and portable and will enable
continuous functional neurosensing of electrical, hemodynamic, and molecular
signatures of brain function, paving the way for engineering the systems for
making the brain tick. Brain cytoarchitecture mapping involves multimodal,
meso-scale imaging, electrophysiology, and omics sequencing methods.
Neuromodulation technologies: Neuromodulation technologies
spanning from invasive deep brain stimulation by electrical stimulation to
non-invasive methods utilizing magnetic pulses, electrical currents, ultrasound,
and light are used in modern brain investigations. The combination with
neurosensing, control system, neural modeling, and data science technologies is
essential for making the brain tick. Neural modeling and simulation of axon
tracts in peripheral nerves is highly developed and is beginning to be used in
the spinal cord to simulate the likely consequences of new electrode technology
and new stimulation paradigms. Comparable techniques are being used to simulate
tracts in the brain to improve electrode targeting, electrode design, and
stimulation patterns.
Neural sensing, modulation, and control systems: Control systems
technologies have advanced for developing effective interventions for
neurological disorders will often require responsive systems that measure
outcome variables and adjust the intervention via stimulation in real-time.
Electrode technologies: Interfacing with neurons in the brain
for both recording and stimulation for deep brain stimulation electrodes, ECoG
arrays, penetrating cortical arrays, have been applied in the brain in people to
both clinical and scientific problems. Similarly, stimulation and recording
electrodes have long been used in the periphery and spinal cord (e.g., spinal
cord simulation for pain). Emerging technologies are improving channel counts in
the brain, allowing interfacing with small unmyelinated axons (e.g., in the
autonomic nervous system), and the use of conduction block as well as
activation.
Neuro-rehabilitative technologies: Enabled by the engineering of
neural interfaces, technologies are emerging to work in concert with traditional
rehabilitative medicine to dramatically improve outcomes for people recovering
from stroke and brain trauma, and to improve wellness for people with
neurodegenerative diseases. New technologies for neuro-scaffold for cell growth
and therapeutics are emerging.
Microphysiological systems: The human brain model systems
include neurons from pluripotent stem cell differentiation and vascularized
brain organoids. Investigation of brain in vivo involves minimally invasive
diagnostic markers and electrocortographical techniques. Therapeutic
interventions require drugs to cross the blood-brain barrier. Exo-brain also
requires the development of low power, high bandwidth telemetry devices, and
higher density power sources.
Data science and artificial intelligence (AI): AI and Machine
Learning are allowing for understanding the huge amounts of relevant data that
can be recorded from the nervous system. So, enhancing our understanding of the
underlying neural systems and the impact of treatment mechanisms will depend on
recently emerging data sciences techniques.

G.

## Multi-Disciplinary Teams and Core Competencies
Traditional neuroscience and neurophysiology have undergone dramatic changes in
the past two decades. For instance, a neurologist today is required to have a
multiscale perspective of brain function from the firing of single neurons to
deciphering cognition towards recognizing normal and abnormal function.
Electrical circuitry of the brain has become a part of modern curriculum in
neuroscience. Both implantable and exobrain electrodes are now routinely used to
assess neurodegenerative disorders. The grand challenge of the exobrain will
require strong collaborative teams involving neuroscientists, neurologists,
biomedical and electrical engineers, computational scientists and experts in
imaging optics.
The core competencies of researchers addressing the associated challenges
include: understanding of brain and central (CNS), peripheral (PNS) and enteric
(ENS) nervous systems, possessing intensive knowledge of AI and computational
skills, neural interface technologies, including electrical, optical and
chemical stimulation, recording technologies, and working knowledge of signal
processing techniques that are capable of extracting information from neural
signals needed to develop neural biomarkers, allow responsive inventions,
estimate parameters for models, and improve our understanding of neural system
performance.

V.

## Grand Challenge 4: ImmunoEngineering – Harnessing the Immune System for
Health and Wellness
A.

## Societal Need
The burgeoning field of “immunongineering” is ripe for developing and
applying quantitative tools to understand the underlying principles driving
immune responses and their connections to other human systems. With this
knowledge we will develop the capacity to modulate the immune system using
materials, engineered therapies (both artificial and biological), and devices
resulting in the ability to address unmet health needs and improve quality of
life. Each challenge is motivated by a major societal/medical need. We also
summarize the most important supporting technologies that need to be developed
or advanced, which presents an additional set of challenges.
Our ability to harness the immune system for human health is hindered by our
limited understanding of the basic science underlying its function. Over the
past decades, our knowledge has advanced substantially from implicating a single
immune cell to the complex immune cell repertoire and population dynamics we
understand today. However, many functions are not understood yet, and new
cellular actors continue to be identified. Despite limited understanding, we are
now able to engineer the immune system to deliver improved responses as
exemplified by immunotherapy for cancer treatment.

B.

## Challenges
1)

## Creation of an Immunoengineering Toolbox
The burgeoning field of “immunoengineering” critically needs new
quantitative tools to understand the underlying principles driving immune
responses and their connections to other human systems. With this knowledge,
we will develop the capacity to modulate the immune system using materials,
engineered therapies (both artificial and biological), and devices,
resulting in the ability to address unmet health needs and improve quality
of life. The entry of engineering into immunology is recent and brings a new
suite of approaches and tools that complement those used by immunologists.
The toolset includes the interplay between enabling technologies to
precisely quantify immune cell phenotype and function including single cell
technologies such as spatial transcriptomics, enabling technologies to
modulate immune cell function such as with biomimetic materials, and
enabling technologies in biomedical data science for analysis. This toolset
accelerates treatment development.
The nonlinear spatial and temporal responses of the immune system are poorly
understood. Understanding immune function will benefit from engineered in
vitro and in silico models and high-content in vivo imaging and single cell
analysis that span a wide range of spatial and temporal scales. Insights and
enabling technologies from data science and machine learning are positioned
to unlock new understanding of immune cells, their networks, and their
microenvironments. This type of complex system is exactly what engineers are
trained to understand, model and design.

2)

## Engineering Immunotherapies
The immune system is a critical interface between an individual and the
environment. We live in a time when the environment challenging our immune
system is changing rapidly including climate, diet, activity, and exposure
to pathogens and other disease-causing agents. The immune system is
recognized as an individual's physiological memory of trauma, exposure,
and overall health, protecting us from external assault. Its dysregulation
is implicated in a multitude of diseases. As an example, an underactive
immune system drives tumor progression, while immune system overactivation
underlies autoimmune disease. As highlighted by the 2018 Nobel Prize in
Medicine, new treatment modalities in cancer now offer patients
transformative opportunities for survival; however, these therapies only
work in a small subset of patients, and in ways that we do not fully
understand. Immune therapy brings a host of challenges including rapid
disease resistance and promotion of autoimmune disease. In addition,
mounting evidence suggests a link between cells and molecules driving
immunity and other human systems in the context of aging, neurological
disease (Alzheimer's), or trauma (concussion). Our gut microbiome
interacts with our immune system in similarly mysterious ways. The
composition of bacterial gut flora drive response to immunotherapies, both
positively and negatively, and antibiotics further affect these outcomes.
Further, the immune system is key to wound healing, transplantation, and
regenerative medicine. As these examples demonstrate, harnessing the immune
system will be transformative for human health and disease.
Once the functions of and key actors in the healthy immune system are
unraveled, changes that occur upon disease states need to be understood and
effective therapeutic interventions developed. Immunological effects are
known to underlie conditions as disparate as cancer and traumatic brain
injury. Using the same engineering tools, immune adaptations can be
identified for all diseases, particularly those that are most prevalent.
Immunomodulatory therapies can then be developed to replicate or regulate
immune function and treat disease. These treatments will take diverse forms
including conventional drugs, protein therapies, cellular therapy, gene
delivery, biomaterials and novel treatments that are still under
development.

3)

## Next Generation of Vaccines for the World
While immunotherapies focus on treatments to modulate an ongoing
immune-related response, there is also tremendous challenge and opportunity
in being able to program the immune response ahead of time through the
development of innovative vaccines. Over 17 million people die from
infectious diseases worldwide each year, and many of them are children.
Reducing these deaths is a global challenge. Biomedical engineering
innovation is needed to develop new vaccines quickly to meet the challenges
of rapidly evolving viruses, including the current pandemic. Similarly,
engineering innovation is needed to increase the effectiveness and
accessibility of existing vaccines in the developing world. Vaccines are
needed that are safe and effective, low cost, and able to be administered
without specialized equipment or expertise. There is a great need for single
administration followed by self-boosting over time so that a patient does
not need to return to a healthcare worker. There are opportunities for new
vaccines based on nucleic acid based technologies (RNA vaccines), and
nucleic acid encoding antigen, rather than protein, that could lead to
greater potency and faster development. Equally important are challenges
with widespread, quickly developed, easy to manufacture, and low cost
diagnostics that can provide critical information to epidemiologists and
policy makers in times of crisis. Computational approaches also are needed
from more precisely modeling viral infection on a subcellular level to the
spread of infections through populations to predicting antigen and genetic
mutations to improve vaccine design.
There are critical challenges for engineering advanced vaccines for purposes
beyond infectious diseases. For example, cancer vaccines can inoculate a
patient against a specific cancer that they may be predisposed to or already
have and ensure that their body mounts a robust adaptive immune response so
that such a cancer is not able to grow, spread, or recur. Development of the
biomaterials, nanobiotechnology, formulation science, and related
engineering technologies for advanced vaccines also open new frontiers such
as opioid vaccines and other anti-drug vaccines that can prevent the action
of a target substance. Through biomedical innovation, tolerogenic, or
“reverse”, vaccines can also be developed that can establish
immunological tolerance in autoimmune diseases such as multiple sclerosis
and type 1 diabetes. Thus, the needs are great and a central challenge of
next generation vaccines for the world is also to improve accessibility so
that all these potential gains can benefit those most in need.

C.

## Enabling Technologies
Several existing and future technologies will provide the basis for Engineering
the Immune System.
Cell sequencing and genome editing: In the past decade, we have
dramatically improved our ability to sequence single cells in healthy and
disease states, edit the genome precisely, and create genes, proteins, and cells
to modulate biological function.
Cell manufacturing and material science technologies: The
development of new progenitor cell provides the opportunity for essential
therapies on a scale of days to weeks, rather than months. A new generation of
materials to constructively interact with the immune systems are available to
deliver therapeutic modalities. Despite these advances, we still lack the
ability to rapidly produce immune cells from stem cell progenitors, which
prolongs the time between disease diagnosis and treatment.
CAR-T Therapies: Cancer models for translating successful
approaches to tumor treatments, significantly restricting the impact of current
CAR-T therapies are needed.
Platform technologies: Technologies are needed to interrogate
the large spectrum presented to the immune system, examine the development of
memory and recall in the immune system, and build predictive immune learning
models that will further advance treatments. As the interface between the immune
system and environmental agents becomes more clearly defined, models designed
for immune-based treatment of individuals will transition to models of immune
health in populations. Additionally, the immune system is often dysregulated in
numerous pathologies such as autoimmune disease and cancer, and sensors for
immune activity may detect disease prior to significant progression and can
monitor the response to immunotherapy.
Mathematical modeling and biomedical data science: A framework
to predict and manage the complications that can emerge when manipulating the
immune system and manage the complicated differences in the immune system across
species, and across patients is needed. The challenge remains that we do not yet
know the governing equations for the immune system.

D.

## Multi-Disciplinary Teams and Core Competencies
The development of engineered immune systems for modulating health is being
recognized by all clinical disciplines. Inflammation is being recognized as a
causal agent in neurodegenerative disease, cardiovascular health, and bone and
joint disease. Because the immune system is the interface between people and
their natural and built environment, we expect that forward looking ventures in
the immune health will include clinical and environmental scientists to predict
how changes in the food supply, patient microbiome, and natural environment will
act as pressures on the immune system to evolve and introduce new health risks
in the population. Specifically, trained bioengineers and material
scientists/engineers, and systems engineers with biomanufacturing
expertise,
Stem cell and systems biologists and technologists, together with developmental
and systems/synthetic/computational biologists will play a very
important role in understanding the immune system. Specific coursework needs to
be developed at the interface of immunology, systems physiology and engineering.
In the design of immune-based therapies and vaccines, biochemical engineers and
biotechnology companies are playing an important role and will continue to
influence future immune-based disease interventions. Systems and network
engineering principles applied to the immune system will be important in
developing new therapies.

VI.

## Grand Challenge 5: Engineering Life – Engineering Genomes and Cells
A.

## Societal Need
Genomes encode the rules of life. Aberrations in the genome and/or its
execution underlie many human diseases. If we could undo corresponding errors in
the intact living organism we could reverse many ailments, both inherited as
well as somatic. In this regard, over the past two decades researchers have
engineered exquisitely specific and efficient tools to engineer genomes, such as
the CRISPR-Cas systems. These provide a degree of molecular precision not
fundamentally feasible by small molecule medicines. For instance, one can both
repress as well as activate genetic targets, and perturb many targets
simultaneously in a single cell, aspects that most modern drugs cannot achieve.
But there are two fundamental challenges to their deployment: 1) limited
understanding of the plasticity of the human genome and epigenetic regulation,
such that genotype-phenotype relationships for most genome aberrations remain
poorly understood and well defined targets that could modulate phenotypes for
many chronic diseases remain to be discovered; and 2) a lack of efficacious in
vivo delivery tools, and the severe constraints on delivery and associated
manufacturability have made most gene therapies limited in their capability and
also prohibitively expensive.
Human cells perform a myriad of diverse functions that are required to guide
normal human development, buffer homeostasis, and to safeguard against human
disease. Despite the overarching relevance of these functions to human
development, health, and disease, we have an incomplete understanding of how
they are coordinated, and even less clarity on how they can be engineered and
repurposed to improve the human condition. Truly remarkable advances in
engineering human T cells to encode chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) have paved
the way for innovative and life-saving cell-based therapeutics, however
engineering other important prophylactic behaviors into human cells has not
progressed as rapidly nor as successfully. Efforts to spur progress in
repurposing human cells as living drugs will revolutionize our ability to
diagnose and treat a wide array of human diseases. In breast cancer, current
genetic testing is often unable to resolve the underlying driver of the
patient's malignancy. Understanding how genetic sequences dictate cellular
phenotypes is needed to discern between normal and diseased tissues improving
clinical standards of care and spare patients from unnecessary surgical
procedures. Alternatively for late-stage prostate cancer, CT, PET/SPECT, and
MRI are often performed to design the regimen of radio, chemo and surgical
therapies. At the same time, better imaging of tumor cells is needed to more
precisely identify the location of cancerous cell masses. More sophisticated
engineered approaches are also needed to redesign human cells ex vivo for
subsequent transfusion and precision targeting of metastatic cancer cells that
are difficult to remove surgically. Further, there is great opportunity for in
situ genomic engineering of human cells in vivo within the body. These
approaches can be enabled by nanomedicine technology and are critical as they
can dramatically reduce costs and broaden accessibility of these biotechnologies
for health and wellness and facilitate equitable access around the world.
These examples highlight the challenges of harnessing the fundamental mechanisms
that our cells use to precisely orchestrate our development and maintain our
health and illustrate the tremendous promise of redesigned human cells as
therapeutics and medically useful technologies. Realizing this immense promise
presents several grand challenges that span the central dogma of molecular
biology including improving our ability to engineer genomic sequence information
(DNA), expanding our ability to control the levels of transcription (RNA), and
advancing our capacity to reformat pathways and complexes (proteins) within
living human cells.
Overcoming these challenges can be accomplished by combining engineering
principles with innovations in genome, epigenome, and protein engineering,
nanomedicine technology, functional genomics, and synthetic transcriptional
control.

B.

## Challenges
1)

## Repurposing the Blueprint for Life. Genomic DNA
DNA encodes the design rules that animate all life on earth (apart from
certain RNA-based viruses). Thanks to the monumental efforts of the human
genome project (HGP) completed in 2003, nearly all the ∼3 billion bases
of genomic DNA that orchestrate human existence have been mapped. The
Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) consortium has made remarkable
progress in identifying segments of the mapped genomes that display
regulatory activity, how it changes across human cell types and with the 4D
Nucleome project how our DNA is functionally organized within the nuclei of
our cells. Engineering the sequences of the human genome at the resolution
needed to revert complex disease pathologies and build cells that contain
new therapeutic molecules remains a challenge. Four key obstacles are
limiting our ability to engineer genomic DNA at this scale. First the
efficiency of homology directed repair (HDR) is low in many human cell
types, which results in a costly need to select and/or screen for
correctly modified clones. Second, although we can map nearly any portion of
the human genome at base-level resolution, we do not yet fully understand
how the local context of nearby genetic cis sequences and their activity
dictate function. Third, incorporating large segments of new or corrected
DNA into the human genome is inefficient and, in the case of megabase-scale
or highly complex sequences, impossible. Fourth, our ability to control the
activity of de novo integrated DNA, and specifically prevent silencing over
time, is inadequate. The grand challenge then is to understand the design
principles of the human genome and its activity to engineer new
functionality into human cells and enable new ways to understand the genetic
bases of human diseases and build new cell-based therapeutics.

2)

## Building Epigenetic Tools for Precision Control of Cellular Transcription
and Cell Fate
If DNA sequences are considered the “hardware” of the genome,
epigenetic regulation is a key of the “operating system” of the
genome. While transcriptional regulation of genes in segments of open
chromatin can modulate cell function, the change of cell phenotype or cell
fate, which is critical for stem cell differentiation and cell
reprogramming, requires the conversion between the open and closed chromatin
structures to turn on or turn off certain genes. To be able to engineer
cells and control cell fate, we need to integrate biophysical, biochemical
and biological approaches to: (1) understand molecular spatial interactions
and epigenetic regulation by genome-wise molecular analysis such as Hi-C and
ATACseq and super-resolution imaging, (2) engineer biomaterials and
extracellular signals to facilitate the epigenetic changes, and (3) develop
genetic engineering tools to change the open/closed state of the
chromatin structure. Transcription from the human genome is coordinated at
multiple levels including general transcription factors (TFs) that recruit
RNA polymerases (RNAPs) to specific locations to initiate RNA synthesis, to
modifications to DNA and chromatin, to local chromatin compaction largely
governed by nucleosomal occupancy, to global dynamics in chromosomal
architecture within the nuclei of human cells. Our understanding of these
different levels of control over human gene expression have been driven by
advances in microscopy, computational modeling, and genome and epigenome
editing techniques most recently catalyzed by new CRISPR/Cas9-based
technologies. Shifting from measuring and perturbing these nodes to
engineering their function in situ is needed to redesign human cells as
therapeutics. This shift represents an important opportunity for biomedical
engineers to apply expertise in instrumentation, genome and epigenome
engineering, and computational modeling. For example, human cells encode
hundreds of TFs to precisely tailor the expression of human genes.
Furthermore, the ability to engineer other mechanisms that control human
gene expression, such as post-translational modifications, nucleosomal
occupancy, and global chromosomal structure remain limited. The grand
challenge is the engineering of transcription from the human genome at the
level observed in healthy and diseased cells to enable new treatment
modalities and disease models that faithfully recapitulate patient
pathologies. In addition, the engineering of epigenome may allow us to
reverse the epigenetic clock of cells and rejuvenate cells in
vitro and in vivo.

3)

## Building Solutions for the Delivery Challenge of In Vivo Genome
Engineering
At scale genome interpretation via rapid progress in genome engineering
technologies over the past two decades is enabling us to systematically
unravel drivers of disease. In the coming years, medicine will move
increasingly from treating the symptoms of a disease with broad acting small
molecules, to treating the direct causes of diseases, and in some cases
curing diseases, on the fundamental genetic level with gene therapies. For
human cells as therapeutics, great strides can be made by next-generation
nanomedicine-enabled delivery technologies, improving both ex vivo and in
vivo genome engineering capabilities. However, effective and targeted
delivery of genome and transcriptome engineering tools in intact living
organisms remains daunting. A key challenge to enable robust gene therapy is
a delivery system that is simultaneously: 1) safe, 2) efficient and
tissue-targetable, 3) tunable, 4) redosable, and 5) manufacturable for broad
accessibility. Specifically, key challenges include minimizing toxicity,
orders of magnitude improvements to efficiency of delivery across the
extracellular and intracellular compartment, and tunability of a
generalizable and flexible delivery vehicle capable of delivering a range of
genetic payloads including DNA, RNA, and protein. Gene therapy must be
re-dosable so that the effective dose and its durability can be tailored and
monitored by a clinician and tailored to differential gene therapy for
multiple tissue types. Finally, manufacturability for broad accessibility
including low cost and easily scaled manufacturing operations to produce
off-the-shelf gene therapy products are required. While delivery has
historically been a formidable challenge, breakthroughs in each of the key
attributes needed for achieving robust and low cost gene therapies are now
on the horizon. The grand challenge is thus for the design and engineering
of a new transport technology, not unlike in some ways a space shuttle, but
built on the nanoscale and designed for precise transport through the
microscopic world within the body. A gene delivery vector or nanotechnology
that is simultaneously safe, efficient, tunable, re-dosable, and
manufacturable will open a new powerful paradigm to all of medicine,
including enabling in situ engineered human cells as therapeutics.

4)

## Developing Cellular Sense and Response Modules
Human cells sense inputs, such as mechanical forces, small molecules and
metabolites, and different ligands, responding to stimuli via changes in
gene expression and/or protein function(s). Synthetic biology harnesses
the multitude of combinations of natural sense and respond behaviors
displayed by human cells representing a vast repertoire of biomedically
important and engineerable opportunities. Engineering human T cells encoding
CARs for robust cancer immunotherapy is a major success of synthetic
biology. Platforms for synthetic biology including SynNotch and the Modular
Extracellular Sensor Architectures (MESA) platforms are enabling new ways to
leverage the native ability of human cells to sense and respond for
clinically important applications. Expanding the design rules of these
technologies will create a slew of new diagnostic and therapeutic
methodologies. In the short term these efforts could produce engineered
human cells that sense metastatic cells or the boundaries of solid tumors
and respond with tumor cell killing, the release of inflammatory payloads,
and/or bioluminescence to help guide surgical excision. Longer-term
sense and respond designs could include cell-based vaccines that recognize
and quarantine novel pathogens and simultaneously alert the immune system,
or engineered cells that improve local wound healing, release analgesics,
and/or seamlessly integrate with implanted or wearable scaffolds. The
grand challenge is to build sense and respond modules that function
predictably and reliably when deployed in any primary human cell and that
are amenable to prolonged use and clinical-scale manufacturing and
banking.

C.

## Enabling Technologies
Several existing and future technologies will provide the basis for Genetic
Systems Engineering.
Genome engineering: Advances in biotechnology provide a vast
repertoire of enablers for next generation efforts in genome engineering. In
vivo genetic alterations including insertion and deletion of genes using
CRISPR-Cas technique is revolutionizing modern cellular engineering.
Genomics and epigenomic sequencing: In addition, genomic,
epigenomic sequencing and other omics technologies are exponentially evolving
and offer exceptional scope for precision genome engineering.
Biomedical data science: The ability to analyze the vast amounts
of data to develop genome-scale models of cellular function provide further
impetus for genome engineering-driven biomanufacturing.

D.

## Multi-Disciplinary Teams and Core Competencies
The development of human cells for therapeutics requires interdisciplinary
strategies that combine every domain of biological and engineering sciences.
Modern training in genomic biomedicine involves core competencies in Omics
technologies, microfluidics, nanoengineering, bioinformatics, computational and
systems biology and data sciences.
Genomic intervention warrants precise molecular engineering approaches such as
that evidenced by the CRISPR-Cas method. In addition, scaling of such method
warrants design of miniaturized scalable chemical reactors, and design of cell
and tissue manipulation devices. This will require interdisciplinary
collaborations between biologists, chemical engineers and systems engineers. We
envision that the future genome manufacturing industry will involve
professionals trained across these disciplines.

VII.

## Conclusion
The five challenges outlined by the Workshop have several common underlying themes.
As demonstrated in each of the grand challenges, interdisciplinary collaborations
between life science-based and engineering disciplines harbingers the future. Next
generation training of physicians and clinicians is needed in more technologically
and quantitatively driven sciences. We anticipate that the future will involve a
holistic approach to human health and disease, in which myriad measurements, mostly
non-invasive, will provide a detailed map of “human wellness quotient”
and provide lifestyle recommendations. Two major factors will determine the future:
the ability to build inter and transdisciplinary collaborations and expertise, and
the training of an entirely novel generation of professionals who can adapt
technology (devices and sensors), measurements, data analytics and systems-level
integration. In addition, funding agencies and organizations will have to explore
multidisciplinary research involving multiple domains of expertise and team science
collaborations.

## Acknowledgment
The workshop held at the University of California San Diego that originated this
manuscript was supported by IEEE EMBS, JHU Biomedical Engineering and UCSD
Bioengineering Departments. We thank Mr. Michael Fitzgerald from the Subramaniam
research group for developing the schematic figure outlining the grand
challenges.