pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS One1932-6203PLOSPMC12779069PMC12779069.112779069127790694149937810.1371/journal.pone.0338647PONE-D-25-258711Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaAnimalsVertebratesAmniotesMammalsDogsBiology and Life SciencesZoologyAnimalsVertebratesAmniotesMammalsDogsBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaAnimalsPets and Companion AnimalsBiology and Life SciencesZoologyAnimalsPets and Companion AnimalsBiology and Life SciencesPlant SciencePlant AnatomyWoodBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyPhysiological ParametersBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyDecision MakingBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyDecision MakingSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyDecision MakingBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitionDecision MakingBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyPhysiological ParametersBody WeightBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyBiological LocomotionWalkingBiology and Life SciencesSpecies InteractionsInfluence of agility training on body-size and object solidity perception in pet dogs
Body-awareness in pet dogshttps://orcid.org/0009-0000-8713-9600StarićDarioConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing ArnauerLeaConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyValidationWriting – original draft Marshall-PesciniSarahConceptualizationFunding acquisitionSupervisionWriting – review & editing RangeFriederikeConceptualizationFunding acquisitionSupervisionWriting – review & editing 1
Domestication Lab, Konrad Lorenz Institute of Ethology, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Austria2
University of Vienna, Vienna, AustriaFlorkiewiczBrittany N.Editor files.

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the manuscript and its files.

## Introduction
When navigating their surroundings, animals require a basic understanding of the physical properties of objects around them and, to some extent, at least the most basic level of self-awareness (i.e., distinguishing between external objects and their own self) to avoid other objects, hazards, or obstacles [ ]. In addition, they also need the notion of their own body proportions (i.e., size, shape, weight, etc.) to master this challenge. For instance, an animal has to have some knowledge of its size to avoid being stuck in a narrow opening or trying to jump over a gap that is too large, but also an understanding of what materials can support their weight to avoid falling. This level of self-awareness is usually called the “ecological self” and is one of the five “selves” or categories used to describe self-awareness [ ]. Following the idea self-awareness is achieved through several cognitive processes [ , ], we can further break down the ecological self into smaller “building blocks”.
The first “building block” of perceiving oneself as an “object” or an “obstacle” in the physical world entails that, when moving an object in their environment, an animal needs to be aware of its own position in relation to the object, so as not to obstruct the trajectory of the object. A more social example is that animals living in groups with a dominance hierarchy might need to consider their position in relation to other members of the group, as crossing paths with a more dominant member of their group or blocking a way to a food source might cause conflicts.
The next level or building block involves not only the understanding that the body acts as an object, but also that it has certain physical properties (e.g., size, shape, weight...). Perhaps the most important property of the self as an object is its size. Misjudging one’s own size can lead to perilous situations for animals on all trophic levels, either by getting stuck in their environment, attacking a too large prey or rival, or failing to find an appropriate hiding place. Finally, relating one’s own physical properties to those of the objects in their environment forms the third building block. For example, arboreal animals should judge the elasticity of tree branches in relation to one’s own weight to reduce the risk of falling. Thus, only understanding the first two building blocks of the ecological self is not sufficient to make adequate predictions about the consequences of one’s actions. However, the building blocks may vary between species as different species experience them through different senses and different blocks may have different ecological relevance for each species [ , ]. Furthermore, individual experience affects the understanding of each building block [ ]. For instance, an animal living in a more crowded environment (e.g., a bird species living in thick forests) will have more information about its body through constant interaction with the objects around them, while an animal living in a more open space may have limited feedback on its body (e.g., a bird species living on planes). This may lead to a false perception of self and wrongly estimated physical attributes of self may affect multiple building blocks (e.g., crayfish raised in smaller shelters over-estimate their size, which in turn makes them over-estimate their fighting potential [ ]).
A paradigm used to test for the understanding of ones’ body as an obstacle consists of a mat or a carpet that the subject is standing on and a moveable object/toy that is attached to it. The subject is then requested to pass/give the object to the experimenter. If the subject realizes it has to move off the mat in order to give the object (together with the mat) to the experimenter, we assume that they have the ability to understand that their body is a physical object and can act as an obstacle. This paradigm was originally created to test toddlers [ ], but to our knowledge only two studies used it in non-human animals: dogs and elephants [ , ]. Both elephants and dogs have shown an understanding of their own body as an obstacle by moving from the mat significantly more when the objects were attached to it than in the control condition(s).
To our knowledge, only a few studies investigated the ability to put the properties of one’s body in relation with the properties of other objects in their environment [ , – ]. Awareness of one’s own body size is the most commonly studied property of body as an object, and it is usually studied in the context of species whose males fight for resources (territory, potential mates, etc.) (e.g., [ , ]). In that context, it is beneficial for an individual to have a perception of one’s own relative size to be able to assess how much bigger or smaller the opponent is. Only few studies so far tested body size perception in the context of foraging and moving through the environment [ , – ]. The paradigm most frequently used is presenting the animals with gaps of different sizes to go through or walk over. If the animals are aware of their body size, they should choose to walk through bigger gaps when available, adjust their bodies accordingly as the gaps get smaller, and be more hesitant to attempt going through small gaps. Alternatively, some studies used a single gap paradigm in which case the latencies to approach or reach the reward and the behavioural modifications (e.g., body pose, ducking the head, etc.) were taken as the measure of the awareness of body size. Animals across taxa seem to be aware of their body size and adjust their behaviour as they move through or walk over differently sized gaps [ , , – ], suggesting that understanding of one’s own size is indeed crucial for successful navigation through the environment. The only study that focused on other properties of body as an object (other than shape and size) was carried out on brown rats [ ]. The rats had to cross one of the three bridges presented in the enclosure to reach a reward, however only one bridge was fixated, while the other two were loose (acting like a see-saw). The brown rats seem to be able to put their own body weight in the relation to the solidity of the object they walk on. However, out of 25 animals, only 8 developed a probing behaviour (tapping the bridge with their paws) to discriminate between bridges, 12 gave up after a few falls, and the remaining 5 did not develop the correct strategy but kept on trying. This raises an interesting point that although the rats may be aware of their weight and how it interacts with a loose bridge, it does not mean that animals develop the correct strategy to test the properties of another object in the environment and, as mentioned by the authors, some rats might have perceived the falling off the bridge as too big of a risk to invest more energy to finding a solution.
Although a number of studies have been carried out on different species to test aspects of body self-awareness, no single species has been systematically tested in all “building blocks”, making it difficult to progress from an approach where individual abilities are being tested, to one in which we are also able to further our understanding of how these building blocks integrate and complement each other. Lenkei and colleagues [ ] proposed that dogs would be an optimal model to systematically investigate self-awareness across all building blocks, define the different “building blocks”, and further our understanding of the underlying cognitive processes required to achieve them. The first two building blocks mentioned above have already been tested in dogs. Dogs have been shown to understand that their body acts as an obstacle [ ] and that they can correctly judge their body size [ , ]. The study by Lenkei and colleagues [ ] also focused on shape perception by comparing dog breeds with different leg lengths (short legged vs long legged breeds) and found that leg length did not affect the assessment of suitability of an opening to walk through. However, although leg length contributes to the overall shape of the body, the legs may not be the main limiting factor when assessing whether the body can fit through an opening. Finally, to our knowledge, the third building block mentioned (i.e., putting properties of one’s body in relation with the properties of other objects) above has never been tested in dogs.
Dogs occupy a special environmental niche – the obstacle-rich, complex human-environment– and partake in an array of human-dog interactions with some of them providing extensive opportunities to learn about their body size and shape (e.g., agility, search & rescue, musical canine freestyle dogs). Proprioception and exceptional body-awareness is especially important in agility dogs as they have to decide within milliseconds how to move their body to not throw off a bar at a jump, balance on the dog-walk when running at high speeds, navigate through the weaves without hitting the poles, and run through tunnels, that eventually can be smaller than the dog itself depending on the breed [ , ]. To prevent injuries and perform at a competition level, agility dogs receive a lot of proprioceptive training, strengthening and balance training, which might lead to a better sense of body-awareness [ – ]. This is also supported by several studies that have shown that highly trained dogs may outperform untrained pet dogs in problems solving tasks [ , ]. An agility-training program for dogs incorporates a variety of obstacles to challenge their physical abilities, coordination, and responsiveness while keeping the sessions engaging and fun. In the main training phase obstacles like tunnels, weave poles, jumps, A-frames, dog walks, and seesaws are introduced. Tunnels are flexible tubes that dogs run through, starting with straight ones and progressing to curved ones. Depending on the size of the dogs, they have to adjust (crouch down) to fit through. Weave poles require the dog to zigzag through upright poles, while jumps, such as single-bar or tire jumps, can be adjusted in height based on the dog’s size and skill level. A-frames and dog walks help improve balance and confidence on elevated surfaces, while seesaws teach dogs to handle shifting surfaces. Positive reinforcement, such as treats, toys, or verbal praise, is essential to encourage the dog and maintain focus, while directional commands like “left,” “right,” or “jump” improve communication. Sessions should usually be fun, kept short to avoid fatigue, and performed 2–3 times per week, with adjustments based on the dog’s fitness level, age, and experience.
In the current study, we aimed to assess if dogs would be a suitable model for a systematic approach to investigating body- and self-awareness in an ecologically relevant context by not only testing the body size perception, but also investigating whether pet dogs are able to assess the shape of their body (regardless of leg length) and whether they understand the solidity of barriers they could move through. Previous studies [ , ] used a single gap paradigm, arguing that this prevents the animals to simply choose a “more convenient” option. We argue that having two gaps is a better approach because to choose a “more convenient” option, the subject still has to have a frame of reference and therefore knowledge of their own size to choose correctly, while when only one choice is available, choosing to go through the gaps may be a matter of motivation to reach the owner who was on the other side of the gap instead of body size perception. Four other studies on snakes, rats, ferrets, and crows respectively [ – ] used a similar idea in a three-choice paradigm. This approach allows for simultaneous comparison of all three sizes (too small, medium, and large) presented in the study. However, there are several issues that arise from this approach. The main issue is the distance between the subject and the openings. The openings are either equidistant from the subject or from the reward, which makes one option more favourable. Indeed, three of those studies [ – ] reported a bias, as ferrets and crows preferred the central opening, while the rats avoided it. This issue alone makes this approach problematic, as we are no longer studying only the preference for the size or shape of the opening, but a combined preference for the location of the opening and the size and shape. Second issue would be the number of combinations needed to test all of the possible combinations of openings presented. Finally, third issue would be the statistical analysis, as with the increase of combination there is an increase of “conditions” that have to be tested separately (either as different models or as different levels of a single variable). Having three option does not allow us to tease apart which opening prompted the animal to make a specific choice and we would have to consider each opening as a separate effect that interact with each other in a single trial. This would render the interpretation very difficult if not impossible.
Accordingly, we used a two-choice paradigm where animals could decide through which opening to pass to get to a reward on the other side. In the first experiment, the openings varied in shape (horizontal, vertical, and circular) and size, while in the second experiment the openings were covered with materials of different solidity (plastic plant, paper, and wood). We also assessed the role of experience in recognizing one’s size and shape, and assessing object solidity by comparing pet dogs that have received agility training with pet dogs without agility or any other official (e.g., rescue dogs) training. Given the previous studies on dog body size and shape perception, we would expect dogs to perform well in the two-door paradigm and approach, attempt to walk through, and finally walk through the more appropriate opening more often, i.e., prefer a larger opening over smaller ones and prefer a circular opening over vertical and horizontal openings as it requires least body adjustments, while avoiding the horizontal openings as more body adjustments are needed to walk through them (Experiment 1). We also expected the latency to reach the reward to be smaller the bigger the openings presented. However, if the previous results were not due to body size awareness but rather due to the motivation of the dogs to reach their owner on the other side of the gap, we would expect the dogs to choose at random. We expected that dogs do have an understanding of the solidity of the objects around them and will approach, attempt to walk through, and finally walk through a softer barrier (i.e., the barrier that is easier to tear or push aside) more often. Finally, agility training should greatly improve the dogs’ body self-awareness and therefore the dogs with agility training should outperform untrained dogs in all trials.

## Materials and methods

## Ethical statement
Participation was voluntary and the procedure itself was non-invasive and short (~40minutes). The study was discussed and approved by the institutional ethics and animal welfare committee of the University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna in accordance with internal Good Scientific Practice guidelines and national legislation (approval number ETK-140/09/2023).Written consent by the dog owners was obtained prior to the data collection.

## General methods

## Subjects.
A total of 59 pet dogs of different breeds and experience with agility training were tested. We planned to test each dog in two experiments. However, if owners were not able to attend on two separate occasions, their dogs participated in only one of the experiments (41 dogs participated in both experiments, out of which 22 trained and 19 untrained) (see below for separate detailed description of participants in experiment 1 and experiment 2). The time interval between experiments was between 4 and 46 days, depending on the owner availability. A dog was considered agility-trained if they regularly participated in agility training and competed at the A1 level (lowest category to start in agility competitions in Austria). A dog was considered untrained if they had no official training (e.g., no agility, rescue or similar training that would improve their body self-awareness). All owners were recruited using the Clever Dog Lab database or via social media and participated voluntarily. Prior to data collection, the owners had to give written consent.

## Experimental Set-up
The experiment was conducted in the testing room (size: 6m x 7m) of the Clever Dog Lab at the University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna. A small compartment (1.5m x 3m), containing a food bowl, was separated using fences. There were two openings in the front fences, while the side fences were opaque to minimize distractions. The owner was seated against a wall between the two entrance doors on the opposite side of the room, equidistant to the fence openings. The room was equipped with three cameras, one mounted on the wall above the food reward, one above the owner (model: Panasonic HC-V777), and one centrally on the ceiling (model: AXIS M3058 PLVE) ( ).
 

## General procedure
Before each trial, the experimenter placed a food bowl baited with food behind the fences and left the room. The owner then entered the room through one of the two doors with the dog leashed. The entrance door side was randomized and counterbalanced across session. The owner took a seat on the chair that was located between the entrance doors and placed against the wall. The owner then put on a blindfold. The experimenter was positioned outside of the room, monitoring the experiment via live feed from the cameras. The experimenter signalled to the owner to unleash the dog by knocking on the wall from the outside of the room. Once unleashed, the dog was free to roam the room. Since all dogs that were recruited took part in a previous experiment in Clever Dog Lab, they did not require special training to expect and search for food within the testing room. Each trial started when the dog was unleashed and ended when the dog ate the food from the food bowl located in the fenced compartment, or after 1 minute. Once the trial ended, the experimenter knocked on the wall once again to signal to the owner to remove the blindfold, leash the dog, and walk out of the room. Once both the owner and the dog were outside of the room, the experimenter entered the room and baited the food bowl again.

## Training phase
The training phase was carried out to make sure that the animals were comfortable walking through both openings and reaching the reward. Only one opening was open at the time (100 cm x 70 cm), while the other was covered with a wooden plank. The side of the available opening was randomized and counterbalanced across the session. Each subject received 6 training trials in a single session. The subjects had to go through an opening 6 out of 6 times to move on to the test phase. All dogs passed the training criterion in a single session.

## Test phase
In the test phase both openings were covered by different barriers (see below for the respective experiments). Each animal was tested in a single session consisting of 18 trials per experiment. The trial order was randomized and the position of each barrier was counterbalanced across the trials. If the subject stopped participating, a short break of 3 minutes was introduced to motivate the dog to continue participating.

## Video coding
Video coding was performed using Loopy (http://loopb.io, loopbio gmbh, Vienna, Austria). We coded the first side approached, first side attempted, and the side they actually walked through, along with the latency to approach and the latency to reach the reward. First approach was defined as the first time the animal was within one body length radius from an opening. First attempt was defined as the first time the animal tried to walk through the barrier by either putting a paw on the fence frame or by putting the snout against or through the opening. Latency to approach was counted from the moment the dog was released until the subject was within one body length from one of the openings. Latency to reach the reward was counted from the moment the subject was within one body length from one of the openings until the subject reached the red bowl in the fenced compartment. The side to walk through (choice) was simply defined as the opening the animals walked through to reach the reward.

## Statistical analysis
Analyses were carried out in R (version 2023.12.1.402; [ ]). Models were fitted using lme4 [ ] and survival [ ] packages. Significance was inferred via likelihood ratio tests, either by using the drop1 function or by carrying out a full-null comparison (chisquare). All models included training (agility trained or untrained), combination number (used to identify which two choices are presented in each trial; see below for respective experiments), and the interaction between the two as the fixed effects. Each model included sex, z-transformed age (in months), and z-transformed age squared (in months). Additionally, for Experiment 2 we also included the z-transformed trial number. Trial number was not included for Experiment 1 as the order of combinations presented was randomized and each trial contained a different opening, which would make the interpretation of the effect of trial impossible.We z-transformed trial number and age to a mean of zero and standard deviation of one to enhance model interpretability and facilitate model convergence [ ]. We included the subject ID as the random intercept and added random slopes when appropriate. We first checked if there was an overall effect by running a full-null comparison, where the null model included only the intercept (and slope if applicable). If there was an effect, we then determined the effect of the interaction using the drop1 function. If the interaction was not significant, we re-fitted a reduced model without the interaction. The probabilities of choosing the correct choice were calculated using the emmeans package [ ]. Finally, we fitted separate models for trained and untrained subjects including only the combination number and random intercept to determine whether the subjects performed differently from chance.

## Experiment 1: Shape and size

## Subjects
A total of 49 pet dogs (29 females and 20 males; mean age: 72 months, range: 14–140) participated in this experiment; 25 pet dogs had previous agility training, while 24 pet dogs had no training.

## Procedure
The openings were covered with differently sized and shaped barriers adapted to the size of the subject. Three rough measurements of each animal were taken using a measuring tape to determine the size of the opening for each animal (see below): height at withers (HW), body height (BH), and width of chest (CW) ( ). The horizontal and vertical opening came in three different sizes: a large size that was more than big enough for the subject to walk through it, a medium size that was exactly the size the animal needed to walk through, and a small size that was too small for the animal to fit. The change in size was achieved by either sliding the door on the fence left or right (vertical opening), or by placing the wooden panel higher or lower over the opening (horizontal opening). A circular opening came only in large and medium size. The change in size for circular opening was achieved by attaching panels with different diameters over the circular opening ( ). The panels came in increments of 5 cm, so the size calculated by the formula for the circular opening ( ) was rounded up to the nearest multiple of 5. Each subject was presented with 18 different combinations of the openings, seeing each combination only once. Out of the 18 combinations, 4 combinations were used to assess subjects’ shape perception by presenting different shapes of the same size (Large or Medium). To assess subjects’ size perception, 6 combinations that presented them with different sizes of the same shape (3 for horizontal and 3 for vertical) were used, while the remaining 10 combinations were used to assess the relationship between shape and size by presenting openings that differed in both (for the list of combinations see ).
 

## Experiment 1: Statistical analysis
For each combination, we defined a correct choice. We first assessed the first 10 combinations that contained only the effect of shape or of size, but not both. Here we defined the Circular opening as always being the correct choice, as it should require the least amount of body adjustment, and Vertical as correct over Horizontal, as it requires the most body adjustment to walk through. Similarly, large openings were always considered the correct choice, while the small openings were always incorrect. We grouped the combinations into four comparison groups ( ): Shape1, Shape 2, Size Horizontal, and Size Vertical. For each comparison group, we fitted three Generalized Linear Mixed models (GLMM) with binomial distribution; one model for side that was first approached, one for the side that the subject first attempted to walk through, and one for the actual opening the subject went through. We defined outcome of the trial (coded as 1 or 0) as the response variable. We also fitted a Mixed Effect Cox Model (COXME) to conduct a survival analysis for latencies to approach (from the moment the subject was unleashed until the subject was within one body length from one of the openings) and latencies to reach the reward (from the moment the subject was within one body length from one of the openings until the subject reached the red bowl in the fenced compartment). We then calculated number of times subjects attempted to walk through the same opening they first approached, and number of times subjects chose to walk through the same opening they first attempted. We then ran a binomial test to test if they did so different from chance. Once we ran the analysis on the combinations that had only the effect of shape or of size, but not both, we determined the actual preference of our subjects (i.e., we redefined the correct choices according to our data to make it easier to read the results). We then ran two two-tailed binomial test (p = 0.5) for each remaining combination, one for each group of training, to assess whether the shape or the size of the openings are more salient to the animals. Finally, we adjusted the p-values for multiple comparison using the Bonferroni method.

## Experiment 1: Results
We did not detect a significant effect of the interaction between training and combination number in any of our models (p > 0.05), accordingly the results presented here are from the reduced models (not including the interaction).

## Comparison 1: Effect of shape 1 (horizontal vs vertical opening)
The training and combination number did not affect the choice of the side to first approach (Full-null comparison: p = 0.6389), to first attempt (Full-null comparison: p = 0.1459), or to go through (Full-null comparison: p = 0.2185). Untrained dogs performed at chance, while trained dogs approached, attempted to go through, and walked through the horizontal opening significantly more than the vertical one ( , ).
 

## Comparison 2: Effect of shape 2 (Circular vs Horizontal or Vertical opening)
The training and combination number did not affect the choice of the side to approach (Full-null comparison: p = 0.5394), to attempt (Full-null comparison: p = 0.2928), or to go through (Full-null comparison: p = 0.4175). Both groups performed below chance, i.e., they avoided the circular opening ( , ).
 

## Comparison 3: Effect of horizontal size (Horizontal large, Horizontal medium, and Horizontal small)
The training and combination number did not affect the choice of the side to approach (Full-null comparison: p = 0.2815). Both groups approached at chance ( ). Training did not affect the choice of the side that was first attempted (p = 0.8642), but there was a significant difference between the combinations. The subjects performed at chance in combination 5 (Large vs Medium; probability to attempt to go through the correct side = 40.1%), while the other two combinations were solved significantly above chance (probability to attempt to go through the correct side in combination 6 (Large vs Small; 75%; p=<0.01) and in combination 7 (Medium vs Small; 96.6%; p < 0.01). For the side chosen to pass through, the model only included combination 5 (Large vs Medium), as it was impossible in combinations 6 and 7 to go through the small opening since the animal could not fit, and thus the outcome could either be correct or no choice. The training did not affect the choice of the side to go through (Full-null comparison: p = 0.779). Both groups walked through the larger opening more often than the medium sized opening ( , ). The square of age had a significant effect on the choice of the side subjects first attempted (p = 0.0171).
 

## Comparison 4: Effect of vertical size (Vertical large, Vertical medium, and Vertical small)
The training did not affect the choice of the side to approach (p = 0.4255), to attempt (p = 0.7163), or to go through (p = 0.607). However, there was a significant effect of combination number. The subjects first approached the correct side more often in combination 9 (Large vs Small; 79.6%; p < 0.01), while they approached at chance in the other two combinations (combination 8, Large vs Medium; 49.1%, combination 10, Medium vs Small; 43.7%). They first attempted the correct side significantly above chance in combinations 9 and 10 (probability to attempt the correct side in combination 9 = 87.2%; p < 0.01, combination 10 = 80.7%, p = 0.0078), while they attempted at random in the combination 8 (Large vs Medium, 52%). Finally, for the side to walk through, the model only included combination 8 (Large vs Medium), as it was impossible to pass through the small one (as the animal could not fit) in combinations 6 and 7, and the outcome could either be correct or no choice. Both trained and untrained dogs preferred the larger opening over the medium opening ( , ).
 

## Mixed effect combinations
According to results presented, we expected that the preferences will remain the same for the mixed effect combination (number 11–18, ), i.e., that the untrained animals will not show a preference for the Horizontal over the Vertical openings. Furthermore, we expected that the Circular and small openings would be avoided. Finally, we expected the large opening to be preferred over a medium one. The animals walked through the correct opening in all combinations except for combinations 13 (Horizontal large vs Vertical medium) and 15 (Vertical large vs Horizontal medium) ( ).

## Latency to approach
We found no significant effect in comparisons 1 (Full-null comparison (before excluding the interaction): p = 0.0667), 2 (Full-null comparison (before excluding the interaction): p = 0.2212), and 4 (Full-null comparison (before excluding the interaction): p = 0.2905). In comparison 3 (Horizontal Large, Medium, and small) training (p = 0.0240) and sex (p = 0.0389) had a significant effect on latency to approach. Untrained (hazard ratio = 0.4125) dogs were slower, while male dogs (hazard ratio = 2.1686) were faster to approach the apparatus.

## Latency to reach reward
Combination number significantly affected the latency to reach the reward in comparisons 1, 3, and 4, while we detected a trend in comparison 2 ( ). The effect of training was significant only in comparisons 2, 3, and 4 ( ). Overall, trained dogs reached the reward faster and had a higher probability of walking through an opening within the time limit. The subjects took longer to reach the reward and had a lower probability to walk through an opening within the time limit if the presented barriers were smaller ( ). Z-transformed age had a significant effect in comparisons 1 (p < 0.01) and 4 (p = 0.0273). The dogs with age in the extremes of our sample (younger and older dogs) were slower, with the effect being stronger for older dogs ( ).
 

## Relation between approach and attempt, and attempt and choice
Our subjects first attempted the opening they first approached significantly above chance (723 out of 871 cases; p < 0.01) and walked through the opening they first attempted significantly above chance (794 out of 853 cases; p < 0.01).

## Experiment 1: Discussion
Our results suggest that animals did correctly assess their size, as they attempted and went through the correct barrier above chance in Comparisons 3 (Horizontal shapes of different size) and 4 (Vertical shapes of different size). Both groups also took longer to walk through an opening when the presented openings were smaller (medium and small size). These results are in line with previous studies [ , ] as dogs took longer to reach the reward when the openings presented were smaller. The agility training did not affect the choice of the animals, but it greatly affected the latencies to reach the reward once the first barrier had been approached. Agility dogs were quicker and were more likely to walk through an opening within the time limit, suggesting that both animal groups had a notion of their size, but agility dogs needed less time to assess the size of the openings in front of them. However, there was no difference in latencies to approach the apparatus in comparison 4 (Vertical openings). Since we showed that most subjects actually approached, attempted, and walked through the same opening, it would seem that agility trained dogs hesitated less once they approached the opening. The trained dogs were faster to approach the apparatus in comparison 3 (Horizontal openings).
Untrained dogs did not have a preference for the horizontal or vertical shape, while the agility dogs preferred the horizontal opening. This is surprising, since no body adjustment was needed to walk through the vertical openings, while the subjects had to at least duck their head to walk through the horizontal opening. Agility dogs may have more experience with ducking under an obstacle and may have felt more familiar with this shape, which would explain the effect we detected. Taken with the shorter latency to approach when horizontal openings are presented, the most likely explanation is that agility dogs learned how to handle horizontal openings through their training, while vertical openings are usually avoided. This is probably due to most obstacles being horizontal or circular on the agility course, while the closest to a vertical opening that they encounter during training are weave poles, which are flexible and can be pushed aside, while the fences in our experiment were rigid and could not be easily moved. Additionally, several animals hit the brim of the horizontal opening with their back. This suggests that they may not be fully aware of their body’s shape, but more investigation is required to draw a conclusion. Unfortunately, the hitting of the opening was not clearly visible on the videos, as this was not the focus of the study, so we could not assess whether previous agility training affected the amount of times each subject hit the brim. However, the subjects showed no aversion or fear of the apparatus after hitting the barrier, which might mean that dogs did not even pay attention to this.
Interestingly, the animals did not have a preference in mixed effect combination where horizontal and vertical openings came in different sizes. Both groups overall avoided circular opening. This is probably due to the fact that to go through a circular opening the subjects had to jump with their hind legs, which poses a risk of hitting the brim and would therefore be a less desirable option. The exact reason why the subjects avoided the circular opening remains unclear. It would therefore be beneficial if future studies also included combinations where circular option is presented with medium and too small vertical and horizontal openings. Although, given that our subjects avoided the circular opening, if it is presented with a too small opening it might be perceived as an impossible choice, which will probably results in subjects not making a choice at all. It would however seem that shape and size are assessed separately, as the untrained animals retained their preferences for shape and size even when presented with mixed combinations of openings (combination number 11–18). This connection (or lack thereof) between size and shape should be studies in greater detail. Agility dogs, however, did not show preference of the horizontal openings in the mixed combinations. This is interesting as it suggests that the perception of shape and size interact with each other, which caused the subjects to choose at random when the openings differed in both shape and size.
Finally, the effect of age on the first opening attempted in Comparison 3 (Horizontal openings) is likely coincidental, as we found no effect of age in other comparisons and no effect of age when approaching or walking through an opening in Comparison 3. Similarly, the effect of sex on latency to approach in comparison 3 is likely a coincidence too. The finding that the younger and older dogs took longer to reach the reward in Comparisons 1 and 4 probably has nothing to do with size or shape perception. Most likely explanation is that younger dogs were more explorative or distracted, while the older dogs simply walked slower. Since all of our subjects were adults, we did not expect age to have any effect on perception of shape and size, as they are already fully-grown and the mental image of their bodies should have already been fully formed. Future studies could focus on the effect of age on size and shape perception to investigate the matter further.

## Experiment 2: Object solidity

## Subjects
A total of 51 pet dogs (28 females and 23 males; mean age: 70 months, range: 15–141) participated in this experiment; 26 pet dogs had agility training, while 25 pet dogs had no training.

## Procedure
Prior to the test phase, each subject received a short familiarization phase during which the animal was free to search for a treat in a wooden box ( ). The wooden box was either made entirely out of wood or had one side made out of one of the other two materials (paper or decorative plastic plant), which had to be pushed or torn to reach the reward. This way, we made sure that each subject had the necessary exposure to the three materials. The box had a removable wooden lid with a latch. In case of the paper and the plant condition, we removed the wooden lid and covered the opening with the other material. The paper was attached using painter tape, while the plastic plant strings were attached to a sewing thread, which was held in place by two knots protruding through the box’s frame. The owner with the dog leashed entered and moved to the middle of the room. The experimenter showed the reward to the subject, and then placed it in the box, covering the opening with the appropriate material. The experimenter then placed the box in front of the subject, with the covered opening facing it, and took one step back. The owner then unleashed the dog. If the dog stopped trying to reach the reward and either started exploring the room or looked toward the owner for assistance, the experimenter instructed the owner to encourage the dog to reach the reward. For the condition when the wood was covering the opening, it was impossible for the subject to reach the reward and the trial ended after 1 minute or if the subject showed signs of frustration (e.g., barking or whining). Each subject received 2 trials per material in the familiarization phase. All participants managed to push the plant and tear the paper to reach the reward.
The openings on the front fences were completely covered by barriers made out of different materials (wood, paper, or a decorative plastic plant) ( ). The test was conducted in the same way as in experiment 1. Each dog received 6 trials per possible combination of the materials adding up to a total of 18 trials in a single session. The position of each material was randomized and counterbalanced across trials.
 

## Experiment 2: Statistical analysis
We defined the correct choice for each of the 3 possible combinations (plant vs paper, plant vs wood, and paper vs wood). Plastic plant was always considered correct, as it required the least amount of force to push aside, while the wood was always considered incorrect, as it was impossible to walk through it. We fitted three Generalized Linear Mixed models (GLMM) with binomial distribution; one model for barrier that was first approached, one for the barrier that the subject first attempted to walk through, and one for the actual opening the subject went through. We defined outcome of the trial (coded as 1 or 0) as the response variable. We also fitted a Mixed Effect Cox Model (COXME) to conduct a survival analysis for latencies to approach (from the moment the subject was unleashed until the subject was within one body length from one of the openings) and latencies to reach the reward (from the moment the subject was within one body length from one of the openings until the subject reached the red bowl in the fenced compartment).

## Experiment 2: Results
We did not detect a significant effect of the interaction between training and combination number (used to identify the barriers presented in the trial) in any of our models (p > 0.05), so the results presented here are from the reduced models (not including the interaction).
Agility training ( ) affected the probability to attempt the correct side first and to walk through the correct side, while we detected a trend for approach. Combination number ( ) affected the probability to both approach and attempt the correct side first, while the trial number had no effect (effect of z-transformed trial number: approach p-value = 0.9782; attempt p-value = 0.1646) ( ). The model for side chosen to pass through included only combination 1 (plant vs paper), as it was impossible to choose incorrectly in the other two combinations (combination 2: plant or combination 3: paper vs wood). Untrained dogs outperformed trained dogs when approaching, attempting, and choosing the side to walk through ( ), while the probability to approach the correct side first was lower for combination 3 (paper vs wood) when compared to combinations 1 (p-value = 0.0148) and 2 (p-value = 0.0069) and the probability to attempt the correct side first was highest for combination 2 (plant vs wood) when compared to combinations 1 (p-value = 0.0001) and 3 (p-value = 0.0224).
 

## Latency to approach
The training did not have an effect on latency to approach the apparatus. However, there was a significant difference between combinations ( ). Subjects approached the apparatus slower in combination 3 (paper vs wood) than in other two combinations.
 

## Latency to reach reward
The training did not have an effect on latency to reach the reward. However, there was a significant difference between combinations ( ). The subjects had the highest probability to make a decision and did so faster in Combination 1, while the probability was lowest and the subject needed more time to make a decision in Combination 3 ( ). Z-transformed age also had a significant effect. The dogs with age in the extremes of our sample (younger and older dogs) were slower, with the effect being stronger for older dogs ( ).
 

## Relation between approach and attempt, and attempt and choice
Our subjects first attempted the opening they first approached significantly above chance (669 out of 890 cases; p < 0.01) and walked through the opening they first attempted significantly above chance (721 out of 843 cases; p < 0.01).

## Experiment 2: Discussion
Our results suggest that our subjects managed to assess the solidity of materials even after a short interaction with it and could discriminate between them. The untrained dogs outperformed trained dogs when approaching, attempting, and choosing the barrier to walk through, which is surprising. The trained dogs did not have a preference when approaching, while the untrained dogs approached the correct side above chance. Both groups attempted and walked through the correct opening above chance.
Although we detected a significant difference between groups when approaching, the difference in estimated probability to approach the correct first was quite small. It is still surprising that untrained dogs outperform trained dogs, as it would be expected that agility training would improve quick decision-making and that trained dogs would then be able to assess the solidity faster than untrained dogs. There was no significant difference between the groups in latency to approach. Interestingly, we did not detect a significant difference in latency to reach reward between the groups (unlike in Experiment 1). This was also surprising as we expected the agility trained dogs to be faster as speed is an important factor in agility competitions. It is possible that agility training changed how dogs assess the physical feature of the world around them and thus they made a choice once they were close to the barrier, while the untrained dogs may have done so while approaching. This also could have in turn affected the latency to reach the reward. Alternatively, trained dogs might have been more socially inhibited by their owner’s presence [ , ] as they have more training experience, and therefore hesitated to “break” a barrier, as this is usually undesired in normal owner-dog interactions. Furthermore, to successfully finish an agility course it is usually expected of the animals not to touch or break any obstacles, meaning that agility trained dogs were specifically trained not to “break” a barrier, which in turn would increase their latency to reach the reward. More experiments would be needed to analyse how training changes the assessment of different physical attributes of other objects in the environment. It might also be beneficial to test the dogs in the absence of their owners, however this may lead to less exploration and activity, which would directly influence their willingness to walk through a barrier [ ]. We would expect the dogs to become better at recognizing different materials as they have more experience the older they are. Therefore, the finding that the age had a similar affect as it did in Experiment 1 further supports the idea that this is a result of how dogs behave during testing and not an effect of age on physical cognition. Alternatively, it is possible that with age dogs become worse at telling materials apart. We find this explanation unlikely, but more research would be needed to confirm that statement. Effect of age was not the focus of this study.
The weaker (albeit positive) preference to walk through the correct opening in trained dogs could be explained by them having more experience and encountering more materials in their lives, which would result in a lower perceived difference in solidity between plant and paper. To confirm this interpretation, future studies should include different materials to further research how dogs assess solidity. Finally, the influence of experience should be studied in greater detail by including dogs with different types of training.

## General discussion
Dogs have been suggested as a suitable model to investigate body- and self-awareness in an ecologically relevant context [ , , ]. Here we expanded previous studies by not only investigating the perception of body size, but also body shape (in a more general sense) and by exploring animals’ ability to understand the solidity of barriers in the environment. In this study, we used a two-choice paradigm to assess dogs’ perception of their own size and shape (Experiment 1), and their understanding of solidity of obstacles (Experiment 2). We also investigated the effect of agility training on dogs’ body awareness by comparing trained and untrained dogs.
Both groups of dogs avoided the circular opening and preferred large openings to medium and small openings. Untrained dogs had no preference when approaching, while trained dogs did. This suggests that agility dogs made a decision during approach, while untrained dogs made a decision once they reached the apparatus. Untrained dogs had no preference between vertical and horizontal shape. This is in line with the previous results by Lenkei and her colleagues (experiment 3) [ ], where they showed that dogs did not rely on shape perception when arriving at the opening. Interestingly, agility trained dogs preferred the horizontal opening to the vertical one. This is probably due to most obstacles being horizontal or circular on the agility course, so through their training agility dogs learned how to handle these obstacles. The closest to a vertical opening that they encounter during training are weave poles, which are flexible and can be pushed aside, while the fences in our experiment were rigid and could not be easily moved. To investigate this further, more studies focusing on animals with different life experience and specific training are required. The agility trained dogs also had shorter latencies to reach the reward. Overall, the latencies were longer the smaller the barriers presented. The exact reason why the subjects avoided the circular opening remains unclear. In Experiment 2, both groups preferred the plant to the paper barrier, but the untrained dogs had a stronger preference than the agility trained dogs. The probability to walk through a barrier within the time limit was higher when the wooden (impassable) barrier was not present. Both groups attempted to walk through the correct side first more often in combination 2 (plant vs wood) when the difference in solidity of barriers was highest, while the preference was the weakest for combination 1 (plant vs paper) when the difference in solidity was the lowest.
The significance of our findings is three fold: we evaluated the two-choice paradigm, we examined dogs’ body size, shape, and object solidity perception, and we studied the influence of experience on ecological self. We challenged the statement by Lenkei and her colleagues [ ] that dogs would always choose a “more convenient” option if tested in a two-choice paradigm. We argue that a two-choice paradigm is justified, since testing animals with a single opening does not allow us to disentangle the effect of the size of the opening and the motivation of the animal. It is also needed to have a frame of reference to determine what the “more convenient” option would be. Additionally, if there is only one opening present, then that is the only way to reach the reward. When we present the animals with two options, we can directly compare two openings, which provides us with insight into how different shapes and sizes are processed. Furthermore, Lenkei and her colleagues also stated that the latency to approach is a better measurement of body-size perception than the latency to reach reward, as the latency to reach the reward is more driven by the motivation than other factors. Here we found that untrained dogs approached at random which implies that the latency to reach the reward gives us information on hesitation once the animal interacted with the apparatus and came close enough to make a choice.
Our results in Experiment 1 are in line with the existing literature [ , ], as dogs took longer to walk through smaller openings. Although both previous studies demonstrated dogs’ flexibility when navigating openings of different size (and shape [ ]), the previous studies never directly compared two openings of different size and shape. Here we demonstrated that untrained dogs will not show a preference for shape, as long as the opening is large enough for them to fit and does not require additional body adjustments. As mentioned above, these results are in line with the results reported by Lenkei and her colleagues, therefore although we criticized the single-choice paradigm, we confirmed their findings, which suggests that it is still a valid method. This rises several interesting points. Firstly, it seems that dogs do have an accurate assessment of their body shape and size and can use this information in quick decision-making. Secondly, the preferences for shape and size disappeared in combinations where openings varied in both, which implies that the effects of size and shape interact. This suggests that within one “building block” of ecological self, there may be several different aspects, which carry different information, that are taken together to form a mental image of “self”. Importantly, unlike the building blocks analogy, these aspects may not be hierarchical. This expands the idea that ecological self can be divided into building blocks which vary across species and ecological niches [ , ], as some building blocks may be further divided into smaller units, which can and should be studied both separately and together. It would therefore be interesting to design an experiment where multiple physical attributes of a barrier have to be taken into an account to test whether smaller units within a building block have different importance in determining a preference.
Interestingly, we found no effect of training on size perception, but the agility-trained dogs had a preference for horizontal openings This is not surprising since most obstacles used in agility training are horizontal, meaning agility dogs had more experience with this shape and already knew how to handle such obstacles at high speed. Adding to this, although both groups correctly assessed the solidity of the barriers covering the openings, the untrained dogs performed better in Experiment 2. There are two possible explanations for this. Either the agility-trained dogs gave more importance to other information from their environment and did not focus on solidity of the barrier in front of them. This is unlikely, since they still performed above chance. It is much more likely that agility-trained dogs had experience with more materials and therefore the perceived difference between solidities was smaller. Therefore, experience may provide a higher resolution or a bigger range of the information received from the environment and in turn does not change how animals assess the physical attributes of objects around them, but how this information is processed. To further investigate how experience affects the processing of information on physical attributes from their environment, it would be important to test dogs with different specific training (e.g., rescue, guide, police dogs, etc.).
Given that we find evidence of ecological self across taxa (elephants [ ], ferrets [ ], rats [ ], snakes [ ], budgerigars [ ], crows [ ], hermit crabs [ ], cats [ ], and dogs [ , , ]), it would seem that the more important criterion for a suitable model to systematically investigate different building blocks of self might be 1) availability of a large enough sample size and 2) the ease of working with the chosen species, rather than cognitive abilities. This is further supported by the relatively small sample sizes of some of the previous studies (6 [ – ], 7 [ ], 12 [ ], 20 [ ]). It would seem that the highest sample size achieved was either using a study species that appears in great numbers in the wild (hermit crabs, n = 40 [ ]) and by testing pet animals (cats: 30 [ ]; dogs: 39 [ ], 44 [ ], 54 [ ], and 59 in the current study). Dogs are the most common pet animal and they are already used to spending time outside of their homes, which makes them suitable for both at home and lab testing. Furthermore, since there are several well-defined specific training programs for dogs (e.g., agility, rescue, and military), they are the perfect model to test the influence of different life experiences on the perception of self. In addition, testing free-ranging dogs can be another venue of approach. Finally, we could also compare dogs with their closest living relative, wolves, to evaluate the effect of domestication on the perception of self. Taken together, dogs are a prime candidate for a model species to investigate the building blocks of self.
Dogs seem to be a suitable model for a systematic approach to investigating body- and self-awareness in an ecologically relevant context. We demonstrated that dogs do have a notion of their body-size, as they preferred the bigger openings more often. We also demonstrated that dogs showed understanding of the solidity of barriers as they attempted and walked through a less solid barrier more often. The agility training did not influence the size perception. However, the agility training changed shape perception and shortened the time needed for the dogs to make a decision when approaching the openings of different size and shape, but increased the time when approaching openings covered with different materials. Our results show that specific training may influence how information on different physical attributes may be processed. This further confirms that “building blocks” are highly context specific and impacted by life experience. We require more studies following similar procedures testing for more “building blocks” of self-awareness in dogs, and the underlying aspects of each building block, to create a systematic overview of how each of these cognitive abilities contributes to the perception of self and how do they manifest in an ecologically relevant contexts. To get a broader picture of the decision making process, in addition to side chosen and latencies, further studies could also analyse hesitation behaviour and bodily adjustment. We also require more studies on physical attributes of a body and objects in the environment in different context and including animals with different life experience to learn how these perceptions are formed and what circumstances improve (or deteriorate) the underlying cognitive processes.

## Supporting information
S1 Table

## p-values adjusted for multiple comparison using the Bonferroni method.
(DOCX)
S1 Fig

## Survival plots for latency to reach reward in a) Comparison 1: Effect of shape 1 (horizontal vs vertical, b) Comparison 2: Effect of shape 2 (circular vs horizontal or vertical, c) Comparison 3: Effect of size horizontal (horizontal large, medium, and small), d) Comparison 4: Effect of size vertical (vertical large, medium, and small).
First letter of the names in the legend indicate shape (H-horizontal, V-vertical, C-circular) and the second indicates size (L-large, M-medium, or S-small).
(PNG)
S2 Fig

## Plots showing the effect of age in Comparisons 1 and 4 in Experiment 1 and in Experiment 2.
(PNG)
S3 Fig

## Survival plot for latency to reach reward in Experiment 2.
The names in the legend are first two letters of the material covering the material (Pl is short for plastic plant, Pa for paper, and Wo for wood).
(PNG)
S1 File

## Script used to run the analysis.
This is the original R script used for statistical analysis for the original submission of the manuscript.
(R)
S2 File

## Script used to run the analysis.
This is the R script used for statistical analysis containing all the necessary changes for the first round of review.
(R)
S3 File

## Script used to run the analysis.
This is the final R script used for statistical analysis containing all the necessary changes for the second round of review. The results reported above were obtained using this script.
(R)
S4 File

## Readme file for the R scripts.
A file containing a few clarifications to help a reader understand the script provided (File S1, S2, and S3).
(TXT)
S5 File

## Full dataset used for the analysis.
The full dataset collected and analysed for this study.
(CSV)

 10.1371/journal.pone.0338647.r001Decision Letter 0
FlorkiewiczBrittany N.Academic Editor© 2026 Brittany N. Florkiewicz2026Brittany N. Florkiewiczhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
2 Jul 2025

Dear Dr. Staric,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process. 
After reviewing the feedback from three qualified reviewers, I have decided to request major revisions to your work. All three reviewers agree that your study is novel and makes significant contributions to the field of dog cognition. However, they have identified several major limitations in the methodology that must be addressed before your article can be considered for publication. Please note that while all three reviewers share similar critiques of your work, they have also identified several novel and significant issues that need to be addressed. 
Please submit your revised manuscript by Aug 16 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org . When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols . Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols .
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Brittany N. Florkiewicz, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. Your ethics statement should only appear in the Methods section of your manuscript. If your ethics statement is written in any section besides the Methods, please move it to the Methods section and delete it from any other section. Please ensure that your ethics statement is included in your manuscript, as the ethics statement entered into the online submission form will not be published alongside your manuscript.
3. Please upload a copy of Supporting Information Figure/Table/etc. Figure S1 which you refer to in your text on page 19.
4. Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information .
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Partly
Reviewer #3: Partly
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? -->?>
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available??>
The PLOS Data policy
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English??>
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
Reviewer #1: Manuscript Number: PONE-D-25-25871
The authors present an important and timely study on body awareness in dogs. While previous research has attempted to explore this aspect of canine cognition, the authors provide clearer evidence by employing a two-choice paradigm and testing dogs with varying levels of training experience. This study is likely to make a meaningful contribution to the field of animal cognition, particularly in understanding self-awareness. However, I have several questions and suggestions that I believe could help strengthen and clarify the manuscript.
Major Comments
The title should be reconsidered to avoid potential misunderstanding. While “body-size perception” is an appropriate and well-established term, the use of “body-shape perception” and “body-solidity perception” may be problematic. To the best of my knowledge, the term “body-shape perception” is not commonly used in animal cognition research, including previous studies on body awareness. Moreover, the distinction between body size and body shape appears ambiguous and potentially redundant, as the two concepts may substantially overlap in meaning. Furthermore, “body-solidity perception” is inaccurate, as the subjects were perceiving the solidity of the covering materials, not their own bodies.
In the analysis, all combinations of windows were treated equally; however, some should be interpreted separately. There are two types of combinations: one where both doors are available (e.g., the Horizontal large enough and the Vertical medium size), and another where one side is unavailable (e.g., the Horizontal large enough and the Vertical too small). While it is reasonable to define the larger and the particular shape as the correct choice, it is problematic to analyze both types of conditions in the same way. In the former case, the “incorrect” option is still “available,” whereas in the latter case, the “incorrect” option is actually “unavailable.” This difference affects how the dogs’ choices should be interpreted.
In the Results section, it would be helpful to include a comparison between the two-door choices as well as between the trained and untrained groups. While p-values of the former comparisons are reported, those for the latter are not. A comparison between the training conditions is essential for clarifying how prior experience contributes to the development of body awareness.
Reporting the exact choice ratios would enhance the interpretability of the results, rather than relying solely on p-values. I also recommend presenting some of the findings as figures to improve clarity, as too many tables can make the data difficult to follow. Additionally, the current table format does not clearly indicate which door was chosen in each trial, making it difficult for readers to quickly grasp the key outcomes.
To support the claim that animals possess self-awareness, some evidence of self-directed behavior is generally required (Gallup & Anderson 2018, Behavioural Processes; Gallup & Anderson 2020, Psychology of Consciousness: Theory, Research, and Practice.; Kakrada & Colombo 2022, Learning and Motivation). Self-directed behavior refers to actions in which animals inspect or interact with their own body, such as mirror-guided self-exploration (Gallup, 1977, American Psychologist). If any potentially relevant behaviors were observed—such as hesitation or re-examination of body size before attempting to pass through a narrow opening—I suggest mentioning them, even if only as qualitative observations.
Miner Comments
Title
Line 1: As noted in the Major Comments, “body-shape perception” should be incorporated into “body-size perception,” as the distinction between the two is unclear. Additionally, “body-solidity perception” is an inaccurate term, as it refers to the perception of the covering materials rather than the subjects’ own body.
Line 2: The term “pet” is likely unnecessary, as the majority of studies involving dogs already use pet dogs as subjects. Unless there is a specific reason to distinguish them from working or shelter dogs, the term can be omitted to improve conciseness.
Abstract
Line 28: It is unclear what exactly became “faster” or “slower.” Specifying the exact parameter being described would improve the clarity of the results.
Introduction
Line 70: This paragraph and the one that follows could be condensed and integrated to reduce redundancy.
Line 81: The citation style appears to be inconsistent with the journal’s guidelines.
Line 83: A citation is needed to support this statement.
Line 108: If the final “building block” has been demonstrated, is it still necessary to empirically test the two preceding ones?
Ethical statement
Line 167: How much time did each subject spend participating in the experiment?
Materials and methods
Line 231: What was the inter-trial interval used in the experiment?
Line 233: How long was the “short break” mentioned in the procedure?
Line 239: Does this definition of “first approach” follow any precedent in previous research? If this criterion was developed specifically for this study, it would be important to provide supporting evidence or justification to ensure its validity.
Line 242: Why was latency not measured from the moment the owner unleashed the dog? Measuring latency from that point could provide insight into whether the subject approached the door immediately or hesitated before making a decision—an important distinction that can help detect behaviors that may indicate self-directed processing.
Line 253: Why was the rationale for including the z-transformed trial number as a variable in Experiment 2?
Experiment 1: Table 1: In the “Vertical” column, the label “C” should be corrected to “CW” for accuracy.
Experiment 1: Results
Line 330: Does the term “training” refer to agility training specifically, or to the training phase within the experimental procedure?
Line 359: This combination should not be interpreted in the same way as the others, as the subjects can available both windows in this case, unlike in the other two combinations.
Line 363: The interpretive value of this measurement may be limited, as the subjects are capable of passing through both “Large” and “Medium” windows. If both options are equally accessible, it becomes difficult to determine whether the subjects’ choices reflect body-size awareness or are simply arbitrary.
Experiment 1: Discussion
Paragraph 3, line 5: To more clearly assess this possibility, a combination of the Circular window with either the Horizontal or Vertical too small should be tested. These options appeared to be less preferred by the subjects.
Experiment 2: Object solidity
Subjects: How long was the interval between Experiment 1 and Experiment 2 for subjects that participated in both experiments?
Experiment 2: Results
Paragraph 2, line 10: Should the final combination be 1 and 3 rather than 1 and 2?
Experiment 2: Discussion
Paragraph 1, line 5: Are the relevant statistical results reported in the Results section? If not, please consider including them to support the interpretation of the findings and ensure consistency with the hypotheses or claims made in the Discussion.
Paragraph 2, line 3: Does agility training include any components that involve learning about material solidity?
Paragraph 2, line 10: Providing details of a representative agility training program would help readers better understand and contextualize the results. I strongly recommend including this information either in the main manuscript or as supplementary material.
General Discussion
Paragraph 1, line 1: In the case of dogs, the olfactory self-recognition test has been developed as a means to investigate self-awareness (Horowitz 2017, Behavioural Processes). This study may be worth citing, as it provides an alternative approach to assessing self-awareness in dogs. Together with the accompanying comment article, it offers valuable insights into how self-awareness in animals can be examined (Gallup & Anderson 2018, Behavioural Processes).
Paragraph 3, line 12: It would be helpful to clarify the relationship between the “first approach” and the “first attempt.” What distinguishes trials in which subjects attempted to go through the same window they first approached from those which they did not? How many times do subjects approach the windows before making their “first attempt”? Are all subjects “walked through” the window on their “first attempt”?
Paragraph 4, line 8: The logical link between this idea and the preceding statement is unclear. Please consider providing additional explanation to clarify the relationship.
Table S1: The raw p-values should be omitted; only the adjusted p-values should be reported.
References: The published month and date may be unnecessary. The title should follow sentence case, capitalizing only the first word and any proper nouns. Scientific names should be italicized.
Reviewer #2: In this study, two groups of dogs (untrained pet dogs vs. agility-trained dogs) were compared in a two-choice task requiring them to pass through one of two openings (Experiment 1: variation in size/shape; Experiment 2: variation in solidity). The authors conclude that: (i) dogs correctly assess their own body size; (ii) evidence regarding shape perception is less conclusive; (iii) dogs partially discriminate the solidity of obstacles; and (iv) experience (i.e., agility training) primarily affects decision speed and, to a lesser extent, shape perception.
This study offers a useful extension of the work by Lenkei et al. (2021), by testing multiple “building blocks” of the ecological self within the same species, and by introducing a two-option paradigm that allows for better control over motivational factors. The overall contribution is promising, but several major issues need clarification or improvement before publication.
- The categorization of dogs as “agility-trained” is based on relatively broad criteria (regular training and participation in A1-level competitions), which likely includes individuals with highly variable levels of intensity, frequency, and duration of training. To better characterize this group and assess its internal heterogeneity, it would be helpful to include additional information such as average weekly training time, age at training onset, and date of most recent competition participation.
- The authors conclude that agility-trained dogs exhibit enhanced shape perception. However, this conclusion appears to overreach the empirical findings. The supporting results are limited to a single statistically significant condition, with a small effect size, and do not justify a clear claim of increased perceptual accuracy. The data more plausibly reflect faster decision-making or motor familiarity in specific configurations, rather than a finer or more conscious representation of body shape. It would be advisable to temper this conclusion in the discussion.
- The analyses rely on an a priori categorization of choices as “correct” or “incorrect,” based on what the authors define as the optimal solution for the animal (e.g., a larger opening or a softer material). This approach carries the risk of imposing an anthropocentric decision framework, assuming that the dog’s perception of its own body necessarily aligns with human preferences or strategies in similar contexts. However, dogs’ individual preferences, contextual motivations, or sensory interpretations may diverge from this framework. It would be useful for the authors to acknowledge this limitation and to consider, in the discussion, the possibility that some choices judged as “suboptimal” from a human perspective may nonetheless reflect valid body representation from the animal’s point of view. A complementary approach could involve coding and analyzing bodily adjustments or hesitation behaviors as direct indicators of body perception, independently of the final choice.
- Given that one of the study’s stated aims is to evaluate the dog as a model for the systematic study of body and self-awareness (i.e., “ecological self”), the discussion would benefit from a more explicit comparative perspective involving other species. Specifically, previous studies using similar paradigms in elephants, rats, or birds should be mobilized not only qualitatively but also quantitatively, by citing observed effect sizes when available. This would help situate canine performance within a more rigorous comparative framework and strengthen the argument for their suitability as a model species. Such inclusion would also help clarify the potential species-specific contributions of ecological niche or life experience to the observed patterns.
Reviewer #3: The manuscript presents novel data on the phenomenon of body-awareness in dogs. Although dogs have previously been the subject of similar research on multiple occasions, the authors' results provide valuable insights for advancing a comprehensive understanding of self-awareness across animal species.
Nevertheless, I have several critiques regarding the "Introduction," "General Discussion," and the validity justification of the experimental methodology.
Point 1. Lines 79–92: While the authors provide a general overview of methodology for studying body size awareness across animal species, the literature review is notably limited. The phenomenon of body size awareness—tested using body-as-obstacle tasks—has been documented in the following species (beyond those cited):
Budgerigars
Schiffner, I.; Vo, H.D.; Bhagavatula, P.S.; Srinivasan, M.V. Minding the gap: In-flight body awareness in birds. Front. Zool. 2014, 11, 64
Hooded crows
Khvatov, I.A.; Smirnova, A.A.; Samuleeva, M.V.; Ershov, E.V.; Buinitskaya, S.D.; Kharitonov, A.N. Hooded Crows (Corvus cornix) May Be Aware of Their Own Body Size. Front. Psychol. 2021, 12, 769397.
Ferrets
Khvatov, I.A.; Sokolov, A.Y.; Kharitonov, A.N. Ferrets (Mustela furo) Are Aware of Their Dimensions. Animals 2023, 13, 444.
Domestic cats
Pongrácz, P. Cats are (almost) liquid!—Cats selectively rely on body size awareness when negotiating short openings. iScience 2024, 27, 110799.
Wistar rats
Khvatov, I.A.; Ganza, P.N.; Kharitonov, A.N.; Samuleeva, M.V. Wistar Male Rats (Rattus norvegicus domestica) Are Aware of Their Dimensions. Animals 2024, 14, 3384.
Hermit crabs
Sonoda, K.; Moriyama, T.; Asakura, A.; Furuyama, N.; Gunji, Y.P. Can Hermit Crabs Perceive Affordance for Aperture Crossing? In Proceedings of the European Conference on Complex Systems 2012, Brussels, Belgium, 3–7 September 2012; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2013; pp. 553–557.
Krieger, J.; Hörnig, M.K.; Laidre, M.E. Shells as ‘extended architecture’: To escape isolation, social hermit crabs choose shells with the right external architecture. Anim. Cogn. 2020, 23, 1177–1187.
Recommendation for authors.
Integrate references to Schiffner et al. (2014), Khvatov et al. (2021, 2023, 2024), Pongrácz (2024), and Krieger et al. (2020). Highlight methodological parallels (e.g., aperture-crossing paradigms) to position this study within a broader comparative framework and enrich interpretation of your findings.
Point 2. Lines 94–96. The authors claim that "the only study" investigating animals’ ability to relate bodily properties to environmental features was conducted on rats (assessing weight sensitivity). I disagree with this assertion.
While the cited rat study (14) explicitly demonstrated probing behavior to test substrate solidity, the capacity to integrate body properties with object features is inherently tested in any aperture-crossing paradigm—whether animals: decide to pass through a single opening, or select a viable opening among multiple options.
For example:
Birds folding wings mid-flight when traversing narrow vertical slits demonstrate pre-contact anticipation of collisions, directly relating body dimensions to aperture parameters before physical interaction (Schiffner et al., 2014).
Rats or ferrets immediately approaching and traversing a size-appropriate opening (when alternatives are impassable) similarly reveal this cognitive integration (Khvatov et al., 2023, 2024).
Recommendation for authors.
Revise to: "Few studies explicitly test animals’ ability to integrate bodily properties with object solidity. While rats (14) demonstrated substrate probing, aperture-crossing paradigms in birds and mammals inherently require this integration." Supporting citations: Schiffner et al. (2014), Khvatov et al. (2023, 2024), Pongrácz (2024).
Point 3. Lines 141–145. The authors argue that a two-opening paradigm is superior to a single-opening design. However, a critical question remains unaddressed: Why was a three-opening setup not employed? This alternative is methodologically justified for two primary reasons:
Ecological validity vs. cognitive load. Experiment 1 tested three aperture sizes; Experiment 2 used three barrier materials. A three-opening design would enable simultaneous presentation of all variants, granting subjects fuller choice—enhancing ecological validity. Counterpoint: three openings may overcomplicate the task, demanding higher attentional focus and potentially confounding results.
Methodological precedent. Three-opening paradigms have been successfully implemented in analogous studies (e.g., ferrets: Khvatov et al., 2023; rats: Khvatov et al., 2024), testing aperture shapes/sizes comparable to this work.
While I do not assert that three openings are inherently superior, the authors should justify their design choice relative to established methods. Results should also be contextualized against prior findings using multi-opening paradigms.
Recommendation for authors.
Explicitly state the rationale for selecting two openings. For example: "We retained the two-choice paradigm to: (a) Maintain comparability with prior canine body-awareness research (Lenkei et al., 2020); (b) Mitigate cognitive overload during extended 18-trial sessions. We acknowledge that while a three-opening design could enable direct comparison of all conditions, it risks reducing decision clarity. Future studies could test this adaptation."
Point 4. Interpretation of Experiment 1 Results. Page 12. The authors claim: "Animals did correctly assess their size, as they approached, attempted, and went through the correct barrier above chance". This conclusion lacks sufficient empirical support. My rationale:
1. Behavioral sequence matters. Under high motivation, first-approach behavior is a stronger indicator of body size awareness than first-attempt or crossing choices. Animals may approach one aperture, investigate it, then cross through another (e.g., approach oversized → cross medium-sized). Critical metric: frequency of trials where the first-approached aperture was immediately crossed without prior investigation of alternatives. This is unreported.
2. Ambiguous first-approach data. Horizontal size effect: "Both groups approached the bigger option more often" (line 357) → Confirms preference for larger apertures, not selection of size-appropriate ones. Vertical size effect: Preference for large vs. small apertures only → No evidence dogs distinguished large vs. medium or medium vs. small.
3. Contrast with robust paradigms. Studies in ferrets/rats (Khvatov et al., 2023, 2024) used three-aperture designs: two impassably large openings and one passable small opening. Subjects preferentially approached and crossed passable apertures, proving size-appropriate selection—not just "bigger is better." Current data cannot confirm dogs chose passable over merely larger openings.
Recommendation for authors.
Reanalyze data to track:
1. First-approach-to-immediate-crossing sequences: How often did dogs cross the first aperture they approached?
2. Individual-level cases: Document trials where dogs approached oversized apertures but crossed medium-sized ones.
Point 5. Demographic Variables in Statistical Models. The manuscript reports subjects' sex and age (with notably high age variance). However, the statistical analysis omits these variables as covariates in the models—a significant oversight requiring correction.
Recommendation for authors.
Refit all GLMM and COXME models including age (linear or log-transformed) and sex as covariates. Report whether the agility training effect persists after controlling for these demographic factors.
Point 6. Terminology: "Correct Choice" in Statistical Analysis (lines 307–312). The authors define a "correct choice" for each aperture combination in Experiment 1. This framing is methodologically unsound, particularly given that results contradicted initial hypotheses. Crucially:
1. Functional success ≠ predicted preference: A "correct" choice should reflect task success (reward attainment), not alignment with researcher predictions.
2. Example: Preferring a horizontal over vertical aperture is not "incorrect" if both yield rewards—it simply reflects subject preference.
3. Parallel issue in Experiment 2: The same problematic framing applies to barrier solidity choices.
Recommendation for authors.
Replace "correct choice" with "predicted choice" throughout Methods and Results. Explicitly state: "In combinations where both options were passable (e.g., horizontal vs. vertical), 'non-predicted' choices still enabled reward acquisition."
Point 7. Fatigue and Motivation Control in Experiment 2. Dogs encountered barriers requiring physical effort (tearing paper, pushing aside foliage) or presenting impassable obstacles (wood). The session structure—18 test trials plus 6 familiarization trials—imposes significant cognitive and physical load. This raises concerns about: progressive motivational decline; fatigue-induced performance decay (especially for latency and success probability within time limits). While breaks were mentioned, their effectiveness was not empirically verified.
Recommendation for authors.
1. Analyze trial-order effects: Segment sessions into thirds (early/mid/late) and compare key metrics (latency, success rate).
2. Include trial number as a covariate: Apply to all GLMM/COXME models in both experiments (currently partial for Exp2 only).
3. Acknowledge limitation: Discuss fatigue as a potential confounding factor in the "Limitations" section.
Point 8. Interpretation of Circular Aperture Avoidance (Experiment 1). The authors hypothesize that avoidance of circular openings stems from "the necessity to jump with hind legs and the risk of hitting the brim." However, this interpretation lacks direct empirical support.
Recommendation for authors:
1. Reframe as a hypothesis: Explicitly state this explanation as one possible interpretation rather than a conclusion.
2. Conduct supplemental video analysis (if feasible): Quantify hind-leg jumping behavior during circular aperture crossings; Compare collision frequency (brim contact) between circular vs. other aperture shapes.
3. Acknowledge limitations: If video data is insufficient, explicitly note in "Limitations" that "the cause of circular aperture avoidance remains an unverified hypothesis."
Point 9. Concern: Definition of "Medium" Apertures in Experiment 1. The authors define medium openings as "exactly the size the animal needed to walk through" (lines 272–273). However, this rigid definition overlooks critical biological and behavioral variability:
1. Individual differences in fur density/volume;
2. Posture-dependent body compression/expansion during passage;
3. Risk: Some "medium" apertures may have been functionally impassable or uncomfortable for certain dogs/postures, potentially explaining: absence of large vs. medium preference; observed aperture collisions.
Recommendation for authors:
1. Specify sizing protocol: Detail how "medium" was calculated (e.g., body measurement + X% clearance? Exact withers height?).
2. Discuss limitations: Address whether sizing accommodated: fur/coat volume; dynamic posture adjustments; inter-individual variability.
3. Acknowledge as potential confound: Cite this as a plausible explanation for null results in size comparisons.
Point 10. Comparison with Lenkei et al. (2021) on Aperture Shape. Lenkei et al. (the primary cited study) concluded that dogs (especially short-legged breeds) do not rely on shape perception, successfully traversing both horizontal and vertical slits through postural adaptation. By contrast, this study:
1. Expected preference for circular/vertical openings over horizontal ones;
2. Found no strong shape preference (beyond circular avoidance), except a trend toward horizontal openings in agility-trained dogs
Recommendation for authors.
Expand the General Discussion to reconcile these findings:
1. Emphasize that both studies demonstrate dogs' flexibility in navigating diverse shapes, but this work used a choice paradigm (vs. single-aperture trials in Lenkei et al.).
2. Note that the absence of shape preference (excluding circular) aligns with Lenkei et al.'s thesis of body-awareness plasticity.
3. Highlight the intriguing trend among agility dogs toward horizontal openings as task-specific behavior—potentially stemming from frequent tunnel/under-barrier training. Position this as a key question for future research.
Point 11. Agility Training Effect in Experiment 2. The finding that untrained dogs outperformed agility-trained dogs in solidity-based choices is unexpected. While authors propose hypotheses (e.g., trained dogs' broader material experience reducing perceived solidity differences; social inhibition; conditioned avoidance of barrier destruction), this result demands cautious interpretation.
Recommendation for authors:
1. Highlight the counterintuitive nature: Emphasize this as an intriguing finding requiring cautious interpretation.
2. Propose targeted follow-ups: test dogs without owners present to evaluate "social inhibition" (though logistically complex); use less destructible barriers (e.g., push-flaps vs. tearable paper) to assess "avoidance of destruction" hypothesis.
3. Introduce attentional focus hypothesis: Suggest that agility training may prioritize processing trajectory/speed cues over detailed solidity assessment of static barriers—contrasting with untrained dogs' more exploratory approach.
Minor Recommendations
Point 12. Keywords: Add "body size awareness" to the list. This term accurately reflects a core focus of the study and enhances discoverability.
Point 13. Line 81: Standardize citation formatting to match the journal’s style guide. The current inconsistency deviates from the full citations used elsewhere.
**********
what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes:  Melina Cordeau
Reviewer #3: Yes:  Ivan Khvatov
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/ . PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org . Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: PONE-D-25-25871_Reviewer Comments.pdf
10.1371/journal.pone.0338647.r002Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version1
3 Sep 2025

Reviewer #1: Manuscript Number: PONE-D-25-25871
The authors present an important and timely study on body awareness in dogs. While previous research has attempted to explore this aspect of canine cognition, the authors provide clearer evidence by employing a two-choice paradigm and testing dogs with varying levels of training experience. This study is likely to make a meaningful contribution to the field of animal cognition, particularly in understanding self-awareness. However, I have several questions and suggestions that I believe could help strengthen and clarify the manuscript.
Major Comments
The title should be reconsidered to avoid potential misunderstanding. While “body-size perception” is an appropriate and well-established term, the use of “body-shape perception” and “body-solidity perception” may be problematic. To the best of my knowledge, the term “body-shape perception” is not commonly used in animal cognition research, including previous studies on body awareness. Moreover, the distinction between body size and body shape appears ambiguous and potentially redundant, as the two concepts may substantially overlap in meaning. Furthermore, “body-solidity perception” is inaccurate, as the subjects were perceiving the solidity of the covering materials, not their own bodies.
Our response: the title has been changed to: Influence of agility training on body-size and object solidity perception in pet dogs
In the analysis, all combinations of windows were treated equally; however, some should be interpreted separately. There are two types of combinations: one where both doors are available (e.g., the Horizontal large enough and the Vertical medium size), and another where one side is unavailable (e.g., the Horizontal large enough and the Vertical too small). While it is reasonable to define the larger and the particular shape as the correct choice, it is problematic to analyze both types of conditions in the same way. In the former case, the “incorrect” option is still “available,” whereas in the latter case, the “incorrect” option is actually “unavailable.” This difference affects how the dogs’ choices should be interpreted.
Our response: In our analysis, we tested if the animals had a preference for one side or the other, i.e. do animals pick one opening significantly above chance when two openings were presented. Importantly we looked at the first side approached and first side attempted – so before they actually experienced that one choice was not really available after all (because they did not fit through it). To be able to do so, we defined one opening as “correct” (coded as 1) and the other as “incorrect” (coded as 0), which matches the predictions of our hypotheses. In each model, we included the effect of the “combination number” (i.e. the actual combination presented), which tells us if there is a difference between each combination. Therefore, we did test for this specific difference between the two types of combinations presented when analysing which opening they first approached and attempted. For the actual opening they walked through, we only analysed the combinations where both options were passable.
In the Results section, it would be helpful to include a comparison between the two-door choices as well as between the trained and untrained groups. While p-values of the former comparisons are reported, those for the latter are not. A comparison between the training conditions is essential for clarifying how prior experience contributes to the development of body awareness.
Our response: We added the p-values in text where appropriate (in comparisons 3 and 4 of Experiment 1).
Reporting the exact choice ratios would enhance the interpretability of the results, rather than relying solely on p-values. I also recommend presenting some of the findings as figures to improve clarity, as too many tables can make the data difficult to follow. Additionally, the current table format does not clearly indicate which door was chosen in each trial, making it difficult for readers to quickly grasp the key outcomes.
Our response: We provided additional graphs in the result section to improve clarity. The graphs show the ratio of choices per training group per condition. The ratios were already reported as percentages of trials where they chose the predicted correct option in the tables along with the respective confidence intervals. The predicted correct choices are explained in the statistical analysis section and at the end of the introduction.
To support the claim that animals possess self-awareness, some evidence of self-directed behavior is generally required (Gallup & Anderson 2018, Behavioural Processes; Gallup & Anderson 2020, Psychology of Consciousness: Theory, Research, and Practice.; Kakrada & Colombo 2022, Learning and Motivation). Self-directed behavior refers to actions in which animals inspect or interact with their own body, such as mirror-guided self-exploration (Gallup, 1977, American Psychologist). If any potentially relevant behaviors were observed—such as hesitation or re-examination of body size before attempting to pass through a narrow opening—I suggest mentioning them, even if only as qualitative observations.
Our response: We did not observe any self-directed behaviours that would be worth mentioning. However, as mentioned in the introduction, we focused on a very small aspect of self-awareness, which should be achievable by any animal with active locomotion. This aspect of self-awareness probably does not require self-directed behaviours and thus could be achieved simply from sensory information gathered through interaction with the environment. We did not want to claim with this study that animals possess self-awareness but rather focus on perception of physical attributes.
Miner Comments
Title
Line 1: As noted in the Major Comments, “body-shape perception” should be incorporated into “body-size perception,” as the distinction between the two is unclear. Additionally, “body-solidity perception” is an inaccurate term, as it refers to the perception of the covering materials rather than the subjects’ own body.
Our response: We changed the title accordingly. We also replaced any mention of body-solidity perception with object solidity perception. We would still prefer to keep the term shape perception. Although shape is technically incorporated in size perception, as shape is just size in different directions, it was not explicitly tested previously if animals perceive these measurements differently. This distinction between size and shape also helps separate different conditions.
Line 2: The term “pet” is likely unnecessary, as the majority of studies involving dogs already use pet dogs as subjects. Unless there is a specific reason to distinguish them from working or shelter dogs, the term can be omitted to improve conciseness.
Our response: Our lab often works with pet dogs, free-ranging dogs, and dogs raised in a wild park (pack dogs). Therefore, specifying that these are pet dogs may be important to some readers.
Abstract
Line 28: It is unclear what exactly became “faster” or “slower.” Specifying the exact parameter being described would improve the clarity of the results.
Our response: rephrased this line
Introduction
Line 70: This paragraph and the one that follows could be condensed and integrated to reduce redundancy.
Our response: the condensed paragraph now reads as follows:
To our knowledge only a few studies investigated the ability to put the properties of one’s body in relation with the properties of other objects in their environment [1–9]. Awareness of one's own body size is the most commonly studied property of body as an object, and it is usually studied in the context of species whose males fight for resources (territory, potential mates, etc.) (e.g. [10,11]). In that context, it is beneficial for an individual to have a perception of one’s own relative size to be able to assess how much bigger or smaller the opponent is. Only few studies so far tested body size perception in the context of foraging and moving through the environment [1–9]. The paradigm most frequently used is presenting the animals with gaps of different sizes to go through or walk over. If the animals are aware of their body size, they should choose to walk through bigger gaps when available, adjust their bodies accordingly as the gaps get smaller, and be more hesitant to attempt going through small gaps. Alternatively, some studies used a single gap paradigm in which case the latencies to approach or reach the reward and the behavioural modifications (e.g. body pose, ducking the head, etc.) were taken as the measure of the awareness of body size. Animals across taxa seem to be aware of their body size and adjust their behaviour as they move through or walk over differently sized gaps [1–4,12], suggesting that understanding of one’s own size is indeed crucial for successful navigation through the environment. The only study that focused on other properties of body as an object (other than shape and size) was carried out on brown rats [5]. The rats had to cross one of the three bridges presented in the enclosure to reach a reward, however only one bridge was fixated, while the other two were loose (acting like a see-saw). The brown rats seem to be able to put their own body weight in the relation to the solidity of the object they walk on. However, out of 25 animals, only 8 developed a probing behaviour (tapping the bridge with their paws) to discriminate between bridges, 12 gave up after a few falls, and the remaining 5 did not develop the correct strategy but kept on trying. This raises an interesting point that although the rats may be aware of their weight and how it interacts with a loose bridge, it does not mean that animals develop the correct strategy to test the properties of another object in the environment and, as mentioned by the authors, some rats might have perceived the falling off the bridge as too big of a risk to invest more energy to finding a solution.
Line 81: The citation style appears to be inconsistent with the journal’s guidelines.
Our response: corrected
Line 83: A citation is needed to support this statement.
Our response: the phrasing here was changed as we condensed the two paragraphs as mentioned in the point above. The needed references were added where appropriate. See the paragraph added in the response above.
Line 108: If the final “building block” has been demonstrated, is it still necessary to empirically test the two preceding ones?
Our response: Building blocks may differ between species as they may use different senses to experience them, so within species it would be important to define each of the building blocks to be able to explain how they develop. Therefore, it is hard to define how building blocks may relate to one another without testing for each of them separately. This is also in line with our results that shape and size may be assessed separately.
Ethical statement
Line 167: How much time did each subject spend participating in the experiment?
Our response: specified approximate duration of the experiment of 40 minutes (line 208*)
*the lines specified here and throughout this document refer to revised manuscript with tracked changes
Materials and methods
Line 231: What was the inter-trial interval used in the experiment?
Our response: The inter-trial interval was the time needed for the experimenter to setup the next trial and answer any possible questions that the owner may ask after the trial (often asking if they are doing everything as instructed and how their dog is doing in the study). This usually took a few minutes (1-5 minutes). The next trial started as soon as possible.
Line 233: How long was the “short break” mentioned in the procedure?
Our response: duration specified in line 274
Line 239: Does this definition of “first approach” follow any precedent in previous research? If this criterion was developed specifically for this study, it would be important to provide supporting evidence or justification to ensure its validity.
Our response: in the study by Lenkei et al. (2019) and by Horrowitz at al. (2021) they also defined approach (but did not provide exact measurement of distance from the opening). In the studies by Khvatov et al, they defined the approach as the situation where the tip of the nose/beak of the animal is within 10 cms from the opening. We used a well-established measurement (body length) used in dog studies as a consistent measurement for each subject as different subjects may significantly vary in size(to name a few studies using this measurement [1–5]).
Line 242: Why was latency not measured from the moment the owner unleashed the dog? Measuring latency from that point could provide insight into whether the subject approached the door immediately or hesitated before making a decision—an important distinction that can help detect behaviors that may indicate self-directed processing.
Our response: We added the analysis of latency to approach in the results section of both experiments as suggested (before latency to reach reward). We added the required definition in statistical analysis section(s).
Line 253: Why was the rationale for including the z-transformed trial number as a variable in Experiment 2?
Our response: In experiment 2 there were only 3 combinations and they were presented with 6 trials per combination. The effect of the trial number here provides us with the information about the performance over time. In Experiment 1 each trial was a unique combination randomized across session, meaning the trial number does not provide additional information. We added the rationale for z-transforming the trial number in the statistical analysis section (line 295).
Experiment 1: Table 1: In the “Vertical” column, the label “C” should be corrected to “CW” for accuracy.
Our response: corrected
Experiment 1: Results
Line 330: Does the term “training” refer to agility training specifically, or to the training phase within the experimental procedure?
Our response: the term “training” refers to agility training. The same term is mentioned in the statistical analysis (line 292). We added a clarification in the brackets that training as a variable refers to the two groups of dogs (agility trained or untrained) (line 292).
Line 359: This combination should not be interpreted in the same way as the others, as the subjects can available both windows in this case, unlike in the other two combinations.
Line 363: The interpretive value of this measurement may be limited, as the subjects are capable of passing through both “Large” and “Medium” windows. If both options are equally accessible, it becomes difficult to determine whether the subjects’ choices reflect body-size awareness or are simply arbitrary.
Our response (including previous point): These points are covered by the second major point. Copy of our response there: In our analysis, we tested if the animals had a preference for one side or the other, i.e. do animals pick one opening significantly above chance when two openings were presented. Importantly we looked at the first side approached and first side attempted – so before they actually experienced that one choice was not really available after all (because they did not fit through it). To be able to do so, we defined one opening as “correct” (coded as 1) and the other as “incorrect” (coded as 0), which matches the predictions of our hypotheses. In each model, we included the effect of the “combination number” (i.e. the actual combination presented), which tells us if there is a difference between each combination. Therefore, we did test for this specific difference between the two types of combinations presented when analysing which opening they first approached and attempted. For the actual opening they walked through, we only analysed the combinations where both options were passable.
Experiment 1: Discussion
Paragraph 3, line 5: To more clearly assess this possibility, a combination of the Circular window with either the Horizontal or Vertical too small should be tested. These options appeared t
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0338647.r003Decision Letter 1
FlorkiewiczBrittany N.Academic Editor© 2026 Brittany N. Florkiewicz2026Brittany N. Florkiewiczhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
15 Sep 2025

Dear Dr. Staric,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE and for your diligent work on the manuscript revisions. Reviewers #1 and #2 have expressed their satisfaction with these changes. However, Reviewer #3 has raised some important concerns regarding your data analysis and data collection protocols. These points can be addressed fairly quickly, so I will be recommending a minor revision for the manuscript.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Oct 30 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org . When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols . Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols .
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Brittany N. Florkiewicz, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
If the reviewer comments include a recommendation to cite specific previously published works, please review and evaluate these publications to determine whether they are relevant and should be cited. There is no requirement to cite these works unless the editor has indicated otherwise. 
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #3: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions??>
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Partly
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? -->?>
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: No
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available??>
The PLOS Data policy
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English??>
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: Thank you for addressing most of my comments and for the corresponding revisions. A few points, however, remain insufficiently addressed. Below I clarify the rationale and offer specific suggestions for revision.
Point 5 — Demographic covariates
Thank you for the clarification. Here is why we ask you to account for sex and age in the models, even if these variables were not part of the a priori hypothesis.
• “We had no hypotheses about sex/age.” Adding covariates is not about testing a new hypothesis; it is a standard way to control potential confounding and to improve the precision of the main treatment estimate. Modern modeling guidance emphasizes that adjustment for relevant predictors reduces noise and yields more efficient standard errors (SEs) and confidence intervals (CIs). For age, please model the effect flexibly (e.g., restricted cubic splines) rather than as a strictly linear term.
See: Frank E. Harrell Jr., Regression Modeling Strategies.
• “Groups are similar.” Similar means at the group level do not preclude individual-level confounding, particularly when age variance is high; adjusting for informative covariates increases efficiency of the treatment effect even under randomization/balanced groups.
• “All dogs ≥14 months; body image is consolidated.” Physical maturity does not eliminate between-individual differences in attention, learning speed, and cognitive flexibility in adult dogs; age-related variation in these domains is well documented.
See: Wallis LJ, Range F, Müller CA, Serisier S, Huber L, Virányi Z (2014). Lifespan development of attentiveness in domestic dogs: drawing parallels with humans. Frontiers in Psychology, 5:71. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00071
• Empirical evidence for sex effects in canine cognition. Several studies report sex differences in dogs’ cognitive/spatial tasks.
See:
• Fugazza C, Mongillo P, Marinelli L. Sex differences in dogs’ social learning of spatial information. Animal Cognition (2017) 20(4):789–794.
• Mongillo P, Scandurra A, D’Aniello B, Marinelli L. Effect of sex and gonadectomy on dogs’ spatial performance. Applied Animal Behaviour Science (2017) 191:84–89.
• Junttila S, Huohvanainen S, Tiira K. Effect of sex and reproductive status on inhibitory control and social cognition in the domestic dog (Canis familiaris). Animals (2021) 11:2448.
• Reporting standards. ARRIVE 2.0 Explanation & Elaboration (Item 7, Statistical methods) explicitly states that nuisance variables should be considered in the analysis (e.g., as covariates); sex and age are listed among factors influencing outcomes. In addition, the NIH SABV policy expects sex to be factored into design, analysis, and reporting in vertebrate animal studies. Please either provide analyses with these covariates or offer a strong justification for excluding them.
See: Percie du Sert N. et al. (2020). Reporting animal research: Explanation and elaboration for the ARRIVE guidelines 2.0. PLOS Biology 18(7): e3000411.
Requested action:
— Refit all generalized linear mixed-effects models (GLMMs) and mixed-effects Cox models (CoxME) including sex and age as fixed covariates; model age with restricted cubic splines (3–5 knots). Report whether the agility-training effect persists and how SEs/CIs change.
— Provide a sensitivity analysis (models with vs. without these covariates); if feasible, exploratory training×age and training×sex interactions with appropriate caveats.
— Reflect these choices transparently in Statistical methods in line with ARRIVE 2.0 (E&E, Item 7).
Point 7 — Fatigue/motivation and trial-order effects
Thank you for the clarification. A subject random intercept adjusts baseline between-dog differences but does not model within-session trends (learning, fatigue, motivational decline). Such trends should be accounted for by an explicit trial index predictor; for inference, please treat trial as a continuous variable with a flexible functional form (e.g., restricted cubic splines) and, where possible, include a by-dog random slope for trial. Person-mean centering of the trial index (within-subject centering) is recommended to cleanly separate within- and between-dog components. This approach is standard for repeated-measures designs and avoids anti-conservative inference; splitting into thirds is unnecessary for the main model and can be reserved for descriptive checks. For time-to-success outcomes, include trial in Cox/CoxME; if warranted by the data structure, consider an extended Cox model with a time-varying covariate.
For Experiment 1: if each dog performed only one test, please acknowledge the limitation (no way to estimate a trial trend) and check batch/order at the session level; if multiple tasks/trials occurred per dog, include trial as above. Please provide sensitivity analyses (with vs. without trial) and partial-effect plots.
See: Barr DJ (2013). Random effects structure for testing interactions in linear mixed-effects models. Frontiers in Psychology 4:328.
**********
what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes:  Ivan Khvatov
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/ . PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org
AttachmentSubmitted filename: PONE-D-25-25871_Reviewer Comments#2.pdf
10.1371/journal.pone.0338647.r004Author response to Decision Letter 2
Submission Version2
13 Nov 2025

Reviewer #3: Thank you for addressing most of my comments and for the corresponding revisions. A few points, however, remain insufficiently addressed. Below I clarify the rationale and offer specific suggestions for revision.
Point 5 — Demographic covariates
Thank you for the clarification. Here is why we ask you to account for sex and age in the models, even if these variables were not part of the a priori hypothesis.
• “We had no hypotheses about sex/age.” Adding covariates is not about testing a new hypothesis; it is a standard way to control potential confounding and to improve the precision of the main treatment estimate. Modern modeling guidance emphasizes that adjustment for relevant predictors reduces noise and yields more efficient standard errors (SEs) and confidence intervals (CIs). For age, please model the effect flexibly (e.g., restricted cubic splines) rather than as a strictly linear term.
See: Frank E. Harrell Jr., Regression Modeling Strategies.
• “Groups are similar.” Similar means at the group level do not preclude individual-level confounding, particularly when age variance is high; adjusting for informative covariates increases efficiency of the treatment effect even under randomization/balanced groups.
• “All dogs ≥14 months; body image is consolidated.” Physical maturity does not eliminate between-individual differences in attention, learning speed, and cognitive flexibility in adult dogs; age-related variation in these domains is well documented.
See: Wallis LJ, Range F, Müller CA, Serisier S, Huber L, Virányi Z (2014). Lifespan development of attentiveness in domestic dogs: drawing parallels with humans. Frontiers in Psychology, 5:71. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00071
• Empirical evidence for sex effects in canine cognition. Several studies report sex differences in dogs’ cognitive/spatial tasks.
See:
• Fugazza C, Mongillo P, Marinelli L. Sex differences in dogs’ social learning of spatial information. Animal Cognition (2017) 20(4):789–794.
• Mongillo P, Scandurra A, D’Aniello B, Marinelli L. Effect of sex and gonadectomy on dogs’ spatial performance. Applied Animal Behaviour Science (2017) 191:84–89.
• Junttila S, Huohvanainen S, Tiira K. Effect of sex and reproductive status on inhibitory control and social cognition in the domestic dog (Canis familiaris). Animals (2021) 11:2448.
• Reporting standards. ARRIVE 2.0 Explanation & Elaboration (Item 7, Statistical methods) explicitly states that nuisance variables should be considered in the analysis (e.g., as covariates); sex and age are listed among factors influencing outcomes. In addition, the NIH SABV policy expects sex to be factored into design, analysis, and reporting in vertebrate animal studies. Please either provide analyses with these covariates or offer a strong justification for excluding them.
See: Percie du Sert N. et al. (2020). Reporting animal research: Explanation and elaboration for the ARRIVE guidelines 2.0. PLOS Biology 18(7): e3000411.
Requested action:
— Refit all generalized linear mixed-effects models (GLMMs) and mixed-effects Cox models (CoxME) including sex and age as fixed covariates; model age with restricted cubic splines (3–5 knots). Report whether the agility-training effect persists and how SEs/CIs change.
— Provide a sensitivity analysis (models with vs. without these covariates); if feasible, exploratory training×age and training×sex interactions with appropriate caveats.
— Reflect these choices transparently in Statistical methods in line with ARRIVE 2.0 (E&E, Item 7).
Point 7 — Fatigue/motivation and trial-order effects
Thank you for the clarification. A subject random intercept adjusts baseline between-dog differences but does not model within-session trends (learning, fatigue, motivational decline). Such trends should be accounted for by an explicit trial index predictor; for inference, please treat trial as a continuous variable with a flexible functional form (e.g., restricted cubic splines) and, where possible, include a by-dog random slope for trial. Person-mean centering of the trial index (within-subject centering) is recommended to cleanly separate within- and between-dog components. This approach is standard for repeated-measures designs and avoids anti-conservative inference; splitting into thirds is unnecessary for the main model and can be reserved for descriptive checks. For time-to-success outcomes, include trial in Cox/CoxME; if warranted by the data structure, consider an extended Cox model with a time-varying covariate.
For Experiment 1: if each dog performed only one test, please acknowledge the limitation (no way to estimate a trial trend) and check batch/order at the session level; if multiple tasks/trials occurred per dog, include trial as above. Please provide sensitivity analyses (with vs. without trial) and partial-effect plots.
See: Barr DJ (2013). Random effects structure for testing interactions in linear mixed-effects models. Frontiers in Psychology 4:328.
Our response:
We agree that age and sex could be added as control variables. We also agree that the effect of age should not be simply modelled as linear. However, we were not sure if the restricted cubic splines (RCS) were the best method to model this effect. We would assume that younger dogs may be worse at assessing the physical parameters of their body due to lack of experience, while this ability may fade for older dogs. Therefore, the dogs that fall in between should outperform the rest. As for the effect of trial, we would actually expect it to be linear, as it is common for dogs to do 20 trials in an experiment, so we would expect some decline in motivation with trial but nothing major. With this in mind, introducing the age squared into the model may be a more accurate way to model the effect of age. Restricted cubic splines often have an issue of loss of interpretability and overfitting the data. To make sure we are using the best possible model for our data, we compared the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) [1,2]of models using squared term, RCS (4 knots) for age only, and RCS (4 knots) for both age and trial, see table below. The colour fill of the cells represents how well the model fits our data: green representing the best fit (lowest AIC), while the red represents the worst fit (highest AIC), and yellow and orange falling in between.
Colour code
Lowest AIC Highest AIC
Comb12 Original Age squared; sex Age splines (4); sex Age and trial splines (4); sex
App 140.2011 143.545 146.814 151.5677
Att 135.9755 137.5687 140.6845 146.1881
Chosen 138.8667 136.2802 138.164 142.5788
Comb34 Original Age squared; sex Age splines (4); sex Age and trial splines (4); sex
App 119.3054 122.2449 116.2574 119.6225
Att 99.10256 104.4944 103.5049 108.2469
Chosen 78.19002 83.19431 85.3913 89.85315
Comb567 Original Age squared; sex Age splines (4); sex Age and trial splines (4); sex
App 200.5669 204.4066 201.7396 208.3161
Att 131.7965 129.662 126.305 129.4156
Chosen 70.43967 117.9099 119.0174 123.829
Comb8910 Original Age squared; sex Age splines (4); sex Age and trial splines (4); sex
App 191.1069 194.8953 198.3063 201.556
Att 166.6473 172.1097 175.1665 179.193
Chosen 72.37238 137.4145 140.403 145.9742
Solidity Original Age squared; sex Age splines (4); sex Age and trial splines (4); sex
App 1269.479 1271.478 1275.186 1279.921
Att 991.5868 994.0419 997.616 990.9578
Chosen 351.5033 354.0858 356.6618 356.3391
Judging from the AIC comparison, both the model with the square term for age and with RCS for age would be good candidates. However, the square term models seem to have a better fit and paired with the negative sides of RCS, we decided to use the square term models. The models containing z-trial as a RCS yielded much higher AICs, so we decided to keep the z-trial as a linear variable as it both fits our expectations and seems to better fit our data. Additionally, it seems that RCS often overfitted our data. Here is an example of the comparison of effect of age in four different models (original - top left, squared - top right, RCS – bottom left, RCS for age and trial – bottom right).
It is clear that RCS overfitted the data simply because of the requirement to create the number of knots defined. This is usually useful when there are multiple age groups (e.g. in human studies), but for dogs we would only differentiate between young, middle-aged, and old dogs, so introducing more knots would only reduce the interpretability of the results.
We refitted all GLMM and Coxme models with added sex, z-transformed age, and z-transformed age squared. We updated the statistical analysis, results, and discussion(s) to fit the new models. We also explained in the statistical analysis the limitation of our design (each trial being different combination) and why we did not include z-trial for Experiment 1.
References:
1. Zuur AF, Ieno EN, Walker N, Saveliev AA, Smith GM. Mixed effects models and extensions in ecology with R [Internet]. New York, NY: Springer; 2009 [cited 2025 Oct 27]. Available from: https://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-0-387-87458-6
2. Harrison XA, Donaldson L, Correa-Cano ME, Evans J, Fisher DN, Goodwin CED, et al. A brief introduction to mixed effects modelling and multi-model inference in ecology. PeerJ 2018;6:e4794.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers2.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0338647.r005Decision Letter 2
FlorkiewiczBrittany N.Academic Editor© 2026 Brittany N. Florkiewicz2026Brittany N. Florkiewiczhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
25 Nov 2025

Influence of agility training on body-size and object solidity perception in pet dogs
PONE-D-25-25871R2
Dear Dr. Staric,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager®  and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. For questions related to billing, please contact billing support .
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Brittany N. Florkiewicz, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

Reviewer #3: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions??>
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? -->?>
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available??>
The PLOS Data policy
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English??>
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
Reviewer #3: Dear Authors,
Thank you for your thorough revisions and for addressing the majority of the previous comments. The manuscript has improved substantially and is now suitable for publication in PLOS ONE.
Below are several non-critical editorial suggestions that may further strengthen the clarity and transparency of the work:
Experiment 1 — limitation.
Please briefly acknowledge in the Limitations section that trial-order effects cannot be estimated for Experiment 1, as each dog performed only one test.
Trial-by-subject random slope.
For Experiment 2, including a by-dog random slope for the trial index could be considered. This is a recommendation only and not a requirement.
Optional sensitivity analysis.
If feasible, a short sensitivity comparison of models with vs. without demographic covariates (sex, age) would further demonstrate robustness, although the current analysis is acceptable.
Statistical methods clarity.
It may be helpful to provide a slightly clearer description of the final model structures (e.g., using an lme4-style formula notation).
These suggestions are editorial in nature and do not affect the validity of the study. I recommend acceptance after minor editorial adjustments.
**********
what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy
Reviewer #3: Yes:  Khvatov Ivan A.
**********
10.1371/journal.pone.0338647.r006Acceptance letter
FlorkiewiczBrittany N.Academic Editor© 2026 Brittany N. Florkiewicz2026Brittany N. Florkiewiczhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.PONE-D-25-25871R2
PLOS One
Dear Dr. Staric,
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS One. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
You will receive further instructions from the production team, including instructions on how to review your proof when it is ready. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few days to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps.
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
You will receive an invoice from PLOS for your publication fee after your manuscript has reached the completed accept phase. If you receive an email requesting payment before acceptance or for any other service, this may be a phishing scheme. Learn how to identify phishing emails and protect your accounts at https://explore.plos.org/phishing.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access.
Kind regards,
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Brittany N. Florkiewicz
Academic Editor
PLOS One