pmcSci RepSci Rep1579scirep101563288Scientific Reports2045-2322Nature Publishing GroupPMC11603046PMC11603046.111603046116030463960452410.1038/s41598-024-81247-8812471ArticleResearch on the group path of improving the efficiency of China’s public sports services based on DEA and fsQCA analysis
HanXue2575366361@qq.com , the Chinese government has successively introduced national strategies such as Healthy China, Fitness for All, and Sports Power . The level of public sports services has emerged as a crucial indicator of common prosperity and national modernization . With the ongoing implementation of relevant policies (see Table  ), the development of China’s public sports service system has accelerated . However, a persistent contradiction exists between the supply of public sports services and the increasingly high demand from the public, leading to significant challenges such as uneven resource allocation and the mismatch between supply and demand, underscoring the urgency of enhancing the quality of public sports services . The efficiency of public sports services is defined as the ratio of the input resources to the corresponding output effects . By enhancing this efficiency, China can enhance the allocation effectiveness of public sports resources, optimize the overall level and quality of public sports services, and more effectively meet the sporting needs of individuals, enabling them to optimize their health. The quality improvement and upgrading of public sports service efficiency is a systematic and complex endeavor , jointly determined by the intertwined influence of multiple factors. Currently, research on public sports service efficiency enhancement has identified various influencing factors and analyzed their individual effects . However, there is a notable paucity of studies that examine the interactive effects of these influencing factors on the improvement of public sports service efficiency, especially from the perspective of the multifactorial “group state” interactions. The public sports service system is complex and characterized by multiple input factors and output outcomes. The DEA method is especially effective in handling complex multi-dimensional data; it does not necessitate the pre-specification of a production function, thereby mitigating the potential biases associated with subjective judgements in efficiency assessments and enhancing the objectivity and accuracy of results. Conversely, the fsQCA method integrates qualitative and quantitative analysis, enabling a thorough exploration of the various factors affecting the efficiency of public sports services and their interaction mechanisms. The method adeptly addresses this complexity, revealing both synergistic and inhibitory effects among different factors. In summary, while the DEA method is primarily focused on efficiency evaluation, the fsQCA method is focused on causality profiling. By combining the two methods, researchers can form a complete research framework that incorporates both efficiency evaluation and causal analysis, comprehensively elucidating the pathways and mechanisms for enhancing the efficiency of public sports services. Therefore, this study aims to measure the efficiency of public sports services in 30 provinces (except Tibet) in 2020 and employs the fuzzy set qualitative comparative analysis method to identify core factors that contribute to efficiency enhancements. Additionally, it delineates the pathways for enhancing public sports service efficiency, aiming to clarify the combinations of conditions that influence this efficiency and identify the conditions that are critical to the enhancement of public sports services. Consequently, the findings can provide robust support for upgrading the efficiency of public sports services in China. The primary contributions of this research are threefold: (1) Methodological innovation: This study promotes the application of a joint method, involving both DEA and fsQCA, offering a novel methodological perspective for analyzing public sports service efficiency and enhancing the study’s empirical basis. (2) Identification of efficiency improvement pathways: This study reveals the actual scenarios of the efficiency in China, highlighting disparities among various regions and organizations; thus, it contributes novel empirical data to the discourse on public sports service efficiency. (3) Policy recommendations: Based on the research results, this study proposes specific policy recommendations for the efficiency improvement of public sports services in China, providing evidence-based decision-making support for policy makers. The objectives of the study are as follows: (1) To promote the optimization and balance of public sports services. As a crucial component of the social public service system, the efficiency of China’s public sports services is directly linked to individuals’ sports needs and health and well-being. By investigating pathways to improve the efficiency of public sports services, researchers can identify the bottlenecks and deficiencies in the current service system, facilitating balanced development and quality enhancement optimizing through optimized resource allocation and innovative service models. (2) Addressing the national health strategy: For the comprehensive implementation of the ‘Healthy China’ strategy, enhancing the level of public sports services has become a crucial method for achieving universal health. This study responds to the needs of the national health strategy; through empirical analysis, researchers can identify the effective pathways for enhancing the efficiency of public sports services, providing a scientific basis for policy making and facilitating the establishment of a healthier China. (3) Promoting the modernization of the sports governance system and governance capacity: Enhancing the efficiency of public sports services is not only necessary for the development of sports itself, but also a crucial measure for promoting the modernization of the sports governance system and governance capacity. This study enables researchers to explore novel modes and methods of sports governance, enhance the decision-making level and implementation capacity of sports departments, and promote the high-quality development of sports. The significance of the study is threefold: first, it aims to reveal the current scenario and challenges affecting the efficiency of China’s public sports services through a systematic review, providing a scientific rational for policy makers; second, it offers an in-depth analysis of the key factors influencing public sports service efficiency and their operational mechanisms, providing theoretical support for optimizing resource allocation, the improvement of the management mechanism, and the innovation of the service mode; and finally, it proposes the practical efficiency-enhancement pathways and strategic recommendations, promoting the high-quality development of public sports services in China. Compared with other empirical studies, this study is innovative in the following ways: (1) Although DEA and fsQCA have been widely applied in their respective fields, few studies combine the two to analyze the efficiency of public sports services. Regarding the application of existing methodologies, this study exhibits novelty and innovativeness. (2) It not only focuses on evaluating the current scenario of public sports service efficiency, but also deeply explores the key factors affecting this efficiency and their respective mechanisms, as well as the specific pathways and strategies for efficiency improvement, which is a more comprehensive and in-depth perspective. (3) This study collects a wealth of empirical data, which covers different regions, types, and levels of public sports services; by achieving comprehensiveness and depth, the objectivity and universality of the research results are ensured.

 

## Literature review

## Literature review
Public sports services serve are a fundamental guarantee for individuals to engage in sports and fitness activities. The reasonable efficiency of these services not only enhance individuals’ quality of life, but also effectively promote the sustainable development of the sports sector. A review of the existing literature reveals that current research on the efficiency of public sports services is primarily conducted through three dimensions: indicator system construction, evaluation methods, and influencing factors.
Regarding indicator system construction, early studies predominantly focused on quantitative analyses that utilized the number and area of resources as evaluation indicators. For instance, scholars such as Wei et al. , Yang Xuezhi et al. , and Zheng Jiakun utilized the Delphi method to develop an indicator system based on resource input, organizational management, and service outcomes. While this approach led to an authoritative system, it was also characterized by a degree of subjectivity, which is assessed through the consistency of expert opinions. More recent studies have shifted toward qualitative research that emphasizes balanced and sustainable development. In this context, Fengbiao Zhang et al. applied structural equation modelling to evaluate sustainability in public sports services, incorporating indicators relevant to long-term development planning and environmental impact. They combined subjective and objective methods; by overcoming the subjectivity of expert scoring, the researchers utilized its unique advantage in defining the weight coefficients of the indicators. Thus, they constructed an indicator system for evaluating the performance of public sports services.
Regarding efficiency evaluation methods, the data envelopment analysis (DEA) remains the predominant approach, often supplemented by subjective empowerment techniques. Li Yanling et al. applied the data envelopment analysis (DEA) method and combined it with Theil’s index to evaluate the efficiency and fairness of China’s public sports services. This hybrid method not only comprehensively considers various input and output elements, but also reveals disparities and developmental differences in service efficiency; Yuan Chunmei utilized the grey correlation analysis (GRA) method to measure the status of the nation’s public sports services. Thus, the scholar more objectively reveals the degree of association between various factors in the national public sports service and the impact of these factors on overall efficiency; Li Yong systematically analyzed public sports service efficiency in Shaanxi Province using DEA and the Tobit model, combining quantitative evaluation with qualitative insights.
Regarding influencing factors, existing literature primarily applies four categories: government, population, economy, and environment. Chen Huawei et al. examined public sports service efficiency for national fitness across 31 provinces and cities and screened out six significant influencing factors, including the income and consumption levels of residents, the level of economic development of the region, the investment in mass sports, residents’ awareness of sports, the level of education, and population size. Regarding the economic level, the quality of the population, and the resources and environment, this study not only enriches the diversity of influencing factors, but also further refines the specific role of each factor in service efficiency. Furthermore, by empirically analyzing the efficiency of public sports services in China, Zhang Fengbiao et al. extracted three key influencing factors, namely the level of regional economic development, the strength of government support, and policy support from the aspects of economic strength and government support. This corroborates previous findings regarding the significance of economic conditions and governmental roles in enhancing service efficiency, while also emplacing the necessity of policy support. In addition, Yan Jing et al. , who considered the actual scenario of public sports resources in China, identified five main factors that influence the efficiency of public sports services: the regional economic level, the population’s education level, the environment of sports resource allocation, the government’s supportive attitude, and information dissemination. This study considers both macroeconomic and micro-sociocultural contexts, providing a comprehensive perspective on public sports services.
In summary, the literature reveals that scholars have actively investigated the efficiency of public sports services from the perspectives of indicator system construction, evaluation methods, and influencing factors . This body of work establishes a robust research foundation; however, the following limitations remain: (1) Much of the research is based on the evaluation of the indicator system, with a lack of holistic and systematic research to improving public sports services efficiency in practical terms. (2) There is a need for methodological innovation, as existing studies predominantly employ traditional quantitative methods and neglect qualitative approaches, failing to thoroughly explore the complex relationships underlying efficiency improvement pathways. (3) The integration of macro and micro factors is insufficient. Macro factors have been well-explored; however, the impact of micro factors has received limited research attention. Although some studies explore the relationship and mechanism between influencing factors and efficiency ,they often focus on describing surface-level phenomena and lack in-depth theoretical analyses and empirical tests. Consequently, there is a limited understanding of the mechanisms by which influencing factors operate and the underlying principles of efficiency improvement. Especially for the core factors and pathways affecting the efficiency improvement of public sports services, it is necessary to establish structural thought process and examine its overall orderliness. Hence, this study focuses on 30 provinces in China and adopts a combination of quantitative and qualitative methods to explore the group pathways for improving the efficiency of China’s public sports services, aiming to uncover the multifaceted pathways and complex mechanisms. The findings provide a foundational reference for the coordinated development of public sports services in China.

## Research design

## Research methodology

## DEA
DEA is a systematic analysis method for evaluating the effectiveness of decision-making units of the same type .The most commonly applied models for DEA are the CCR model and BCC model. The CCR model is the constant return to scale model (CRS model) proposed by Charnes et al. in 1978, and the BCC model is the variable return to scale model (VRS model) proposed by Banker et al. in 1984. In the context of variable returns to scale, DEA models are further classified as either input oriented or output oriented . According to the basic characteristics of the two models, combined with the actual needs of the research, this study selects the variable scale compensation model (BCC) to measure and evaluate the efficiency of public sports services in China for the following reasons: Variability in the returns to scale implies that the amount of output per unit of input may vary across different production or service scales. This variability may have crucial implications for the efficiency and performance of the decision-making unit. In the domain of public sports services, financial constraints may hinder the construction and maintenance of public sports facilities, affecting the quality and coverage of services. To cope with the variability of returns to scale, decision-making units should adopt a series of strategies, such as optimizing resource allocation, improving operational efficiency, and innovating service models. Meanwhile, the government should also provide support and guidance for the development of public sports services by formulating reasonable policies and measures. Therefore, to optimally comply with the research practice, this study adopts the BCC model to analyse the input and output indicators of public sports services in each province, and applies Deap2.1 software to measure the efficiency of public sports services; the measured efficiency values are all within the 0–1 range, where the value approximates 1, indicating higher efficiency . The specific expression is1\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
 \usepackage{amsmath}
 \usepackage{wasysym} 
 \usepackage{amsfonts} 
 \usepackage{amssymb} 
 \usepackage{amsbsy}
 \usepackage{mathrsfs}
 \usepackage{upgreek}
 \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
 \begin{document}$$\:\text{B}\text{C}\text{C}\left\{\begin{array}{ll}&\:\text{M}\text{i}\text{n}{{\uptheta\:}}_{{\upnu\:}}\\\:&\:\text{s}.\text{t}.{\text{X}}_{{\uplambda\:}}\le\:{{\uptheta\:}}_{{\upnu\:}}{\text{X}}_{\text{i}}\\\:&\:{\text{Y}}_{{\uplambda\:}}\ge\:{\text{Y}}_{\text{i}},\:{\text{I}}_{{\uplambda\:}}=1\\\:&\:{\uplambda\:}\ge\:0\end{array}\right.$$\end{document} where θv denotes the technical efficiency; Xi and Yi denote the m×1 dimensional input and output vectors of the ith decision unit, respectively; I denotes a row vector comprising the number 1; and λ denotes the weight assigned to each decision unit, and λ denotes an n×1 dimensional vector.

## QCA
The QCA qualitative comparative analysis approach was developed in the 1980s; its core concept entails considering cases as a specific set of configurational conditions and explaining the generation of results by combining their conditions . QCA can be divided into three basic categories: clear set qualitative comparative analysis (csQCA), fuzzy set qualitative comparative analysis (fsQCA), and multi-valued set qualitative comparative analysis (mvQCA) . Compared to csQCA and mvQCA, which are applicable to only specific problem categories, fsQCA can handle problems involving degree change and partial affiliation. Because FsQCA utilizes Boolean algebra, there is no requirement for control variables, and its causality is determined by consistency and coverage using the following formula:2\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
 \usepackage{amsmath}
 \usepackage{wasysym} 
 \usepackage{amsfonts} 
 \usepackage{amssymb} 
 \usepackage{amsbsy}
 \usepackage{mathrsfs}
 \usepackage{upgreek}
 \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
 \begin{document}$$\:\text{Coverage}\left({S}_{i}\le\:{T}_{i}\right)=\frac{\sum\:\left[\text{min}\left({S}_{i},{T}_{i}\right)\right]}{\sum\:{T}_{i}}$$\end{document} 3\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
 \usepackage{amsmath}
 \usepackage{wasysym} 
 \usepackage{amsfonts} 
 \usepackage{amssymb} 
 \usepackage{amsbsy}
 \usepackage{mathrsfs}
 \usepackage{upgreek}
 \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
 \begin{document}$$\:\text{Consistency}\left({S}_{i}\le\:{T}_{i}\right)=\frac{\sum\:\left[\text{min}\left({S}_{i},{T}_{i}\right)\right]}{\sum\:{s}_{i}}$$\end{document} where Si denotes the degree of affiliation of the factors influencing the public sports service in the ith case province to the antecedent combinations; Ti denotes the degree of affiliation of the public sports service efficiency in the ith case province to the outcome variables; Coverage denotes the degree of explainability of a certain grouping of states to the outcome; and Consistency denotes the degree of affiliation (if Consistency > 0.9, the conditional variables are a necessary condition).Therefore, the fsQCA method was chosen, and its advantages are as follows: (1) Since the factors affecting the efficiency of public sports services are complex and intertwined rather than linear, it is difficult to analyse the combined effects of multiple variables by focusing on verifying only the significance of a single variable, whereas the fsQCA, which is based on multiple cases and centered on group comparisons, can deeply analyze the relationship between the outcome variable and the combination of condition variables from a systemic perspective The fsQCA can effectively explain the influence mechanism of multiple combined pathways . (2) The traditional quantitative analysis method mainly relies on regression analysis, which usually defaults to the symmetric interactions between the variables; however, the method cannot effectively explain the asymmetric causality. Contrastingly, fsQCA, based on the pooling theory, overcomes the symmetrical mode of thinking in traditional econometric studies and effectively addresses asymmetric causality. (3) This study selects 30 provinces in China as sample cases, which does not meet the case sample requirements of traditional econometric studies. Contrastingly, fsQCA is suitable for both small and medium-sized sample case studies as well as large case studies with more than 100 samples. The 30 sample cases in this study are small and medium-sized and meet the criteria for the application of fsQCA. In addition, the condition variables involved herein differ in degree, but do not constitute a qualitative difference. Therefore, fsQCA is utilized, and fsQCA 3.0 software is applied to perform the analyses.

## Data sources
This study selects 30 provinces in China (excluding Tibet) as the research unit. The data on the indicators of input and output are mainly obtained from the 2020 Statistical Yearbook of Sports, the official website of the State General Administration of Sports, and the official websites of provincial sports bureaus. (Tibet is not included in the analysis scope of this study because too much data is missing.) Regarding the data on the conditional variables and the outcome variables, the data on the outcome variables is derived from the efficiency value measured by DEA, and the data on the conditional variables is mainly obtained from the National Bureau of Statistics, the Chinese government procurement website, and the local government statistics website. The data sample is limited to 2020. The reasons are as follows: (1) The year 2020 is the year of the global new crown epidemic outbreak, and this public health emergency has profoundly impacted global public sports services. By analyzing the efficiency of public sports services in 2020, researchers can explore the impact and adaptation of the epidemic on the mode of public sports services, resource allocation, and service efficiency in China’s provinces, and provide scientific proposals for adapting to the restoration and enhancement strategies of China’s public services in the post-epidemic era. (2) Due to the availability of data and the scientificity and accuracy of the study, the data of the Statistical Yearbook of Sports Business is updated once every two years, and the 2020 data, after a period of precipitation and organization, is relatively high in completeness, accuracy, and accessibility; thus, the robustness and credibility of the study’s conclusions is ensured. In addition, with the continuous progress of data collection and analysis technology, in-depth mining and re-analysis of the 2020 data may reveal novel research perspectives and findings.

## Selection of indicators
In screening the input indicators, this study systematically reviewed the research results of renowned scholars of domestic public sports services, such as Yuan Chunmei and Yang Yikun , providing a robust theoretical foundation for understanding the logic supporting the allocation of public sports service resources. Specifically, we scientifically and rigorously selected a series of representative input variables (mass sports financial expenditure, lottery fund expenditure, sports venue input, and the number of administrators) based on the multidimensionality of public sports development. These variables were selected according to the principles of typicality (reflecting the characteristics of key resources), accessibility (easy to obtain data), quantification (easy to analyse quantitatively), and comparability (easy to compare different regions or points in time) to ensure the comprehensiveness and operability of the assessment system .Unlike the input indicators, the output indicators are also based on multi-dimensional considerations, aiming to comprehensively reflect the effectiveness and impact of public sports services. With reference to the statistical indicators in the Statistical Yearbook of China’s Sports Business of the Economic Department of the State General Administration of Sport, we selected key output indicators, including the area of sports venues per 10,000 people, the number of sports instructors, the number of participants in physical fitness tests, the number of social organizations and private non-enterprise units, and the number of national physical fitness monitoring sites, in conjunction with the direct and indirect benefits of the public sports services. These indicators not only measure the direct effect of public sports services in promoting national fitness and improving national health, but also consider their indirect contribution in promoting the development of the sports industry and enhancing the vitality of the social economy; thus, a system of output indicators is constituted to comprehensively assess the efficiency of public sports services. Therefore, the input and output indicators are specifically screened from four dimensions, namely sports human resources, financial resources, material resources, and organizational resources (See Table  ). Table  indicates the input and output indicators of public sports service efficiency in China.

 

## Definition of variables
Consistent with the convention of the qualitative comparative analysis method, the number of condition variables should be controlled between 4 and 7 to ensure the accuracy and reliability of the study, which refers to the research and definition of variable selection conducted by Du Yunzhou and Zhang Ming et al. ; based on previous analyses and discussions. Considering the institutional environment of China’s provincial governments and the practical scenarios influencing the development of public sports services efficiency, we constructed an appropriate “economy-demography-government” analytical framework (Fig.  ). The public sports service efficiency in the results of the DEA analysis is utilized as the outcome variable of fsQCA to conduct the group state analysis, and the regional GDP per capital, population density, public sports funding, government purchasing efforts, and average years of education are selected as the conditional variables of fsQCA from the economic level, demographic level, and governmental level (see Table  . The principles of variable selection are as follows: 1) the selected conditional variables cover the multidimensional influencing factors of the efficiency of public sports services, and the results include both positive and negative results, which are comparable in specific dimensions. 2) Due to the availability and comprehensiveness of the data, the data of the five conditional variables can ensure the consistency and reliability of the data sources, which effectively limits the research error, guaranteeing the scientific and authentic results of the analyses. 3) The economic dimension plays the role of ‘supporting’ the public sports services, and it is the most crucial factor for developing public sports. The economic dimension plays the role of ‘support base’ and ‘driving force’ in public sports services. It affects the scale of investment, allocation efficiency, industrial development level, and public participation in public sports services. The population level is not only the demand side of services, but also the user and beneficiary of services, and is also the key factor influencing the development of sports undertakings; the government level, as the ‘guide’ and ‘regulator’ of public sports services, has far-reaching influences and diversified influences on the development trend of public sports services, and always controls the development trend. As a ‘guide’ and ‘regulator’ of public sports services, the government has a far-reaching and diversified influence on public sports services, and it is always in control of its development trend.

 

 

Economic level: Regional GDP per capita not only fundamentally affects the government’s ability to provide public products and services, but is also a key factor for enhancing the efficiency of services. The high or low regional per capita GDP determines the local government’s financial spending capacity, influencing its ability to provide more effective and efficient public sports services .
Population dimension: including average years of schooling and population density. Urban population density is closely related to the natural environment and economic activities, which influences the efficiency of public services and determines the longevity of regional development. Meanwhile, average years of education is closely related to the quality of regional development . Under the promotion of urbanization, the aggregation effect of population density is increasing; however, this effect also induces a series of problems, such as the “misalignment of supply and demand” and management cost increment. These problems may negatively affect the efficiency of public sports services, leading to a reduction in service efficiency.
Government level: This includes government purchasing power and public sports funding. Currently, the main provider of public sports services is the government. Specifically, regardless of whether the government’s financial resources are abundant or not, and whether its purchasing power is increasing or decreasing, its influence on the efficiency of public sports services is crucial. Government authorities have long been decision-makers and administrators in the reform and development of public sports. However, this single and inefficient management mode has negatively affected the efficiency of public sports services delivery . It can be observed that the governmental level is also an influencing factor for the enhancement of public sports service efficiency.

## Findings

## Results of DEA efficiency evaluation
From the results (see Table  ), the average value indicating the comprehensive efficiency of China’s public sports services in 2020 is 0.742, which reveals that the overall level of China’s public sports services in 2020 is satisfactory; however, this level can be improved. Hainan, Jilin, Liaoning, Zhejiang, Henan, Shanxi, Ningxia, Qinghai, and Sichuan exhibit a level of 1, indicating that the efficiency of public sports services in these nine provinces is optimal, and the service level is quite satisfactory. Hubei, Heilongjiang, Guangxi, Jiangsu, Shaanxi, Anhui, and Yunnan are the seven provinces where the comprehensive efficiency of public sports services does not attain 1; however, they are all above the mean value, and the service level is satisfactory. On the other hand, 13 provinces, namely Beijing, Fujian, Hunan, Guangdong, Jiangxi, Hebei, Gansu, Guizhou, Inner Mongolia, Shandong, Shanghai, Tianjin, Xinjiang, and Chongqing, have an overall efficiency below the mean, which indicates a low level of public sports services. For the regional dimension, the central region exhibits the most optimal efficiency performance, with an average value of 0.827. Compared to the central region, the western region is slightly less efficient, with an average value of 0.762, and the eastern region exhibits a relatively low efficiency, with an average value of 0.680. The regions include those with high levels of economic development and high population density, such as Henan, Sichuan, and Zhejiang, and also cover regions with slower economic development and smaller populations, such as Ningxia and Qinghai. It can be observed that although differences in economic and social foundations between regions lead to diversity in the allocation of resources for public sports services, some provinces and municipalities have been able to achieve high efficiency; therefore, the rationale for the grouping of high public sports service efficiencies merits further analysis.

 

## Data calibration
In fsQCA, calibration refers to the process of providing cases to assign set affiliation . In summary, sets should be constructed by accurately calibrating the variables based on the existing theoretical body and the context of the specific case. The calibrated set manifests a well-defined degree of affiliation which is typically in the 0 to 1 range. Herein, the thresholds recommended by the Tosmana software (see Table  ) were utilized and combined with specific analyses of the research data to determine the choice of intersections . In selecting the anchors, namely “fully affiliated” and “fully unaffiliated”, the study identified 95%, 50%, and 5% quartiles of the sample data as anchors based on the relative position of the sample data and with reference to the methodology of previous studies .

 

## Analysis of necessary conditions
Before conducting the conditional grouping analysis, each conditional variable must be individually tested for necessity to determine if any condition is a necessary precondition for the outcome to occur . Once the necessity analysis is complete, two key metrics are identified: consistency and coverage. The coverage metric reflects the proportion of cases that meet a given condition out of the total number of cases, whereas the consistency metric measures the similarity and consistency between cases that meet the condition (see Table  ). Typically, if the consistency value exceeds 0.9, the condition may be necessary to lead to the outcome. The necessity analysis revealed that the consistency value of all the condition variables in this study did not attain 0.9, which indicates that it is difficult for a single condition to influence the improvement in the efficiency of public sports services; it is occasioned by a combination of multiple factors, hence further analyzing the influence of the condition grouping state becomes necessary.

 

## Configuration analysis
The cohort analysis exerts a central role in the QCA approach, which aims to explore how different combinations of antecedent conditions collaborate to influence the generation of results. Schneider and Wagemann proposed a judgement criterion, i.e., the congruence level of adequacy, which is recommended to have a value of not less than 0.75 . Individual variables do not constitute the necessary conditions for enhancing the efficiency of public sports services in China. Therefore, a combination analysis of the condition variables was implemented to explore the effect of combining differential factors on the outcome variables. This study adopts the QCA-based analytical results presentation method proposed by Ragin and Fiss, which can clearly reveal the relative importance of each condition in the grouping, providing robust support for the in-depth understanding and interpretation of the analysis results . Herein, the intermediate solution output from the software is selected as the main solution and the simple solution as the supplementary solution for its analysis, and the consistency threshold is set to 0.8 according to the default standard ; moreover, the case frequency threshold has been set at 1.0, and the consistency of the various pathways and the overall consistency exceed 0.8 (see Table  ). Thus, the solution derived from the current study exhibits a high level of reasonableness and credibility, which meets the needs of the study.
Table  presents three grouping pathways for enhancing the efficiency of public sports services, where each column corresponds to a potential combination of conditions. The consistency of the solutions is 0.809, which implies that 81% of the cases in the provinces that meet these combinations of conditions exhibit a high level of efficiency. In addition, the consistency of all pathways and the overall consistency of the solution exceed the critical value, proving the validity of the empirical analysis.

 

(1) Densely populated and government-led.
The grouping pathways of non-high regional GDP per capita, high population density, high government purchasing effort, and non-high average years of schooling as the core conditions, and non-high public sports funding as the missing marginal condition in grouping S1, can enhance the efficiency of public sports services in China. This pathways explains approximately 25% of the cases of efficient public sports services. Meanwhile, approximately 9% of the cases are explained by only this path. On one hand, the government enhances its support for public sports services, strengthens the construction and maintenance of sports facilities through direct investment as well as the procurement of sports equipment and services, and provides the public with a wider range of sports choices and opportunities, enhancing the efficiency of public sports services. On the other hand, in highly populated areas, the government has significantly increased the breadth of coverage and accessibility of public sports services by expanding sports venues and facilities and rationalizing regional space, thereby meeting the sports needs of more individuals and optimizing the efficiency of public sports services. As a typical case, Hainan Province, due to its unique geographical location and developed tourism industry, has exhibited a significant increase in tourist arrivals in tandem with government investment in recent years. According to the preliminary statistics for 2020 published on the Chinese government website, in 2020, Hainan’s tourism industry received 65 million domestic and foreign tourists, and the total tourism revenue attained RMB 86 billion . Local governments in Hainan Province have included funding for national fitness and the construction, operation, and maintenance of public stadiums in their budgets, and have continued to invest in improving sports facilities and optimizing the public sports service system in line with economic development. Under the influence of both high population density and strong government investment, Hainan Province has somewhat alleviated the difficulties occasioned by the underdevelopment of the regional economy, and the efficiency of public sports services has been continuously improved.
(2) Economic dynamism and resource-input-based.
The grouping pathways of high regional GDP per capita, non-high population density, high public sports funding, and non-high average years of schooling as the core conditions and high government purchasing effort as the marginal conditions exist in grouping S2 and can enhance the efficiency of public sports services in China. This pathway explains approximately 28% of the cases of efficient public sports services. Meanwhile, approximately 7% of the cases are explained by only this path. 52 provinces are covered by the group including Shandong, Zhejiang, and Anhui. An increase in regional GDP per capita signals economic prosperity, which not only enhances the people’s ability to consume sports services, but also enables public sports services to receive financial support. The government and enterprises could increase their financial investment in the development of the sports industry, promoting the upgrading of the industrial structure. Additionally, the increased investment in public sports funding can strengthen the construction of sports facilities, coach training, and the organization of sports activities and competitions. Meanwhile, the government guides the investment of social capital to enhance the capacity of public sports service provision, and further enhances its efficiency by purchasing services. Zhejiang typifies this phenomenon: the recent Hangzhou Asian Games has undoubtedly accelerated the development of the province’s sports industry during a critical period for the development of public sports, and the Wenzhou Zhongshi Ice and Snow City, along with three other sports service complexes, have been honored with the title of National Typical Cases of Sports Service Complexes; this is the highest number of such cases in the country. Ningbo, as one of the first “Olympic Champion Cities” (recognized by the State General Administration of Sports), represents a robust foundation for the development of public sports services in Zhejiang, which exhibits one of the highest per capita GDP in the country and abundant public sports funding; thus, the province’s level of public sports services has risen rapidly due to strong government promotion.
(3) Economically and educationally driven.
The grouping pathways in grouping S3 with high regional GDP per capita, non-high population density, and high public sports funding, as well as non-high government purchasing effort as the core conditions, and high average years of schooling as the marginal conditions can enhance the efficiency of public sports services in China. This pathway explains approximately 26% of the cases of efficient public sports services. Meanwhile, approximately 4% of the cases are explained by only this path. The average years of schooling can enhance the efficiency of public sports services through its auxiliary role. The government and schools should strengthen physical education programmes and organize sports activities to cultivate students’ interest and awareness in sports. Meanwhile, universal physical education programmes should be widely provided to encourage students to participate in all forms of physical exercises and cultivate positive physical education habits. In Jiangsu Province, For instance, construction in the education domain has advanced exceedingly. Under the leadership of the Jiangsu Provincial Party Committee and Provincial Government, departments such as the Provincial Development and Reform Commission and the Sports Bureau focus on enhancing individuals’ health, thereby enabling them to pursue a more optimal life. Jiangsu Province exhaustively leverages its economic advantages by integrating multiple resources and vigorously promoting the national strategy of national fitness. Jiangsu Province completed the national fitness public service system and established a “10-minue sports and fitness circle” model of urban communities; the province has become the first provincial public sports service system demonstration area in China . With a high GDP per capita and sufficient financial investment in public sports, the efficiency of its public sports services has been significantly enhanced.

## Robustness tests
After drawing analytical conclusions using the fsQCA method, a robustness check of the adequacy of the obtained pathway configurations is required to verify the reliability of the results in more depth. Schneider and Wagemann proposed four operations for the robustness analysis: change of calibration, change of consistency thresholds, inverse test of the resultant variables, and addition and deletion of cases.
This study changes the consistency threshold as well as the PRI threshold in two ways to conduct perform the robustness test. First, the consistency threshold is increased from 0.8 to 0.85, while keeping the frequency of cases unchanged, and the final grouping is consistent with that before the consistency threshold is adjusted. Second, the PRI threshold was increased from 0.75 to 0.8, and the results were compared with the initial group analysis: population density and government purchasing power remained as the core conditions in group 1, whereas regional GDP per capita and public sports funding became marginal conditions; group 2 was consistent with the initial group S3(see Table  ). Overall, the group states after changing the PRI threshold are a subset of those before the change, and the obtained group state results have not changed significantly from those before the PRI threshold adjustment. We can therefore consider the results of the fsQCA analyses in this study to be robust.

 

## Conclusions, recommendations, and outlook

## Conclusions and recommendations of the study
Herein, 30 provinces in China were selected as samples, and the data envelopment analysis (DEA) and fuzzy set qualitative comparative analysis (fsQCA) methods were utilized to explore the pathways for enhancing the efficiency of public sports services in each region. The following conclusions and recommendations were obtained.
Conclusion: (1) The development of public sports service efficiency in China is unbalanced, and the service efficiency is in the following order from highest to lowest: central region > western region > eastern region. (2) Fuzzy set qualitative comparative analysis yields three grouping pathways for enhancing public sports services efficiency: population-intensive and government-led, economic vitality and resource input, and economic and educational. (3) Regional GDP per capita, population density, government purchasing efforts, and public sports funding are the core conditions for high public sports service efficiency in the country.
Recommendations: First, attention should be directed toward the level of regional economic development and the rational allocation of public sports resources. Economically developed regions possess greater resources and funds, enabling them to support the advancement of public sports services more effectively. However, significant disparities exist in economic development across China, leading to an uneven allocation of public sports resources. It is, therefore, recommended that local governments rationally allocate public sports resources according to the region’s own level of economic development. In regions with more rapid economic development, the investment in public sports facilities should be appropriately increased to enhance service quality and coverage. To maintain the established advantages, the government should further increase the investment in public sports facilities, optimize the layout of facilities, and improve the quality of service and coverage. Meanwhile, it should actively guide social capital to participate in the provision of public sports services and encourage enterprises and social organizations to conduct diversified sports service activities to meet the public’s diversified sports needs. In regions with slower economic development, policy support and financial support should be increased to raise the development level of local public sports services. On one hand, it is necessary to establish a robust system of financial transfers to ensure stable growth and reasonable distribution of funding for public sports services; on the other hand, it is necessary to formulate policies such as favorable tax and land to attract social capital to invest in the field of public sports and to form a diversified input mechanism. In addition, interregional cooperation and exchanges should be strengthened, and the successful experiences and practices of developed regions in public sports services should be learnt from, innovated, and promoted in consideration of local realities; thus, the balanced development and overall enhancement of public sports services is promoted.
Second, funding for public sports should be increased to improve the quality and level of services. The adequacy of funding is directly related to investment in the construction and maintenance of public sports facilities and the training of service personnel. It is therefore recommended that the government, social organizations, and enterprises increase their investment in public sports funding to provide sufficient financial security for the development of public sports services. The government should be chiefly responsible for investing in public sports funding. It can ensure that the financial needs of public sports services are met by increasing the financial budget and setting up a special public sports development fund and can also encourage local governments and all sectors to focus on and support the development of public sports services through policy guidance and incentives. Meanwhile, the government can also attract social capital to invest in public sports through the public-private partnership (PPP) model and can jointly invest in the construction of public sports facilities by promoting the provision of social capital, which facilitates operation and management in addition to offering policy support and supervision. This not only reduces its financial burden, but also introduces market mechanisms to enhance the efficiency and quality of public sports services.
Third, the layout of public sports facilities should be optimized with regard to population density. The demand for public sports facilities is greater in densely populated areas, whereas the inverse is true in sparsely populated areas. Therefore, it is recommended that the government optimize the layout of public sports facilities by considering the population density factor. In densely populated areas, the number and scale of public sports facilities should be appropriately increased to improve the convenience and accessibility of services. For instance, more public sports facilities such as sports parks, gyms, and swimming pools can be constructed in urban center areas or around residential communities to facilitate residents’ physical exercise and leisure activities. In addition, the convenience and accessibility of services can be further enhanced by improving the opening hours and service quality of public sports facilities. In sparsely populated areas, public sports facilities are constructed according to local needs and characteristics to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the use of facilities. For instance, in rural or remote areas, multi-purpose sports venues can be built, which are crucial for hosting sports competitions as well as residents’ fitness and leisure activities. The efficiency and effectiveness of the use of public sports facilities can also be further enhanced by sharing resources with other public institutions, such as schools and community centers.
Fourth, the government’s purchasing power should be strengthened to promote the market-oriented operation of public sports services. Thus, the government can promote the market-oriented operation of public sports services and introduce more social forces to participate in the provision of public sports services. This not only alleviates the financial pressure acting on it, but also increase the diversity and flexibility of public sports services and more optimally meet the needs of the public. Therefore, the government further strengthen government purchasing efforts and formulate clearer purchasing standards and norms. This includes clarifying the requirements for quality standards, price standards, and service duration of public sports services. Thus, the government can more optimally guide and regulate market-based operations to ensure the quality and effectiveness of public sports services. In addition, it can also supervise and manage the market-oriented operation of public sports services by establishing a robust regulatory mechanism. For instance, the government can establish a specialized regulatory body to assess and supervise the quality and effectiveness of public sports services to ensure that the market-based operation of public sports services is effective.
Fifth, raising the average number of years of schooling enhances public awareness and participation in sport. Average years of schooling, as a marginal condition, plays a supplementary role in enhancing the efficiency of public sports services. The public with a higher level of education exhibit a deeper understanding of health and sports, and a higher willingness and motivation to participate in public sports activities. It is therefore recommended that educational institutions strengthen their education and publicity efforts to increase public awareness and participation in sports. Social organizations can popularize health knowledge and sports skills through various forms of sports education and publicity activities to stimulate the public’s enthusiasm and motivation to participate in public sports activities. Meanwhile, the government can also encourage schools, enterprises, and public institutions to organize sports activities by formulating relevant policies and measures, thereby promoting the development of national fitness.

## Comparison of study findings with existing literature
(1) Research methodology level: existing literature has applied different methods to study public sports service efficiency, such as traditional statistical analysis and case studies. This study applied a hybrid method incorporating DEA and fsQCA, which has been utilized quite sparingly in public sports service efficiency research. (2) Research perspective level: Existing literature focuses more on a particular aspect of public sports services, such as resource allocation and service supply. This study, on the other hand, commences from multiple dimensions and considers several factors, such as the level of regional economic development, the input of public sports funding, the government’s purchasing efforts, and the public’s awareness of sports; thus, a more comprehensive perspective is provided. (3) The level of research conclusions: the conclusions of this study postulate specific policy recommendations, such as attaching importance to the level of regional economic development and increasing the input of public sports funding, which are more targeted and operable compared with the existing literature. Meanwhile, this study emphasizes the importance of public awareness in the sports domain, which has not received sufficient research attention in the existing literature. (4) Research contribution level: this study provides a novel analytical tool for analyzing the efficiency of public sport services by combining the DEA and fSQCA methods. In addition, the findings can enable policy makers and practitioners to more optimally understand the complexity and multiplicity of public sports service efficiency improvement, providing theoretical support and guidance for practical work.

## Research limitations and prospects
Despite the results of this study, several limitations exist. First, the selected variables involve three dimensions: government, population, and economy. Although it incorporates more variables, which have already been demonstrated, there omissions persist, and it does not explore the impacts originating from the micro level. Second, limited by data availability, this study analyses only one year’s data and does not include case data across years, which restricts the ability to interpret long-term development trends and results in findings that may not exhaustively reflect the real scenario. Third, this study focuses on provincial administrative regions, and further exploration is needed as to whether the findings are applicable to sub-provincial regions. Considering the limitations of the current study, to deepen the understanding on the efficiency of public sports services and to enhance its comprehensiveness and scientificity, future research can focus on optimizing and expanding the strategies in the following areas: (1) To fill the gap in micro-level research, it is recommended that special micro-surveys should be designed and implemented, focusing on the characteristics of sports behaviors at the individual and household levels, including but not limited to the degree of participation in sports activities, the pattern of preference, satisfaction assessment, and sports consumption habits. Such data can not only reveal the actual demand and feedback of micro-entities on public sports services, but also provide an empirical basis for analysing the potential impact of the micro-level on the efficiency and effectiveness of the services. (2) Design and implement a long-term tracking research programme to collect and analyse data on a regular basis as a method for observing the trend of changes in the efficiency of public sports services over time. This can be achieved by establishing a regular data collection mechanism or by utilizing existing long-term research projects. (3) Future research should construct a multi-level research framework, incorporating provincial administrative regions and sub-provincial regions (e.g., cities, counties, and townships) into a unified analysis system. Through cross-level comparative analyses, differences and commonalities in the efficiency of public sports services between different administrative levels can be revealed, providing more precise regional guidance for policy formulation. Meanwhile, this framework also enables scholars to identify the constraints and facilitating mechanisms of service efficiency improvement among different levels, providing a scientific basis for optimizing resource allocation and enhancing service effectiveness.

Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

## Acknowledgements
The authors wish to express their sincere appreciation to all individuals involved in this study.

## Author contributions
X.H and y.h.Z wrote the main manuscript text and wrote the tables. All authors reviewed the manuscript. The author(s) read and approved the final manuscript.

## Funding
National Social Science Foundation Project: Study on the Enhancement of China’s International Public Opinion Discourse on Sports (24BTY017); Jiangsu Double Innovation Talent Project (JSSCRC2021544); General Project of Social Science Fund of Jiangsu Province: Research on the realization mechanism and pathways of the Intelligent Public Service of National Fitness driven by digital economy (23TYB004).

## Data availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available from Beijing Sport University library internal collection, but restrictions apply to the availability of these data, which were used under licence for the current study and so are not publicly available.The data are, however, available from the authors upon reasonable request and with the permission of Beijing Sport University library.

## Declarations

## Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

## Ethics declarations
This study did not involve human or animal subjects; thus, no ethical approval was required.