pmcVaccineVaccine319nihpa8406899Vaccine0264-410X1873-2518pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC11754535PMC11754535.11175453511754535NIHMS20171213959231610.1016/j.vaccine.2024.05.068NIHMS2017121NIHPA20171211ArticleVaccine value profile for schistosomiasis
YameyGavin McDadeKaci Kennedy AndersonRoy M. BartschSarah M. BottazziMaria Elena DiemertDavid HotezPeter J. LeeBruce Y. McManusDonald MolehinAdebayo J. RoestenbergMeta RollinsonDavid SiddiquiAfzal A. TendlerMiriam WebsterJoanne P. YouHong ZellwegerRaphaël M. MarshallCaroline aDuke Global Health Institute, Duke University, Durham, NC, United StatesbFaculty of Medicine, School of Public Health, Imperial College London, London, United KingdomcPublic Health Informatics, Computational, and Operations Research and Center for Advanced Technology and Communication in Health, City University of New York Graduate School of Public Health and Health Policy, New York City, NY, United StatesdNational School of Tropical Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Texas Children’s Hospital Center for Vaccine Development, Houston, TX, United StateseSchool of Medicine and Health Sciences, George Washington University, Washington, D.C., United StatesfQIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, Queensland, AustraliagDepartment of Microbiology & Immunology, Midwestern University, Glendale, AZ, United StateshLeiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, NetherlandsiGlobal Schistosomiasis Alliance, London, United KingdomjCenter for Tropical Medicine & Infectious Diseases, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center School of Medicine, Lubbock, TX, United StateskLaboratory of Research and Development of Anti-Helminth Vaccines, Oswaldo Cruz Institute (Fiocruz), Rio de Janeiro, BrazillDepartment of Pathobiology and Population Sciences, Royal Veterinary College, University of London, United KingdommInternational Vaccine Institute, Seoul, KoreanWorld Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland1Professor McManus died shortly before this paper was submitted; see dedication at end of paper.
*Corresponding author. gavin.yamey@duke.edu (G. Yamey)0310202523720246448026312602012602027082024071020250810202508102025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).Schistosomiasis is caused by parasitic flatworms (Schistosoma). The disease in humans can be caused by seven different species of Schistosoma: S. mansoni, S. japonicum, S. haematobium, S. malayensis, S. mekongi, S. guineensis and S. intercalatum, as well as by hybrids between species, including livestock schistosome species. People are infected when exposed to infested water and the parasite larvae penetrate the skin. Poor and rural communities are typically the most affected, and the general population who lives in affected areas and is exposed to contaminated water is at risk. Areas with poor access to safe water and adequate sanitation are also at heightened risk. About 236.6 million people required treatment for schistosomiasis in 2019—mostly people living in poor, rural communities, especially fishing and agricultural communities.
This ‘Vaccine Value Profile’ (VVP) for schistosomiasis is intended to provide a high-level, holistic assessment of the information and data that are currently available to inform the potential public health, economic, and societal value of pipeline vaccines and vaccine-like products. This VVP was developed by a working group of subject matter experts from academia, non-profit organizations, public private partnerships, and multi-lateral organizations. All contributors have extensive expertise on various elements of the schistosomiasis VVP and collectively aimed to identify current research and knowledge gaps. The VVP was developed using only existing and publicly available information.

Vaccine valueSchistosomiasisNeglected tropical diseasesParasitic infectionpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY1.

## The global public health need for a vaccine
Schistosomiasis is caused by parasitic flatworms (Schistosoma) [ ]. The disease in humans can be caused by seven different species of S. mansoni, S. japonicum, S. haematobium, S. malayensis, S. mekongi, S. guineensis and S. intercalatum, as well as by hybrids between species, including livestock schistosome species. The first three species account for the current magnitude of human schistosomiasis globally. People are infected when exposed to infested water and the parasite larvae (cercariae) penetrate the skin [ ]. Freshwater snails are the intermediate hosts [ ]. Infected humans contaminate water sources through their excretions (feces or urine), which contain eggs which hatch into the second larval stage (miracidia) [ ].
The general population who lives in affected areas and is exposed to contaminated water is at risk [ ]. Areas with limited access to safe water and adequate sanitation are at heightened risk [ ]. About 236.6 million people required treatment for schistosomiasis in 2019—mostly people living in poor, rural communities [ ], especially fishing and agricultural communities [ ] ( ).
1.1.

## Current methods of surveillance, diagnosis, prevention, and treatment
Parasite egg detection has been the central method for evaluating schistosomiasis control programmes. It has relied upon the Kato Katz method for detecting eggs in faeces and by urine filtration for eggs in urine. Counting excreted eggs can provide data relating to prevalence and intensity of infection but these traditional methods lack the required sensitivity especially in low prevalence and intensity settings. New diagnostic methods based on circulating cathodic antigen (CCA) and circulating anodic antigen (CAA) have been implemented and are being further developed together with novel molecular approaches. WHO recently published the Diagnostic Target Product Profiles for monitoring, evaluation and surveillance of schistosomiasis control programmes [ ].
In support of the WHO NTD Roadmap for Neglected Tropical Diseases, WHO published new guidelines in 2022 for the control and elimination of schistosomiasis, which advocate for an integrated approach [ ]. Treatment of the disease relies on the drug praziquantel given orally as a single dose of 40 mg/kg primarily through mass drug administration (MDA) programmes. Currently, Merck KGaA donates up to 250 million tablets on an annual basis, which is roughly sufficient to treat 100 million school-age children. The new guidelines recommend annual preventive chemotherapy in endemic communities with a prevalence of 10% or above for all age groups, beginning from two years old. In communities where infection levels remain high, countries are encouraged to consider biannual treatments and in communities with a prevalence below 10% annual preventive chemotherapy should continue or a test and treat approach should be developed. The recognised need to treat adults within the community, given that emphasis was previously on treating school-aged children, raises an important question as to whether the likely increased demand for praziquantel can be met by current global supplies. Monitoring and evaluation programmes are essential to assess the impact of programmes to help improve efficiency. Most prevalence and intensity data have been collected from school-aged children and there is a need to collect data from a broader age-range to include adults [ , ].
To eliminate schistosomiasis, a cross cutting approach will be needed to reduce transmission. Such an approach will require additional inputs in areas such as water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH); education and behaviour change; integrated snail control; appropriate veterinary and animal health measures to guard against zoonotic infections; and increased capacity in the health system, especially at the level of the health centre. The International Task Force for Disease Eradication in its overview of schistosomiasis and the new WHO guidelines encouraged further research and development of schistosomiasis vaccines, as a vaccine may be crucial for eliminating schistosomiasis as a public health problem [ ].

1.2.

## Summary of knowledge and research gaps in epidemiology, potential indirect public health impact and economic burden
Prior to wide-spread MDA, many extensive long-term studies have documented the epidemiology of the major human schistosome infections [ ]. The main epidemiological features are convex age intensity and prevalence curves, with the declines in older age groups due to some combination of exposure and acquired immunity. Fecundity of adult female worms is density dependent since the per worm fecundity declines as worm burden rises as demonstrated by detailed autopsy studies to assess worm load and egg output [ ]. Adult worm life expectancy is uncertain but thought to be around 3–5 years on average. It is thus longer than the soil transmitted helminths, but shorter than the human filarial worms. Bounce back time post cessation of chemotherapy is of the order of a few years to around 90% of per MDA levels. This is a much slower bounce back time when compared with soil transmitted helminths, but shorter than the filarial worms. The largest uncertainty in our current epidemiological understanding of these infections is what determines the convex age intensity of infection curves (immunology or ecology/human behaviour). This uncertainty is highly pertinent to vaccine development since if natural infection only builds partial immunity slowly after repeated exposure as individuals age, then vaccines will have to do better than the human immune response to natural infection. Human helminths have large genomes (often as much as 1/3 the size of the human genome) so it is possible that they make many secretions to modulate immunological attack by the human host.

2.

## Potential target populations and delivery strategies
Historically, schistosomiasis control has relied heavily on MDA, mainly focusing on school-aged children. With a recent public health paradigm shift from schistosomiasis control to elimination, expanding the scope from school-aged children to all age-groups (including pre-school age children and adults) and particular risk groups (such as fishermen, farmers of irrigation fields and car washers) seems appropriate and is supported by mathematical modelling studies of MDA impact [ ]. Similarly, vaccine roll-out could start with school-based programs for practical reasons, or indeed, as a part of current infant vaccination programmes at around 2 years of age that target the common viral infections such as measles, and subsequently be expanded to the wider community, including other age and risk groups. This could ultimately result in a combined, infant, school- and community-based delivery strategy, which has recently been shown to generate high coverage levels [ ].
To maximize impact on disease burden, schistosomiasis vaccination could be used in conjunction with other interventions such as MDA, and water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) improvements [ , ]. However, the desirability of this will depend greatly on vaccine efficacy and the duration of protection it provides to an individual. If highly efficacious and of long protection duration, vaccination alone could be the most effective intervention. In high-endemicity regions, vaccine delivery should be integrated with the existing health system to maximize possible synergies [ ]. This integrated approach may result in a delivery strategy combined with other public health activities such as: (i) routine infant measles or childhood vaccination for pre-school children; (ii) regular MDA activities for school age children; and/or (iii) HPV vaccination for girls, boys, and women. In addition, ad-hoc campaigns will be tailored to particular target populations or high endemicity regions. Ideally, initiation of large-scale vaccination campaigns in endemic areas should follow MDA, with the aim of reducing re-infection, as above. With vaccine coverage above 70% of the total population, vaccination with appropriately safe and immunogenic vaccines should be introduced into the childhood immunization calendar in endemic countries starting at 12 months of age.
Of note, should age of MDA expand to lower age groups, thanks to upcoming availability of paediatric praziquantel orally dispersible formulation [ ], vaccine delivery could be concomitantly expanded to these same lower age groups or integrated with infant vaccination programmes. The definition of age range for vaccination needs to be adequate to the safety and immunogenicity characteristics of licensed vaccines ( ).

3.

## Schistosomiasis and its consideration as a public health priority by global, regional or country stakeholders
There are many international stakeholders, non-governmental organizations, and government ministries involved in schistosomiasis control and elimination in Africa that, potentially, would have significant or prioritized interests in a vaccine for schistosomiasis.
There is interest from funders globally to reduce the impact of schistosomiasis, as evidenced by ongoing efforts using various approaches such as chemotherapy of at-risk groups, access to clean drinking water and improved sanitation, hygiene education, environmental management, and snail control. Praziquantel, which is used for chemotherapy, is donated by Merck (250 million tablets a year).
In areas where zoonotic schistosome species occur, including S. japonicum and S. mekongi in Southeast Asia, as well as is now acknowledged across Africa too, veterinary and animal health measures will be required, and vaccines are a potential intervention strategy. This may be particulary pertinent given recent reports of systematic mis-use of praziquantel intended for humans and/or incorrect dosage veterinary formula praziquantel being given by subsistence farmers to their African domestic livestock, thereby also potentially facilitating the emergence of praziquantel resistance [ , , ].
Transmission blocking vaccines that prevent infection or reduce fecundity of adult worms have shown some level of protective efficacy against S. japonicum in bovines in the field [ , ]. Furthermore, social surveys amongst African subsistence farmers have demonstrated both a need and a demand, including a willingness to pay, for measures aimed at preventing livestock schistosomiasis [ , , ]]. Effective livestock vaccines could also help reduce access and evolutionary pressures on praziquantel.
WHO launched a NTD Road Map for 2021–2030 that targets the elimination of schistosomiasis as a public health problem in all endemic countries [ ]. The schistosomiasis annex to the Road Map lists as a required action: “consider development of a vaccine for humans and animals to prevent reinfection and reduce transmission.”
The new WHO Guideline on Control and Elimination of Human Schistosomiasis puts forward six recommendations using currently available tools, hence this guideline does not include the use of schistosomiasis vaccines, since they are not yet available [ ].
In 2020 estimates suggest that at least 241.3 million people, the vast majority in sub-Saharan Africa, required treatment for schistosomiasis. The potential market for a vaccine, in terms of number of potential doses required in each geographical area, should be determined. The market will depend on the target group, taking into account the product profile of the vaccine or vaccines (likely efficacy against the various species of Schistosoma, safety in different ages, vaccination schedule/number of doses, shelf life/storage/transport, etc.).
Because of the known distribution of schistosomiasis, any vaccine would be unlikely to be a ‘dual market’ vaccine (with potential demand and uptake in both HICs and LMICs). However, a private market for travellers from HICs to affected areas in LMICs is possible (but would be relatively small) alongside a vaccine for military personnel ( ).

4.

## Existing guidance on preferences/preferred product attributes for vaccines against schistosomiasis
Candidate vaccine agnostic guidance on preferred product attributes for schistosomiasis have been developed by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. This information is presented in . There are two key properties of any vaccine. The first is vaccine efficacy, determined as a percentage of those immunised who are protected against infection, or a more complex definition of efficacy based on the fraction of worms suppressed by vaccination from developing to mature adults or the fractional reduction in eggs. Second, and of equal importance, is the duration of protection—which is particularly important when compared with MDA. Understanding duration of protection requires long-term phase III trials or phase IV studies.

5.

## Vaccine development
5.1.

## Probability of technical and regulatory success (PTRS)
Vaccine development for schistosomiasis includes the development of both human and veterinary vaccine candidates, as the implementation of an animal-based transmission-blocking vaccine may present an important part of a package of integrated control measures synergizing human and animal health.
Preferential targets for vaccine development are S. mansoni and S. haematobium, the main species with impact in endemic countries, especially in Africa as the etiologic agent of urinary tract and female genital schistosomiasis. Products from different manufacturers should be preferentially interchangeable.

## Human vaccines for intestinal schistosomiasis caused by Schistosoma mansoni and urogenital schistosomiasis caused by Schistosoma haematobium
Proof-of-concept for vaccinating against schistosomiasis accelerated in the 1970s and 80s through an improved understanding of the mechanisms underlying protective immunity to S. mansoni and S. haematobium infections in animal models [ – ], followed by efforts to elicit protection against experimental challenge infection in these models using irradiated cercariae or schistosomulae. These early animal vaccine studies were conducted in both the U.S. at the Biomedical Research Institute in Rockville, Maryland [ , ], and in the U.K. at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine [ ]. Previously, in the 1960s, S.Y. Li Hsu and H.F. Hsu at the University of Iowa demonstrated protective immunity in Rhesus monkeys with infectious, non-irradiated cercariae of Schistosoma japonicum against subsequent experimental challenge infection [ ] Following efforts to reproduce this protective immunity by substituting homogenates or extracts of cercariae or schistosomulae [ ]. The next advance was to test individual surface antigens isolated by affinity chromatography [ ]. Later, during the mid-1980s, the first schistosome antigens were expressed as recombinant proteins [ ]. Over the ensuing decade, multiple internal, surface, and excreted recombinant schistosome antigens underwent animal testing, although six of the promising candidates that were selected by an expert review group convened during the 1990s by the World Health Organization and the Special Programme for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases, failed to achieve high levels of protection in independently conducted mouse challenge trials. However, the laboratory of R.A. Wilson at the University of York has since identified shortcomings in the mouse model that limit its utility for adequately estimating protective immunity of candidate vaccines for human schistosomiasis [ , ]. For an animal model, the baboon, a natural host of schistosomiasis appears to be an excellent model to evaluate safety, immunogenicity and protective immune responses because these animals exhibit human-like acute and chronic disease manifestations [ ]. Now, as shown in and , newer recombinant proteins have undergone more refined testing in animal models with the benefit of newer and potentially more effective adjuvants, together with human immunology studies; this newer generation of recombinant protein schistosome vaccines have entered into Phase 1–2 clinical testing in the U.S., Brazil, and Africa.

## Veterinary vaccine for bovines (water buffalo/cattle) in Asia to reduce/eliminate human infection by Schistosoma japonicum
The schistosomiasis annex to the WHO Road Map lists as a required action: “consider development of a vaccine for humans and animals to prevent reinfection and reduce transmission.”[ ]
Schistosomiasis control in the Philippines and China is complicated by the zoonotic nature of the disease with bovines (water buffalos and cattle), which act as major reservoir hosts for S. japonicum, being responsible for, depending on the habitat type, up to 90% of environmental contamination of the parasite’s eggs [ ]. However, in terms of vaccine development, this zoonotic nature permits a step-wise approach that would start with the use of a “transmission-blocking” veterinary vaccine for bovines before moving on to a product aimed at human vaccination, should this be necessary [ ]. Accordingly, vaccination of animals, particularly bovines, is considered useful with respect to schistosomiasis japonica, and should follow human vaccination as a complementary tool. The vaccine would assist in long-term prevention of human (and animal) infection, a concept supported by mathematical modelling, which predicts that a schistosome vaccine capable of reducing the faecal egg output in bovines by 45% in conjunction with praziquantel treatment would lead to a significant reduction in the transmission of schistosomiasis japonica almost to the point of elimination [ ].Similar step-wise approaches could plausible be of value across sub Saharan Africa too, particularly where targeting ongoing zoonotic transmission of haematobium group schistosomes from livestock to humans.
Vaccination can reduce egg excretion from cattle and buffalo, thereby interrupting transmission from bovines to snails. The use of such a vaccine would be particularly applicable in areas deemed unsuitable for the replacement of bovines by mechanized farming, one of the interventions featuring in the current integrated schistosomiasis control strategy for China [ ]. Indeed, the implementation of an animal-based transmission-blocking vaccine as part of a package of integrated control measures sits well with the One Health concept synergizing human and animal health. This was a conclusion reached at two workshops, co-sponsored by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, on schistosomiasis elimination strategies and the potential role of a vaccine for Asia [ , ]. Discussion at one of these workshops on the question of a clinical versus a veterinary vaccine concluded the latter was considered as the preferred target product profile (TPP) with respect to schistosomiasis japonica as the less rigorous safety concerns required would allow more rapid implementation [ ]. A large number of S. japonicum transmission-blocking vaccine candidates have been identified with Sj-GST26, Sj-GST28, Sj-97 (paramyosin), Sj-TPI (triose-phosphate isomerase) and Sj-IRs (insulin receptors) the most tested [ , , , ]. In addition, the Fatty Acid Binding Protein family member Sm14, which shares homologous members with the main schistosome species and other helminths of human and veterinary importance, is being developed as an anti-Fasciola vaccine for livestock (Livac). Safety and immunogenicity were demonstrated in definitive hosts such as sheep and cattle in Brazil by Fiocruz and Ourofino Animal Health groups, and goats by the Spanish group from Cordoba University, among others.
The development of a vaccine for schistosomiasis japonica has proven highly challenging but the deployment of a transmission blocking vaccine, in tandem with other interventions (e.g., improved water, sanitation and hygiene, health education and snail control) for the prevention of S. japonicum, would be invaluable if the goal of elimination is to be achieved.

## Veterinary vaccine for livestock and wildlife in Africa to reduce/eliminate human infection
The role of livestock in the transmission of schistosomiasis in Africa and beyond, namely by S. haematobium group parasites, has now been acknowledge by WHO, FAO and beyond, largely demonstrated through high prevalence and intensity levels of the human S. haematobium with livestock S. bovis, S. curassoni, or S. mattheii [ , ], as well as cases of human infection with livestock-only hybrids of S. bovis with S. curassoni [ ]. Furthermore, whilst zoonotic spillover to human infection through recent hybridization may be currently low, it has been predicted to become more important as elimination programmes continue [ ]. Therefore, in areas where potential zoonotic transmission occurs, the need for development of livestock vaccines for use within Africa should be raised too. As mentioned earlier, this may be particularly relevant given recent reports of mis-use of praziquantel intended for humans and/or incorrect dosage veterinary formula praziquantel being given by subsistence farmers to their African domestic livestock [ , , ]. Furthermore, social surveys amongst African subsistence farmers have demonstrated both a need (largely in terms of reducing the mortality and morbidity, and thereby financial losses, of their infected herds) and a willingness to pay for measures aimed at preventing livestock schistosomiasis [ , , ]]. Finally, there may also be a role for the S. mansoni vaccines mentioned above for wildlife as well—notably, for the non-human primates who we know also perpetuate transmission and key challenges for areas to achieve verification of interruption of transmission status.

5.2.

## Overview of the vaccine candidates in the clinical pipeline

## Controlled human infection models for advancing vaccine development
Controlled human infection models (CHIMs) are valuable tools to advance vaccine and drug development and can be used to efficiently test new vaccine or drug candidates. Moreover, controlled human infections can provide insights into immunological responses that could help identify correlates of protection or new targets. In these ethically contentious studies, a small number of healthy volunteers are deliberately exposed to a pathogen, after which they are followed over time before the infection is cleared, often by curative treatment. Particularly in the field of malaria, controlled human infections have helped advance vaccine candidates such as the RTS,S malaria vaccine. The initial efficacy of RTS,S was shown in a proof-of-concept CHIM study, and later confirmed in a phase 3 clinical trial in African children (which showed about 30% protective vaccine efficacy) [ ].Analogous to malaria, a CHIM has been developed using S. mansoni cercariae. To ensure safety for volunteers, a single-sex infection model was developed, whereby healthy volunteers are exposed to cercariae of one gender only. This will ensure that worms are not able to mate and produce any eggs, which are the main cause of morbidity.
In the first male-only controlled infection study with S. mansoni (Sm), challenge with 20 male cercariae was well-tolerated and led to detectable infection in 82% (9 out of 11 volunteers) based on serum circulating anodic antigen levels [ ]. Interestingly, some volunteers develop systemic symptoms at weeks 4–5 after exposure, which are reminiscent of acute schistosomiasis syndrome (Katayama fever), whilst eosinophilia occurs somewhat later. Rather, initial immune responses were characterised as mixed Th1/2 cellular responses with high levels of IgG1 induced. No eggs were detected in stool of these volunteers at any timepoint, confirming the single-sex approach.
More recently, a study using female cercariae was initiated [ ] to investigate whether this model could add to the toolbox for schistosomiasis vaccine development. For both human models, the fact that they use single sex schistosomes ensures safety to participants but also is an important difference with field infections. Infection levels, as measured by circulating antigens, are manyfold lower as compared to those found in highly endemic areas, for example in Sub-Saharan Africa. The healthy volunteers included in controlled infection studies differ from any vaccine target population with regards to genetics, infection history and very often age. In order to bridge the gap between infection models and endemic infections, a controlled infection model in endemic areas could be insightful. Currently, efforts are underway to also establish these technically advanced models in Uganda. Furthermore, comparison of (vaccine) immune responses between non-endemic and endemic populations will further our understanding of schistosomiasis and aid vaccine development.
Lastly, a third study is ongoing where healthy volunteers are repeatedly exposed to Sm male cercariae, in order to explore whether the early mixed Th1/Th2 inflammatory responses that seem to be associated with systemic symptoms are a sign of natural protection or will ultimately lead to tolerogenic response [ ]. Such exploratory studies provide a unique opportunity to identify correlates of protection that improve our understanding of immunity and that may lead to the discovery of new vaccine targets.

6.

## Health impact of a vaccine on burden of disease and transmission
The value of a schistosomiasis vaccine depends on its ability to prevent disease and/or reduce the burden of disease and its sequelae (e. g., intensity level of infection, chronic disease, death) – and, most importantly the duration of any such effects. Thus, it is important to have a sense of what is already known about the health burden of schistosomiasis and its transmission dynamics to understand what a vaccine should look like in terms of reducing these things. Such information can be used to develop a ‘wish-list’ of characteristics, features, and attributes the vaccine should have once it reaches the market (i.e., a target product profile, TPP) [ ]. Understanding a vaccine’s value and developing this list prior to licensure can help guide vaccine development while still time to make adjustments [ ]. Since both schistosomiasis and vaccines reside in and are part of complex systems, mathematical and computational models that represent these systems can help inform TPPs by helping decision makers (e.g., vaccine developers, funders, manufacturers, policy makers) understand and address complex systems. For example, models can help identify the efficacy thresholds at which things change, which can help set efficacy targets for which vaccine developers can aim. These models can help save time, effort, and resources, often associated with clinical studies, and they can help show other impacts/effects that may not otherwise have been seen as well as the future/long-term impacts, both of which are hard to see and measure in traditional clinical studies. Therefore, summarizes modelling studies that explore the use of a schistosomiasis vaccine and quantify its potential impact on schistosomiasis’ disease burden and/or transmission.
6.1.

## Summary of knowledge and research gaps in modelling health impact on disease burden and transmission

## Priority Knowledge
Most studies that evaluate vaccination look at achieving the WHO morbidity and elimination goals (i.e., a prevalence of heavy intensity infection in school-aged children ages 5–14 of ≤5% and ≤1%, respectively) and use interrupting community transmission as the outcome metric.
Vaccination alone seems to be able to achieve the WHO goals, but would take several years to achieve, especially in high transmission settings. The predictions depend critically on vaccine efficacy and duration of protection.
Studies indicate that vaccination used in combination with MDA would tend to provide greater benefits (e.g., the combination would reduce transmission more quickly) than using either alone. But vaccination alone would work well if vaccine efficacy was high and the duration of protection was long.
Interrupting transmission (i.e., achieving WHO goals) is more readily achieved in low transmission settings compared to moderate and high transmission settings, but again this depends on vaccine efficacy and duration of protection.
The duration of protection seems to be the largest driver of vaccination’s impact across all the studies. For example, if protection lasts less than 5 years, there is very little impact as repeated vaccination is needed. Studies seems to indicate that 5–10 years duration of protection or more is ideal.
Mass vaccination of the community should more quickly interrupt transmission and has the greatest chances of achieving the WHO goals compared to vaccinating other target populations.
Vaccinating school-aged children seems to be the next best strategy, followed by infant vaccination.

## Research Gaps
Future studies may include other outcomes of interest e.g., prevalence in humans as referenced by the mean worm burden; snail infection levels are always low − even in high human prevalence settings − and are not a reliable marker of impact when compared with intensity measures in humans. Most of the current studies focus on interrupting transmission but may miss other benefits of vaccination (e.g., reductions in prevalence, heavy intensity infections, reductions in mean worm burden).
Future studies may comprise additional regions/countries/contexts. Current studies are calibrated to Kenya and Senegal, and in the future, it is conceivable to vary conditions so as to represent other transmission settings. However, this may not adequately reflect differences between regions (e.g., baseline prevalence, population size and age structure, differences in contact with reservoir/water) that may impact the value of vaccination.
Many of the current studies evaluate very specific scenarios. Future studies may want to identify the relationship between different vaccine characteristics (e.g., efficacy, duration) and health outcomes and reductions in transmission.

7.

## Social and/or economic impact of a vaccine
Ultimately, it is important to know the economic value of the schistosomiasis vaccine because a range of different decision makers will be using economic measures to determine where the vaccine will fall on their priority list and what resources may be needed [ , ]. For example, funders need to know where to invest limited resources and how much they should invest. As another example, vaccine developers need to understand the thresholds at which the vaccine becomes cost saving and cost-effective to set targets for various vaccine characteristics (e.g., efficacy, duration of protection, price). As another example, policy makers need to understand the trade-offs between vaccination costs and its effects (e.g., its ‘bang for the buck’) to know if a vaccine is worth developing and implementing based on costs [ ]. Policy makers also need to understand what vaccination implementation characteristics are necessary (e.g., target population, coverage, frequency) to develop effective policies and programs. It is helpful to determine the economic value prior to licensure or as early in development as possible, while there is still time to make adjustments [ ].
While some of the immediate effects of a schistosomiasis vaccine would be to prevent cases and/or negative health outcomes and their associated medical costs, the potential value of a vaccine extends way beyond this. A vaccine may impact other negative and longer-term consequences of schistosomiasis infections such as life-long disability, reduced economic productivity, impaired child health and development (e.g., stunting) and their ability to learn, and reduced worker productivity [ ]. These negative consequences can have a larger impact on a society as a whole, especially since NTDs tend to affect the poorest and most marginalized populations and may, in fact, contribute to these populations’ poverty [ ]. Thus, vaccination may prevent productivity losses, increase health benefits, reduce disability, and provide other community benefits. Therefore, economic evaluations of a schistosomiasis vaccine should include the broader impacts of a vaccine in a population to capture the whole spectrum of benefits. summarizes modelling studies that evaluate the impact of a schistosomiasis vaccine on the economic, health, and social burden of schistosomiasis.
7.1.

## Summary of knowledge and research gaps in modelling studies that measure anticipated socio-economic impact of the vaccine

## Priority Knowledge
Vaccination (with an efficacy ≥ 90%) would be cost-effective (measured as cost per high intensity infection years averted) and, in some circumstances, could generate cost savings, compared to MDA from the healthcare provider perspective (including only the cost of the intervention and delivery).
Vaccination would be more cost-effective than MDA, when the vaccine costs up to $9.20. However, this threshold cost varied by study and transmission setting (e.g., higher costing vaccines remained cost-effective in higher transmission settings) and ranged from $3 to $9.20.
The duration of protection offered by vaccine is a large driver of its cost-effectiveness. It also is a driver of which target population it is most cost-effective to vaccinate (e.g., with a shorter duration of protection it is more cost-effective to vaccinate school-aged children).
Transmission setting is also a driver of the vaccine’s cost-effectiveness. Vaccination would be more cost-effective in higher transmission settings compared to lower transmission settings.
In Brazil, schistosomiasis infections are estimated to cost $20.1 million for hospitalized cases and $40.7 million for all infections.
Cost of illness studies estimate that over 95% of total costs associated with schistosomiasis are due to productivity losses (e.g., lost wages due to illness and death).

## Research Gaps
There is a lack of estimates of the disability associated with schistosomiasis, with little quantification of the number of disability-adjusted life years (DALYs). A quick calculation suggests 13–15 million DALYs lost worldwide in 2004 [ ]. However, updated estimates would be helpful.
Future studies may want to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of lower efficacy vaccines (e.g., lower than 90%).
Current studies evaluating the cost-effectiveness of vaccination do not appear to include direct medical costs. Therefore, these studies may underestimate the true value of the vaccine as they do not capture all the benefits of vaccination (e.g., reductions in hospitalization and treatment costs).
Current studies evaluating the cost-effectiveness of vaccination do not include productivity losses (e.g., reductions in productivity due to illness and death), which may underestimate the value of vaccination. Future studies may want to capture such losses.
Future studies may want to quantify some of the broader social impacts of vaccination (e.g., impact on learning/education and development/growth), which do not appear to have been captured by the studies appeared to date.
Many of the current studies are calibrated to Kenya, and to a lesser extent Senegal, and the costs included are not context/location specific. Future studies will hopefully quantify the value in other regions/countries/contexts given differences that may impact the value of the vaccine (e.g., population size, age structure, contact with water/reservoir, costs, healthcare system differences).

8.

## Policy considerations and financing
Fifty-one countries require use of preventative chemotherapy treatment. Most of these countries (76%) are eligible for funding from Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance (Gavi), 84% are low or lower-middle income, and 80% are located in Africa.
A WHO policy recommendation is a pre-requisite for WHO prequalification. It is also a pre-requisite for financing by Gavi. Should a schistosomiasis vaccine become available, Gavi may evaluate it through its Vaccine Investment Strategy (VIS). The VIS process uses a robust and transparent mechanism to evaluate vaccine products based on several criteria, such as health and economic impact, contribution of equity and social protection, feasibility, and implementation costs.
Vaccine policy development and decision-making may also be influenced by the following considerations:
For the target population of infants and young children, it may be beneficial to administer the vaccine within the infant EPI programme for optimal cost-effectiveness and feasibility of implementation, and/or to administer the vaccine alongside anthelminthic MDA.
Rather than national roll-out, some countries may elect strategic, targeted use of schistosomiasis vaccines, especially for high-incidence areas.
National decision-making bodies may require evidence of vaccine safety and efficacy in local populations before considering their use, irrespective of whether other countries have licensed the vaccine(s).
Local manufacturing may greatly enhance the likelihood of government uptake, particularly where countries have national policies on self-reliance/domestic production of vaccines.
If a schistosomiasis vaccine can be combined (co-formulated) with another vaccine (e.g., hookworm) that has a compatible delivery strategy and schedule, this will significantly impact its feasibility of delivery and cost-effectiveness.
 outlines some of the criteria that are likely to be important for policy and financing decision making, based on published discussions with policy stakeholders, the WHO SAGE E2R framework, principles and considerations for adding a vaccine to a national immunization programme, and Gavi’s VIS criteria. In studies on school children and infants, nutritional status should be evaluated, and corresponding nutrition measures should be implemented for malnourished children/infants.

In addition to Gavi, there are other health agencies, especially regional ones, that would probably play a critical role in supporting the rollout of schistosomiasis vaccines, e.g., Africa CDC, the African Vaccine Acquisition Trust, the Asia Pacific Vaccine Access Facility, and the regional development banks.

9.

## Access and implementation feasibility
Possibility of implementation within existing delivery systems: High. Vaccines in current development have relatively simple dosing schedules (see ). Possibility for administration alongside MDA programs.
Commercial attractiveness: Moderate/High. There is significant potential LMIC vaccine demand, and many endemic countries are eligible for Gavi support (see ). There is also some HIC utility for military populations.
Clarity of licensure and policy decision pathway: High; The existing standard licensure pathways are applicable, and there is an additional possibility of using CHIM data.
Expected financing mechanism: Moderate. Interest from Gavi with respect to funding has not been formally confirmed, but it is expected to fall within Gavi consideration.
Ease of uptake: High. There is a good existing level of acceptance of vaccination, mass drug administration, and other health care approaches, and the target populations are well defined. Country-specific commitments to vaccine introduction have not yet been determined.

10.

## Conclusion
The global public health need for a schistosomiasis vaccine is based on (a) the morbidity, mortality, and gender-based and socioeconomic implications of the illness, and (b) the global ambition to eliminate the disease (not just achieve its control).
Even with MDA, WASH, snail control, and other interventions, there is still a large burden of schistosomiasis. The Global Burden of Disease 2019 study found that schistosomiasis was responsible for 1.64 million DALYs. About 236.6 million people required treatment for schistosomiasis in 2019. Poor and rural communities are disproportionately affected. The risk is greatest in areas with poor access to safe water and adequate sanitation; high-risk activities include farming irrigated fields, fishing, washing cars, and washing clothes in infected water sources. Out-of-pocket costs associated with schistosomiasis have been poorly studied, but are likely to be considerable for severe disease. Cost of illness studies estimate that over 95% of total costs associated with schistosomiasis are due to productivity losses (e.g., lost wages due to illness and death). There are also productivity costs associated with livestock schistosomiasis. Schistosomiasis has multiple gendered dimensions—for example, FGS is a stigmatizing condition that affects reproductive health.
WHO launched a NTD Road Map for 2021–2030 that targets the elimination of schistosomiasis as a public health problem in all endemic countries. Under “actions required,” the Road Map states: “consider development of a vaccine for humans and animals to prevent reinfection and reduce transmission.” In addition to political and policy support for vaccine development, other supportive policy actors include the US NIH, the US Department of Defense, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, the European Community, FIOCRUZ and the Brazilian Government, Australia’s NHMRC, SCI, and IVI.
Preferred product characteristics for a schistosomiasis vaccine, agnostic to a specific candidate, include: prevention of infection by one of the three human Schistosoma parasites (S. mansoni, S. haematobium, or S. japonicum); targets populations in endemic countries or regions, especially adults (18–59 years of age) in high-risk occupations or areas and high-risk school-age children (3–12 years of age); 2-dose, parenteral administration; at least 2–3 years of protection after last dosing; good safety profile; can be co-administered with praziquantel MDA and other interventions; storage at from − 20 ◦C to 4◦C; and stability expected to be over 3 years.
There are currently four vaccine candidates in clinical trials, described in detail earlier in this paper:
Bilhvax (Sh28GST vaccine), which has undergone phase 1–3 trials.
The Sm-14 Humanitarian Schistosomiasis Vaccine Initiative, which has undergone Phase 1a and 1b in a non-endemic area of Brazil between 2010 and 2015; 2a and 2b trials in a Senegalese area endemic for both S. mansoni and S. haematobium conducted by EPLS between 2015 and 2019; followed by a Phase 2c trial which began in 2020 and is expected to reach conclusion in an endemic area in Senegal by the end of 2023. Safety was already attested.
The Human Schistosomiasis Vaccine, which has undergone Phase 1 trials; a Phase 1/2 proof-of-efficacy trial in healthy exposed adults is currently underway in Uganda.
SchistoShield®: A Phase 1a clinical trial has been completed in infection naïve adults in the US. No significant safety concerns have been observed in all of the groups including with dose escalation. Vaccine appears to be well tolerated and elicits pronounced vaccine-mediated responses. Phase 1b/2A dose-escalation trial among African adults, with a planned future age de-escalation study in school-aged children (Burkina Faso, Madagascar) is currently underway.

Several modelling studies have explored the use of a schistosomiasis vaccine and quantified its potential impact on disease burden and/or transmission. Key findings are: (i) vaccination used in combination with MDA would tend to provide greater benefits (e.g., the combination would reduce transmission more quickly) than using either alone; (ii) interrupting transmission should be more readily achieved in low transmission settings compared to moderate and high transmission settings; (iii) the duration of protection seems to be the largest driver of vaccination’s impact; (iv) mass vaccination of the community would more quickly interrupt transmission and has the greatest chances of achieving the WHO goals compared to vaccinating other target populations; and (v) vaccinating school-aged children seems to be the next best strategy, followed by infant vaccination (it would take several years to interrupt transmission in a community when only vaccinating infants as there is not a reduction in the current burden in the population when using this strategy).
Modelling studies have also estimated the socioeconomic impacts of a schistosomiasis vaccine. These have shown that a vaccine of at least 90% efficacy would be cost-effective and, in some circumstances, could generate cost savings, compared to MDA from the healthcare provider perspective. Vaccination would be more cost-effective than MDA, when the vaccine cost up to $9.20. However, this threshold cost varied by study and transmission setting (e.g., higher costing vaccines remained cost-effective in higher transmission settings) and ranged from $3 to $9.20. The duration of protection offered by a vaccine is a large driver of its cost-effectiveness and is a driver of which target population it is most cost-effective to vaccinate (e.g., with a shorter duration of protection it is more cost-effective to vaccinate school-aged children). Vaccination would be more cost-effective in higher transmission settings compared to lower transmission settings.
Finally, there is high overall feasibility when it comes to implementing schistosomiasis vaccines. First, they could be implemented within existing delivery systems and vaccines in current development have relatively simple dosing schedules. They could be co-administered with routine measles or preschool vaccines, alongside MDA programs, and with HPV vaccines. Schistosomiasis vaccines have moderate to high commercial attractiveness, since there is significant potential LMIC vaccine demand, many endemic countries are eligible for Gavi support (interest from Gavi has not been confirmed, but schistosomiasis vaccines are expected to fall within their remit), and there is also some HIC utility for military populations. Uptake is expected to be high, given the existing level of acceptance of vaccination, mass drug administration, and other health care approaches. Nevertheless, we note that Gavi’s procurement decisions are based primarily on deaths avoided, and the comparatively low mortality may not make this an attractive investment. The societal costs of morbidity need to be better enumerated to strengthen the case for donor funding of schistosomiasis vaccines (including in comparison to funding treatment). As we noted in the introduction, schistosomiasis vaccines also fit well with the One Health concept synergizing human and animal health: there are opportunities for using veterinary vaccines in the control of human schistosomiasis.

14

## Sponsor acknowledgement
This supplement was sponsored by the World Health Organization’s Immunization, Vaccines, and Biologicals unit. The authors alone are responsible for the views expressed in each article and they do not necessarily represent the views, decisions or policies of the institutions with which they are affiliated.

## Funding
Funded by a grant from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, grant number INV-005318.

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: GY and KKM declare that they have received research funding from the WHO, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation (BMGF), The Carnegie Corporation of New York, the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, the Alliance for Health Policy and Systems Research, and the New Venture Fund. PH declares that he is the inventor and patentholder on vaccines against schistosomiasis which are in clinical trials and/or in development stages AS declares research funding from BMGF, EU/Horizon 2020, the Wellcome Trust, the National Institutes of Health, the RIGHT Foundation, and the Thrasher Foundation. DR declares that he is Director of the Global Schistosomiasis Alliance; consultation for Merck KGaA, which donates drugs for the treatment of schistosomiasis (he receives consulting fees in relation to his role as Director of the Global Schistosomiasis Alliance); and fees as editor of Advances in Parasitology. MT declares research funding from Finep, FIOCRUZ (Brazilian health ministry), Orygen Biotechnology, WHO, and FAPERJ (Rio de Janeiro State Financial Agency); consulting for Orygen Biotechnology and FABP Biotech; support from FIOCRUZ to attend meetings/travel; membership of the Scientific Advisory Board for the Sm14 Schistosomiasis Humanitarian Vaccine; and stock in Biomanguinhos, FIOCRUZ; she is CEO of FABP Biotech (an animal health company). JW declares research funding from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Research England: The Bloomsbury SET, Global Challenges Research Fund: UKRI Collective Fund, and the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council; she is the Director of the London Centre for NTD Research (unpaid) and the Director/Trustee of Fauna and Flora International (unpaid). HY declares support from the Australian National Health and Medical Research Council (grants APP1194462 and APP1132975).
11Dedication
This paper is dedicated to Professor Don McManus, who devoted his life to global elimination of neglected tropical diseases, especially schistosomiasis. He was a co-author of this paper, and died shortly before the paper was submitted.
12Author agreement
The authors declare that this is original work which has not been published before, and that all authors have agreed to the submitted paper.
13Copyright
World Health Organization, CC BY 3.0 IGO license.
15Data statement
The VVP was developed using only existing and publicly available information.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Gavin Yamey: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Kaci Kennedy McDade: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Roy M. Anderson: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Sarah M. Bartsch: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Maria Elena Bottazzi: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. David Diemert: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Peter J. Hotez: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Bruce Y. Lee: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Donald McManus: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Adebayo J. Molehin: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Meta Roestenberg: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. David Rollinson: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Afzal A. Siddiqui: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Miriam Tendler: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Joanne P. Webster: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Hong You: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Raphael ¨ Zellweger: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Caroline Marshall: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.
ARTICLE INFO
The development of this Vaccine Value Profile has been commissioned by WHO’s Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals (IVB) department on the recommendation of IVB’s Product Development for Vaccines Advisory Committee, to Duke University. All authors are independent subject matter experts and the authors alone are responsible for the views expressed in this manuscript.

## Data availability
Review of publicly available data

Appendix A.

## Framework to inform – vaccine development
 Appendix B.

## Framework to inform – access and implementation feasibility