pmcPLoS Negl Trop DisPLoS Negl Trop Dis532plosntd101291488plosPLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases1935-27271935-2735PLOSPMC12633871PMC12633871.112633871126338714124817210.1371/journal.pntd.0013701PNTD-D-24-014691Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesZoonosesBiology and Life SciencesVeterinary ScienceVeterinary DiseasesPeople and PlacesGeographical LocationsAfricaUgandaBiology and Life SciencesAgricultureAnimal ProductsMeatBiology and Life SciencesNutritionDietFoodMeatMedicine and Health SciencesNutritionDietFoodMeatMedicine and Health SciencesEpidemiologyMedical Risk FactorsBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaAnimalsWildlifeBiology and Life SciencesZoologyAnimalsWildlifeBiology and Life SciencesAgricultureAnimal ManagementLivestockBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaAnimalsDomestic AnimalsBiology and Life SciencesZoologyAnimalsDomestic AnimalsAssessment of exposure to zoonoses and perceptions of zoonotic transmission surrounding the Bwindi impenetrable forest, Uganda
Perceptions of zoonotic transmission in Ugandahttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-4359-7073HavenNahabweFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologySupervisionValidationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing MutahungaBirungiConceptualizationSupervisionWriting – review & editing KellermannScottConceptualizationData curationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing JoynerJalikaFormal analysisWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing LippertJuliaFormal analysisVisualizationWriting – review & editing RusojaEvan AndrewWriting – review & editing WilkesMichaelFunding acquisitionWriting – review & editing MateekaGilbertFormal analysisWriting – review & editing SsebideBenardWriting – review & editing AgutiCharlotteFormal analysisWriting – review & editing AhweraIsaacFormal analysis MugisaCharlesInvestigation NanonoFelistaData curationInvestigation KatushabeProssyData curationInvestigation GardnerNicole R.Writing – original draftWriting – review & editing JohnsonChristine KreuderConceptualizationFunding acquisitionMethodology EvansTierra SmileyConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Bwindi Community Hospital, Kanungu District, Uganda2
Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology Division, Department of Integrative Biology, University of California, Berkeley, California, United States of America3
Tulane University, School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, United States of America4
University of California Davis, Davis, California, United States of America5
Alameda Health System, Oakland, California, United States of America6
Rugarama Hospital, Kabale District, Uganda7
Gorilla Doctors, Mountain Gorilla Veterinary Project, Inc., Kampala, UgandaMshelbwalaPhilip P.Editor files. Interview data will not be shared because of sensitive participant information they may contain. Any other questions about the study can be obtained by reaching out to the Research Coordinator at Bwindi Community Hospital (email: researchbwindihospital@gmail.com).PLOS Publication Stagevor-update-to-uncorrected-proofPublication Update2025-11-20

## Data Availability
We made all the relevant data available as summarized files. Interview data will not be shared because of sensitive participant information they may contain. Any other questions about the study can be obtained by reaching out to the Research Coordinator at Bwindi Community Hospital (email: researchbwindihospital@gmail.com).

## Introduction
The world is experiencing a period of accelerated emergence of pathogens with pandemic potential over the last century [ ]. Zoonoses present one of the greatest threats to human health in the 21st century representing close to three-quarters of all newly emerging and re-emerging diseases [ , ]. In low-income settings, zoonoses are estimated to contribute to a quarter of the disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) lost when compared to 1% of DALYs lost in high income countries [ ].
Uganda is known to host a wide range of pathogens of zoonotic origin. Some of these pathogens were first identified in Uganda including: West Nile virus (1937), Bwamba virus (1937), Semliki Forest virus (1942), Bunyamwera virus (1943), Zika virus (1947), O’Nyong’nyong virus (1959), and Bundibugyo ebolavirus (2007) [ , ]. In the last decade, Uganda has experienced outbreaks of swine fever (2013), Marburg disease (2016), yellow fever (2016), Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (2018–2019), and Rift Valley fever (2018), as well as Ebola disease (ED) outbreaks in 2000, 2014, 2017, 2018 and in 2022 [ – ]. A seminal study in 2018 found significant serological evidence of exposure to ebolaviruses in the Bwindi region despite having no confirmed cases of Ebola disease [ ].
Uganda remains a hotspot for pandemic threats due to its rich biodiversity, wide range of wild lands, rapid population growth, and increasing proximity to wildlife reservoirs [ , ]. The Uganda National Housing census report of 2024 shows that, it has a population of 45.9 million people, with a significant proportion dependent on agriculture such as livestock production [ ]. According to the National Livestock Census of 2021, the country is estimated to have 2.27 million, cattle, 3.30 million goats, 0.74 million sheep, 2.22 million pigs, and 5.5 million poultry [ ]. Endemic and re-emerging zoonotic diseases such as Anthrax and Rift Valley Fever in Uganda have had significant socioeconomic impacts, including morbidity and mortality resulting in the loss of productivity and income for livestock-dependent populations [ , ]. Accordingly, Uganda has adopted a One Health strategy aimed at addressing the complex interplay between human, animal, and environmental health [ ]. With a vision of halving some key drivers of zoonotic infections, this strategy is intimately dependent on improving capacity to recognize threats, reduce high-risk contacts, and effectively respond to outbreaks. Rural communities are particularly important for this strategy given their disproportionate contact with both wild and domestic animals.
The Bwindi Impenetrable National Park (BINP) is a protected tropical rainforest in the Southwestern corner of Uganda with complex and biologically rich fauna and flora [ ]. Forests in Southwestern Uganda are home to a number of wild animals with the potential to share zoonotic pathogens with humans due to proximity and shared resources [ ]. The diverse fauna includes species with potential for harboring zoonotic diseases such as mountain gorillas (Gorilla beringei beringei), black-and-white colobus monkeys (Colobus guereza occidentalis), chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes), vervet monkeys (Chlorocebus aethiops), red-tailed monkeys (Cercopithecus ascanius schmidti), olive baboons (Papio anubis), giant forest hogs (Hylochoerus meinertzhageni), cane rats (Thryonomyidae spp), bush pigs (Potamochoerus larvatus), black-fronted duikers (Cephalophus nigrifrons), and yellow-backed duiker (Cephalophus silvicultor). There are over 90 known bat (Chiropteran) species in Uganda, but new species continue to be identified, several of which are known to be reservoirs of zoonotic illness [ – ]. Ecotourism, including gorilla trekking, is a major attraction in the region, bringing in over 36,000 visitors to the forest annually [ ]. These tourists may not always adhere to the guidelines preventing disease transmission between non-human primates and people [ ].
The Southwestern region of Uganda supports one of the most rapidly growing populations in the country. The average reproductive rate per woman is 6 children although, among the poorest members of the population, it approaches 7.1 [ ]. The combination of an expanding population and limited housing and agricultural land has resulted in encroachment into forests that have been undisturbed for centuries [ ]. Illegal poaching of animals from local forests is not uncommon [ ].
Despite the ever-increasing risk of zoonotic disease, there are studies conducted in other regions of Uganda that demonstrate minimal knowledge about zoonotic diseases and disease transmission [ ]. In Kagadi district, livestock value chain actors had knowledge about zoonotic disease risk whereas their non-technical counterparts knew relatively little [ ]. In several districts in Uganda, knowledge of zoonotic diseases that can be transmitted from humans to animals (zooanthroponosis) is limited to diseases where there has been deliberate sensitization because of prior outbreaks or conservation efforts to limit transmission [ , ]. Using a mixed methods approach, the goal of this study was to better understand communities’ contacts with wild and domestic animals and their knowledge of potential disease risks associated with these interactions.

## Methodology

## Ethics statement
Ethics clearance was obtained through UC Davis Institutional Review Board (#1614696–2), the Mbarara University of Science and Technology Institutional Review Board (#07/02–21) and the Uganda National Council of Science and Technology (UNCST) number HS1772ES. All participations were voluntary. Individuals were read an informed consent script and consent were documented by thumbprint or signature. For children, assent to participate in the study was obtained from parents followed by consent from the child was obtained. Written informed consent was obtained from every participant.

## Mixed methods approach
Given the complex and under-researched nature of zoonotic disease spread in these communities, policy makers and planners require a definable and culturally relevant understanding of key factors that contribute to outbreaks. The mixed methods approach utilized in this study is aimed at exploring factors involved in zoonotic disease spread and then beginning the process of quantifying the extent of these drivers within the local community. Combined, this data can help develop a richer understanding of the local context alongside the breadth of potential opportunities for future research, education, and/or intervention.

## Study area and context
From November 2021 to August 2022, we studied rural and urban settings in Southwestern Uganda in the Kigezi region. Based on the 2024 housing census, more than 1.7 million people reside in this region [ ]. Kabale was chosen for the urban setting as it is a region of high human density and the closest urban center to the BINP. Three districts including Kisoro, Kanungu, and Rubanda districts were chosen for the rural setting because they border the BINP, a prominent ecotourism site. The urban and rural sites were approximately 50 miles apart, allowing for strong ecological comparisons. BINP is a UNESCO World Heritage Site that is home to a very biodiverse fauna including several species of non-human primates (NHPs) bats, birds, and small mammals [ ]. Ecotourism, encroaching of farming practices, and illegal hunting create multiple avenues for contact with wild animals and risk for zoonotic spillover.

## Participants and sampling strategy
Snowball sampling utilizing local networks was selected as it was anticipated to be the most effective method of gathering potential participants in the targeted groups and was consistent with local cultural practices. Accordingly, community members participating in the focus group discussions (FGD) were recruited through local administrators, Community Health Workers (CHWs), and elders. Participants who lived within the selected study sites (Kabale, Kisoro, Kanungu, and Rubanda, see ), and who were 18 years old or greater and had resided in the community for at least five years were assumed to have adequate knowledge about their community and therefore eligible to participate. Individuals with direct or indirect wildlife contact were preferentially targeted for participation in the study. FGDs were conducted as only male, only female, or mixed gender (in the case of CHWs and Health workers). Each group was composed of six to seven participants. The interviews lasted between 60–120 minutes. Interviews were conducted in a quiet setting that was identified by the FGD members in each community.
 

## Data collection
FGDs were conducted as only male, only female, or mixed gender (in the case of CHWs and Health workers). Each group was composed of six to seven participants. The interviews lasted between 60–120 minutes. Interviews were conducted in a quiet setting that was identified by the FGD members in each community. A total of 24 focus groups with 153 participants from rural and urban communities were conducted ( ).
 Socio-demographic data collected from each participant included age, gender, occupation, level of education and whether participant was a resident of a rural or urban community. Education was categorized into three levels: (i) Primary education, which encompasses the first seven years of schooling; (ii) Secondary education, which follows primary education and spans six years, divided into two stages Ordinary level (four years) and Advanced level (two years); and (iii) Tertiary education, which begins after the completion of secondary education. No participants withdrew during the course of the study. Final study size was driven by data saturation around key study themes.
The interviews were conducted by trained research assistants who were native speakers of Rukiga and Rufumbira (HN, MC, AI, PK, and NF). The study team was composed of several local and international collaborators with experience in qualitative research. The local collaborators (NH, BM, GM, BS, CG, CA, NF) were native to the community and fluent in the local language. Several collaborators, were largely based outside of Uganda but had familiarity with the setting (TS, CKJ, JJ, ER, MW, NG), had been living for several years in the local community (JL) or had lived locally for several decades and spoke Rukiga fluently (SK).

## Data analysis

## Qualitative data analysis.
Audio recordings were transcribed directly from the local language to English by an independent translator who had no involvement in the data collection process. All transcribed text was analyzed using thematic analysis independently by four researchers (HN, JJ, JL and SK) using NVivo 12 software (Nvivo, Inc). First, these researchers to developed codes and concepts within the text based on topics discussed by participants. Next, they tied together conceptually related codes to generate themes and sub-themes such as medical treatments or disease symptoms. Finally, these were tied together into the final concepts related to topics such as the perceptions and local understanding of the meanings of zoonoses. Data analysts used an iterative approach involving written, verbal, and other analytic techniques methods to refine each piece of the analysis in arriving at the final themes, sub-themes, and codes used in the codebook and subsequent outcomes.

## Quantitative data analysis.
A data set used for quantitative analysis was generated using the themes, sub-themes, and codes from the codebook. We counted the number of times pre-defined subthemes were mentioned across all interviews. A frequency table showing the prevalence of each subtheme across the dataset was generated. Scoring and ranking data obtained from the focus group discussions were analyzed using descriptive and non-parametric statistical methods. Associations between zoonotic and anthropozoonotic understanding and demographic and geographic variables were initially evaluated by the 2-sided Fisher exact test or the χ2 test as appropriate, and associations were measured by odds ratios (ORs). Multivariable logistic regression was then used to assess the association of factors with zoonotic understanding for variables that were significant on bivariate analysis (P < 0.1). Variables were included if they significantly improved model fit, based on the likelihood ratio test (P < 0.1), while minimizing the Akaike information criterion (AIC). Overall model fit was assessed using the Hosmer-Lemeshow goodness-of-fit test.

## Results

## Socio-demographic characteristics of study participants
A total of 153 participants joined the discussions. By occupation, 50.3% of participants were farmers, 68.6% were aged 35 years and above while31.4% were aged under-35 years. 96.1% of the participants were from the Bakiga tribe the dominant tribe in southwestern Uganda, 54.9% were female while 45.1% were male. In this region, crop growing at subsistence level is practiced by over 95% of the households and mixed with some livestock (chickens, goats, sheep, cattle). Large scale livestock farming is uncommon in the region because people live on small pieces of land due to high population density of the region. Forty percent of the participants had attended primary levels of education ( ).

## Perception of animal to human disease spread
153 participants from multiple communities, age groups, occupations, and education levels participated in the study ( ) and contributed to the overall study themes and sub-themes ( ). There was generally a lack of awareness regarding animal to human disease transmission ( ). Only 61 of 153 (33%) participants were aware that animals could transmit diseases to humans. People from rural settings were 3.53 times more likely to be aware that animals can transmit diseases to humans (OR = 3.53, p = 0.017, CI: 1.19 – 12.65). The most commonly reported perceived mode of transmission of zoonotic pathogens was through animal products (24.5%), followed by contact with animals such as cane rats, mice, baboons among others (16.4%), and domestic animals (11.5%) ( ). The most mentioned diseases, known to be transmitted zoonotically were brucellosis, malaria, plague, rabies, jiggers, diarrhea, and Ebola. Participants believed that there was an increased risk of transmission of diseases where there was sharing of resources such as food, a water source or living environment. In most of these rural communities, animals are raised on free range and it’s not uncommon for domesticated animals such as pigs to share food or contaminate food meant to be consumed by animals as they scavenge for food on their own. At the same time, domesticated animals are rarely seen as a source of infections to humans since people have lived with them for many generations and thus their perceived risk of zoonotic transmission is low.
 
“Diseases that animals transmit to people, is where you find someone eating food which a pig had also eaten, there you suffer from diarrhea” (FGD Men, Ruhija).

Rats were thought to host multiple diseases (n = 3 mentions) that could be transmitted to humans and bats (n = 5 mentions) were alleged to deposit diseases on whatever surfaces they encountered. For the forested communities, rats constantly move in between the forest and the homes at the forest edge. In both urban and rural communities however, the perceived risk of disease transmission from rats to humans was low. For example, food could not be thrown away just because it had chew marks from rats. Instead, what would be done was that a piece that had chew marks would be cut off and the food (such as sweet potatoes, cassava, and fruits like bananas) would be consumed without additional measures to disinfect the food. We did not get a mention of instances where food would be completely thrown away in the discussions conducted.
Further, meat is highly prized and limited, particularly since hunting is prohibited in the BINP. We assessed how community members dealt with products from apparently sick (i.e., presenting with obvious clinical signs of a known or unknown infection such as irregular eating habits, sudden weight loss, vomiting, unusual stool, and lethargy) domesticated animals. These animals included domestic livestock, such as goats, cows, swine, and poultry. Most participants (n = 34 mentions) in both rural and urban settings reported even if they knew that the meat was from a diseased animal it would be eaten.
Some participants reported that a sick animal would either be treated by the participant using local herbs or by simply buying medicine from the veterinary shops without a prescription or taken to a veterinary practitioner. If there was no hope of recovery, the animal would be sold quickly to a butcher at a reduced price before the clinical signs became obvious. There were reports where veterinary doctors and local leaders were bribed to allow meat from diseased animals to be sold.
“They bribe (the Local Council) chairmen and the veterinary doctor so they can slaughter a sick animal to change the narrative; a cow which died because it was sick is pronounced to have been killed by a rope”, (Men, Kabale City).
In some instances, meat from diseased animals killed would be sold alongside or even mixed in with meats from freshly killed healthy animals.

“Sometimes they slaughter the meat of the sick one and mix it with the healthy one”, (VHTs Mpungu).

Other reasons given for the consumption of potentially diseased meat included extreme hunger due to poverty and potential economic loss.
“People eat the meat because of poverty”, (VHTs Southern division).
Even when the owner was willing to bury, there were those who would still ask for dead animals to consume them …. “A friend of ours lost very many chickens and when someone found him burying them, he asked him if he can take one. With caution, he gave one to him and told him not to mention they came from him; because he wouldn’t have personally given away a dead chicken”, (FGD Men, Southern sector).

Illustration by Eunah Preston, UC Davis, One Health Institute and used with permission. This figure is published under the CC BY 4.0 license.

 summarizes community knowledge about transmission from most mentioned to least mentioned (left to right). The following specific transmission pathways were described by at least one FGD: brucellosis was known to be transmitted through the consumption of animal products such as meat and milk; Ebola through contact with primate bodily fluids; rabies through the bite of an infected dog; tuberculosis through breathing the same air as an infected cow; diarrheal diseases through contaminated water; malaria through the bite of a mosquito. Mosquitoes were largely not perceived to transmit zoonotic illnesses although many participants were aware that they transmitted malaria.
 Results from our multivariable model (see ) showed that participants from rural areas were significantly more likely to be aware of zoonotic disease transmission compared to participants who were from urban areas (OR = 3.98; P = 0.01). Participants who were greater than 35 years of age were also significantly less likely to have zoonotic disease awareness compared to those who were younger (OR = 0.4; P = 0.02). Participants who were trained as health-care workers (CHWs and professional healthcare givers) were significantly more likely to have zoonotic disease awareness (OR = 7.24; P = 0.02) compared to other occupations.
 

## High-risk contacts with animals
Participants mentioned that there was significant human contact with both wild and domestic animals in rural and urban locations ( ) even as participants from these groups varied in their awareness of these contacts ( ). Most wildlife contact occurred as participants were attempting to eliminate marauding animals (n = 16 mentions) in both domestic settings and in the farming areas at the forest edge. Wild animals (e.g., rodents, bats and non-human primates) were eliminated via poisoning of trapping (using rodent traps and cages for non-human primates) and then killing. Carcasses were handled with bare hands in most cases and in some instances (n = 15 mentions), polythene/pieces of paper (n = 5 mentions), leaves/stick (n = 6 mentions) or farm tools (n = 2 mentions) were used to avoid direct contact in the case of rodents and bats. There is recognition that disposal of animal remains requires contact with animals that can expose people to diseases.
“Another way people get in contact with animals is when we build traps…. once the animal falls in the trap, they can’t leave it there, it is the responsibility of the people to remove it so that it doesn’t stay and smell or cause other troubles, they decide to dispose of it” (FGD Women, Karangara).
Although these animals are known to harbor a wide range of pathogens, infection control and prevention were minimally observed while handling carcasses.
“We use our hands to unset the trap and to pick the dead animals” (FGD Women, Butobere).

“Some people even carry dead corpses of some animals on their backs”, (FGD Men, Katojo)

Only in a few instances was infection control considered. The main methods used to clean rodent traps were washing with soap (n = 2 mentions) or pouring hot ash on the traps (n = 1 mention). Unintentional contact (n = 15 mentions) occurred when both domestic and wild animals, such as cats, dogs, and snakes, entered dwelling places. Occasionally domestic animals entered the beds of sleeping occupants or ate some of their food which was left uncovered and contaminated it.
“For cats, sometimes you find it sleeping with you in the blanket, then you touch it” (FGD Female, Kabale City).
Unintentional contact also occurred at the forest edges.
“Mostly we that neighbor the park, we have the monkeys which are very common and usually come to where we graze our goats, so sometimes these monkeys leave their hairs with our goats when they get in contact with them, and we definitely get into contact with their hairs” (FGD Male, Nyamishamba).

## Human to animal disease spread
Participants were also minimally aware of the human-to-animal transmission of diseases (n = 26/153), representing only 17% of all study participants. Diseases that were reported to transmit from humans to animals, in descending order, included respiratory, diarrhea, helminths, Ebola, fever/skin rash, and measles. The most commonly mentioned mode of transmission was open defecation.

“If you defecate in an open space and an animal eats the fecal material, it can get sick ….” (FGD Women, Nkuringo).

Animals that were believed to be at the highest risk of human-to-animal transmission were mountain gorillas and monkeys. Transmission knowledge was skewed toward transmission to gorillas (n = 12/26). Some participants in the focus group noted that mountain gorillas are at risk of contracting respiratory infections (e.g., influenza, cough, SARS-CoV-2) from infectious humans.
“…. animals also get infections from us, because (the Uganda Wildlife Authority) taught us that also the gorilla can suffer from flu with a nasal discharge. You find it isolating itself from the members of the family, moving more slowly, and raising the hair on its skin in that way it is also sick and mostly infected from a human.” (FGD, Ruhija, Men).
Diarrheal diseases were also thought to be transmitted from people to non-human primates, such as mountain gorillas, monkeys, and chimpanzees, through inappropriate sewage disposal. Fecal matter was mentioned as a transmission mechanism through which intestinal parasites could be spread to non-human primates, especially if the human fecal matter was left unburied or improperly disposed. This was noted to occur around homes near the park edge or within the park as people transverse through the forest.
“For example, those gorillas, when someone defecates near the road, it will come touching everywhere, then ends up eating it in the grass, resulting in it suffering from worms, that is another way they get infections from people.” (FGD Men, Ruhija).

## Reporting disease outbreaks
We assessed participants’ willingness to report diseases in humans and animals. A small proportion of the respondents (n = 28/153) were aware of where to report disease outbreaks. When inclined, respondents reported a disease outbreak to a CHW (n = 12/28), a local health facility (n = 8/28), and, in some instances, to local leaders (n = 5/28).
The choice of where to report was predicated on the assistance that they hoped to receive, the venue most available to them, and the perceived infectiousness of the disease.
“In case there was an outbreak of such a disease, they first inform the Village Health Teams (VHT’s). The VHT’s have numbers of hospitals and responsible people and look for a car” (FGD, Women Karangara).
Common reasons for not reporting were not knowing where and whom to contact.
“It is unlikely for a rural person to report any case because first of all, they don’t know there is someone they can report to, instead of the health care system they go to the local government system, to local leaders, or call the police…...” (FGD Health Workers, Bwindi).

## Discussion
Emerging infectious diseases with pandemic potential threaten both human and animal health. Despite Uganda’s frequency of outbreaks of zoonotic diseases, rich biodiversity in conserved parks, rapid population growth and human encroachment into forests (1), the level of awareness amongst participants in this study was low.
Our research augments previous studies into communities’ views of zoonotic diseases in East Africa demonstrating a general lack of awareness of zoonotic disease transmission. We found that only 1/3 of the respondents were aware of zoonotic diseases. A Tanzanian study found differences in understanding of zoonotic diseases among pastoralists from different parts of the country with differing educational efforts [ ]. A study among actors in the livestock trade in the Lake Victoria crescent ecosystem in East Africa found that although there was awareness of livestock diseases, there was a lack of awareness of which diseases could be transmitted from livestock to humans. There were also many misconceptions regarding the origins of zoonotic diseases and methods of disease spread [ ]. A study in high-risk districts of Western Uganda for Ebola outbreaks found that only 30% of the respondents described knowing that Ebola could be transmitted from animals [ ]. Other studies have also reported misconceptions about the source of zoonotic infections including the spiritual, airborne, and mosquito transmission of hemorrhagic fevers. Providing education in this regard would reap great rewards in local citizens’ understanding of the diseases that commonly circulate [ ].
Our finding that rural residents had a greater understanding of zoonotic disease spread, disagrees with research in other regions which indicated that people in rural areas were either equal or less likely to understand zoonotic risks from wildlife, despite there being more contact with wildlife compared to urban areas. A study in Eastern Ethiopia found that the associations between the respondents’ residence and knowledge of zoonotic Anthrax, rabies, and brucellosis were not significantly different [ ]. The difference in awareness between rural and urban communities in our study can be partially explained by the presence of sustained community education programs aimed at preventing disease transmission from humans to wildlife such as the endangered mountain gorilla in BINP. Comparatively, there are no conservation areas in the Kabale urban setting. Education programs have been ongoing in communities around BINP about the risks of transmitting human diseases to mountain gorillas after several studies reported that humans were the source of zoonotic diseases such as scabies and intestinal helminths in the mountain gorillas (Gorilla beringei beringei) [ – ]. Surprisingly, we noted that sick or dead animals were not handled in a sanitary manner and were frequently consumed. This practice increases the risk of zoonotic transmission and spillover. Meat from sick animals has been consumed for many generations in these traditionally agricultural-hunter-gatherer communities. With closure of the open hunting around the national parks, meat became very expensive and therefore left for those more affluent. At the same time, meat consumption is deep-rooted within the culture and part of the most desirable components of the diet of the communities in the two sites. Dead animals provide opportunity for very cheap meat for those who couldn’t otherwise afford it. In other parts of Uganda, there have been reports of Anthrax among people knowingly consuming meat from a sick animal [ ]. Good knowledge about anthrax among residents of a repeatedly-affected community did not translate to safe practices [ , ]. Consumption of meet from sick animals is widespread in Africa with similar findings noted in Kenya where 60% of the participants had consumed meat from a sick animal [ ] and Zambia, where people were aware that consuming beef from an infected cow would transmit Anthrax, but would continue to consume the meat. [ ]. Respondents in our study noted that even if they were aware an animal may have carried a disease, it would still often be consumed either in the household where it died or, after negotiations with brokers, sold at local markets alongside regular meat. These findings underscore the complexity of imparting effective behavior change amidst competing socio-economic drivers. People in our study communities and many others throughout sub-Saharan Africa place greater value on meat consumption despite any perceived risks associated with contracting zoonotic infectious diseases.
It was interesting to note that although very few of the participants were aware of human-to-animal transmission of disease, the rural areas were more cognizant than urban populations. Further research is needed to investigate the drivers of this knowledge gap as it was beyond the scope of this study. In addition, most study participants were from the Bakiga tribe and no people of Batwa ethnicity chose to participate. This may have been due to existing segregations between the two ethnic groups and Batwa feeling less comfortable participating. Further research is needed to understand the differences in awareness of zoonoses between these two tribes especially given the Batwa’s historic residence within the local forest. Both park personnel and the general public were more aware of human-to-mountain gorilla transmission of illnesses compared to other wildlife suggesting a potential educational impact of recent campaigns on local knowledge of zoonotic disease although further investigation is needed particularly to understand if this outreach has led to changes in key outcomes such as high-risk contacts or disease spread and whether these results are replicable in other key groups [ ].
Both quantitative and qualitative results of this study offer clues into potential local drivers of zoonotic spread in the region. Considering local and regional One Health strategies, results from this study can inform Uganda’s One Health strategy but also be incorporated into existing education efforts such as the World Organization for Animal Health’s ongoing education programs for community animal health workers or other regional efforts such as ZOOSURSY [ ]. The complex interplay between drivers of behaviors further supports the need in this community for the co-designed, contextually relevant interventions.
While providing a useful starting point for future study and interventions, this study had several limitations. One key limitation was that having used the Snowball sampling approach to recruit participants, there is a likelihood that participants might have identified those with similar characteristics, attitudes, or experiences. Similarly, while we attempted to quantify beliefs and attitudes amongst these important informants, the data collected only reflect those sampled within the context of the study limiting their generalizability to the wider population.

## Conclusions
This study provides a detailed analysis of residents near the Bwindi Impenetrable Forest regarding their perception of zoonotic spread of disease. Our findings indicate that only one-third of those surveyed were aware of the potential of animal to human transmission of disease. Surprisingly, those residing in rural areas were more knowledgeable than those in urban settings. Our study also indicated that participants rarely properly disposed of sick animals and that these animals were commonly consumed. Importantly, it was unlikely that dead or diseased animals were properly reported to appropriate authorities. Based on our findings, policy makers and government entities should prioritize education regarding disease spread between humans and animals, prevention of known potential spillover events like consumption of diseased meat or contact with wild animals, and research into the drivers, including poverty and wildlife encroachment, of these high-risk activities.
While providing knowledge and guidance is essential, without an approach that considers context, competing motivations, and structural/cultural barriers, behavior change is difficult to attain. Although on a purely intellectual level, providing vital information seemingly would create opportunities for improvement; however, sustainable behavioral change requires a more integrated approach. This approach needs to consider the complexities of deeply ingrained patterns. Human behavior is complex, particularly when the cause of dysfunction is abject poverty. Behavior is shaped by context. It is abundantly apparent that social, cultural and particularly economic factors take precedence over health goals. Consequently, we have found the necessity of shifting our messaging to a participant-focused approach. As Ugandan as well as most of African culture is relationship based, without acknowledging critical relationships, positively impacting behavioral change is nearly impossible. One of the ways we propose is to expand the one health workforces in communities at the greatest risk of zoonotic spillover. In Uganda and most of Africa, lay Community Health Workers (also called Village health teams (VHTs) in Uganda) play an important role in providing education to communities. Adding training about zoonoses to their curriculum would increase their ability to provide education to the communities within which they live to identify, report and respond to. Around the Bwindi Impenetrable National Park and Kabale city, there are over 1000 VHTs, each responsible for 20–25 households and play a role as eyes, ears and feet on the ground for community health care engagement. The training of VHTs can be expanded to include zoonotic aspects in their curriculum on disease prevention, reporting of animal and human outbreaks and dissemination of health information in a culturally sensitive manner. Around the Bwindi and Kabale communities the VHTs are valued purveyors of medical information for the isolated villages in our region giving us feedback and advice regarding the success of our interventions. It is our impression that this method of engagement and information sharing will engender a more robust behavioral change but more research is needed to further define the value of this approach.
Population increases and animal habitat degradation in Uganda and other parts of the world will continue to increase human contact with zoonotic infections, making zoonoses education campaigns and other culturally relevant interventions well worth the investment.

## Supporting information
S1 Table

## Factors associated with awareness of zoonotic transmission in rural and urban populations.
(XLS)
S2 Table

## Demographic factors associated with overall zoonotic disease awareness based on final multivariable analysis.
(XLSX)
S1 Text

## English focus discussion guide.
(DOCX)

We also thank Bwindi Community Hospital, Gorilla Doctors (Mountain Gorilla Veterinary Project, Inc.), Rugarama Hospital, Uganda Wildlife Authority, and the District Health Office of Kabale and Kanungu for their support towards the research project.
 10.1371/journal.pntd.0013701.r001Decision Letter 0
BrookesVictoria J.Academic EditorMshelbwalaPhilip P.Academic Editor© 2025 Brookes, Mshelbwala2025Brookes, Mshelbwalahttps://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.Submission Version0
5 Feb 2025

PNTD-D-24-01469
Assessment of exposure to zoonoses and perceptions of zoonotic transmission surrounding the Bwindi Impenetrable Forest, Uganda
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
Dear Dr. Haven,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases's publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript within 60 days Apr 06 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosntds@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pntd/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
* A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'. This file does not need to include responses to any formatting updates and technical items listed in the 'Journal Requirements' section below.
* A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
* An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, competing interests statement, or data availability statement, please make these updates within the submission form at the time of resubmission. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Philip Mshelbwala
Academic Editor
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
Victoria Brookes
Section Editor
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
Shaden Kamhawi
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
orcid.org/0000-0003-4304-636XX
Paul Brindley
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
orcid.org/0000-0003-1765-0002

Journal Requirements:

1) Please ensure that the CRediT author contributions listed for every co-author are completed accurately and in full.
At this stage, the following Authors/Authors require contributions: Scott Kellermann, and Tierra S. Evans. Please ensure that the full contributions of each author are acknowledged in the "Add/Edit/Remove Authors" section of our submission form.
The list of CRediT author contributions may be found here: https://journals.plos.org/plosntds/s/authorship#loc-author-contributions
2) Tables should not be uploaded as individual files. Please remove these files and include the Tables in your manuscript file as editable, cell-based objects. For more information about how to format tables, see our guidelines:

https://journals.plos.org/plosntds/s/tables

3) Some material included in your submission may be copyrighted. According to PLOSu2019s copyright policy, authors who use figures or other material (e.g., graphics, clipart, maps) from another author or copyright holder must demonstrate or obtain permission to publish this material under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) License used by PLOS journals. Please closely review the details of PLOSu2019s copyright requirements here: PLOS Licenses and Copyright. If you need to request permissions from a copyright holder, you may use PLOS's Copyright Content Permission form.
Please respond directly to this email and provide any known details concerning your material's license terms and permissions required for reuse, even if you have not yet obtained copyright permissions or are unsure of your material's copyright compatibility. Once you have responded and addressed all other outstanding technical requirements, you may resubmit your manuscript within Editorial Manager.
Potential Copyright Issues:
- Figure 2; Please confirm whether you drew the images / clip-art within the figure panels by hand. If you did not draw the images, please provide a link to the source of the images or icons and their license / terms of use; or written permission from the copyright holder to publish the images or icons under our CC BY 4.0 license. Alternatively, you may replace the images with open source alternatives. See these open source resources you may use to replace images / clip-art:
- https://commons.wikimedia.org
- https://openclipart.org/.
- Figure 1; Please provide a direct link to the base layer of the map (i.e., the country or region border shape) and ensure this is also included in the figure legend; and provide a link to the terms of use / license information for the base layer image or shapefile. We cannot publish proprietary or copyrighted maps (e.g. Google Maps, Mapquest) and the terms of use for your map base layer must be compatible with our CC BY 4.0 license.
Note: if you created the map in a software program like R or ArcGIS, please locate and indicate the source of the basemap shapefile onto which data has been plotted.
If your map was obtained from a copyrighted source please amend the figure so that the base map used is from an openly available source. Alternatively, please provide explicit written permission from the copyright holder granting you the right to publish the material under our CC BY 4.0 license.
If you are unsure whether you can use a map or not, please do reach out and we will be able to help you. The following websites are good examples of where you can source open access or public domain maps:
* U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) - All maps are in the public domain. (http://www.usgs.gov)
* PlaniGlobe - All maps are published under a Creative Commons license so please cite u201cPlaniGlobe, http://www.planiglobe.com, CC BY 2.0u201d in the image credit after the caption. (http://www.planiglobe.com/?lang=enl)
* Natural Earth - All maps are public domain. (http://www.naturalearthdata.com/about/terms-of-use/).
4) We note that your Data Availability Statement is currently as follows: "Data has been made available". Please confirm at this time whether or not your submission contains all raw data required to replicate the results of your study. Authors must share the “minimal data set” for their submission. PLOS defines the minimal data set to consist of the data required to replicate all study findings reported in the article, as well as related metadata and methods (https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-minimal-data-set-definition).
For example, authors should submit the following data:
- The values behind the means, standard deviations and other measures reported;
- The values used to build graphs;
- The points extracted from images for analysis..
Authors do not need to submit their entire data set if only a portion of the data was used in the reported study.
If your submission does not contain these data, please either upload them as Supporting Information files or deposit them to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. For a list of recommended repositories, please see https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/recommended-repositories.
If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially sensitive information, data are owned by a third-party organization, etc.) and who has imposed them (e.g., an ethics committee). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent. If data are owned by a third party, please indicate how others may request data access.
5) Please amend your detailed Financial Disclosure statement. This is published with the article. It must therefore be completed in full sentences and contain the exact wording you wish to be published.
- State the initials, alongside each funding source, of each author to receive each grant. For example: "This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health (####### to AM; ###### to CJ) and the National Science Foundation (###### to AM)."
- State what role the funders took in the study. If the funders had no role in your study, please state: "The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.".
If you did not receive any funding for this study, please simply state: u201cThe authors received no specific funding for this work.u201d

Reviewers' Comments:

Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Key Review Criteria Required for Acceptance?

As you describe the new analyses required for acceptance, please consider the following:

Methods:

-Are the objectives of the study clearly articulated with a clear testable hypothesis stated?
-Is the study design appropriate to address the stated objectives?
-Is the population clearly described and appropriate for the hypothesis being tested?
-Is the sample size sufficient to ensure adequate power to address the hypothesis being tested?
-Were correct statistical analysis used to support conclusions?
-Are there concerns about ethical or regulatory requirements being met?
Reviewer #1: This is a mixed-methods study - but at least for the qualitative aspects, the authors could consider referring to the Standards for Reporting Qualitative Research (SRQR), available at http://www.equator-network.org/reporting-guidelines/srqr/. There are some aspects of the methodology which to me are unclear and would benefit from more structure. For example:
- Rather than a section titled “Focus group discussion”, I would expect rather to have sections titled “Data collection” where the method of data collection is provided, “Participants”, where information on the choice of participants and sampling strategy is provided, and “Researcher characteristics”, describing the characteristics of the researchers (their experience in qualitative research, language, prior relationship with participants (if at all), positioning in relation to participants (e.g. outsider or insider) – as this information has implications for the interpretation of the results. Please see the SRQR for further details.
- The abstract mentions a three-stage coding framework and the use of grounded theory – but there is no mention of this at all in the methodology section. In fact, aside from the abstract, there is no indication at all of what methodological approach was used to analyse the qualitative data. If grounded theory was used, this appears to me a bit counterintuitive, as the themes appear to have been defined almost in advance and in relation to the research topic of interest – this is a perfectly valid way of doing it, but does not really seem compatible with a grounded theory approach (which would involve the researchers’ identifying or generating the themes from the data itself). Some additional explanation and clarity on this would be appreciated. I would recommend including a paragraph on “Qualitative approach” where this could be described.
Reviewer #2: The study ethics was cleared through international university review board and the in-country review board and national Council of Science and Technology and participants were read an informed consent information and signed off. There was no mention of participants withdrawing from the study.
The goal of the study was to better understand communities (rural and urban) contacts with wild and domestic animals and their knowledge of potential disease risks associated with these interactions. The reviewer recommends the authors state in the aim/goal that the study was conducted near the Bwindi Impenetrable Forest in Uganda a known hotspot for zoonotic pathogen spillover. The review suggests awareness be added to the study goal given table 2 of the results is about awareness of animal associated transmission risk factors and specific zoonotic diseases.
In the study (total number of participants = 153) qualitative methods of focus group discussions using a questionnaire interview guide were used. In the Rural focus groups, there were 90 people split into groups of 6-7 people across three rural districts of Kisoro, Kanungu and Rubanda. The group size for each focus group was appropriate but referring to table 1 there appears to be only two livestock farmers one from urban group and one from rural Kanungu. Table 1 should describe if agriculture/farming have livestock, what type of livestock or are hunters (what they hunt)? More description about participants contact with animals or ownership of animals is required. Also were any participants involved as guides for ecotourism associated with non-human primates etc? The reviewer did not have access to supplementary material Appendix 1 therefore could not review the interview guide.
The urban FGD included 63 people (live in Kabale City) about 50 miles away from the rural districts. There were 30 percent fewer urban participants in FGD than in rural groups. The two comparison groups urban or rural should have approximately the same number of participants given the study is assessing the odds (probability) of a zoonosis or zooanthroponosis knowledge and transmission pathways between different geographic locations (rural and urban) and exposure to animals/humans or animal products.
More information is needed about how the community members were recruited through local administration, community health workers and elders. The only inclusion criteria mentioned were being 18 years old or greater in age and residing in the community for at least five years to have adaptive knowledge. The CHW may have been biased in their selection choosing participants who had contacted a zoonotic disease. Was the sampling convenience or purposive sampling?
The main tribal group in the study were the Bakiga people therefore it is not possible to compare between Bafumbira and Bakiga people. It is noted that the Bantu people are the original forest dwellers and were not included in the focus groups. This tribe were hunter and gatherers and were evicted from the BINP in 1991 when the park was formed. The authors should discuss why one tribe mainly participated in the study and how they could have engaged other tribes in the study to have a better representation of the communities in this area. The socio-economic situation of the communities could also be described given those bordering Bwindi are the poorest in the region and have limited household income alternatives (Bitariho et al Conservation Science and Practice. 2022;4:e12761).
Was the interview guide (questionnaire) pretested with a few urban and rural people (representative of survey participants) to check the questions were clear and not ambiguous and culturally/gender appropriate? https://www.fao.org/4/w3241e/w3241e05.htm? Pretesting (piloting) of interview guides is recommended and best practice for studies.
The statistical analysis in the mixed methods descriptive study were appropriate though the confidence intervals for the odds ratios are required. Having an independent translator (not involved in data collection) transcribe the audio recordings to English reduced information bias that may occur if study FGD interviewers undertook this transcription. Additionally, the reviewer acknowledges study efforts to remove interpretation bias by having three researchers involved in the creation of themes and sub-themes related to perceptions and local understanding of the meaning of zoonosis.
Multivariable logistic regression was used to measure associations of risk factors with zoonotic understanding for variables that significantly improved the model fit.
Reviewer #3: The methods overall are well-described and appropriate. A few minor comments:
- Lines 128-129: please state if informed consents of illiterate participants were witnessed by an independent witness. If not, please confirm that the consenting procedure was approved as such by the local and national Ugandan ethics committees.
- Lines 152-155: please provide more information regarding how participants were recruited and selected for the focus groups. Was there an attempt to ensure the groups were representative of the local population (e.g., in terms of age, socioeconomic status, education, etc.)? Were residents selected at random to participate?
- Line 155: please describe or list the inclusion/exclusion criteria
Results :
-Does the analysis presented match the analysis plan?
-Are the results clearly and completely presented?
-Are the figures (Tables, Images) of sufficient quality for clarity?
Reviewer #1: No major comments, please see my attached comments for more detailed suggestions.
Reviewer #2: The receiver recommends the inclusion of a table showing the main themes and sub-themes that were created from the focus group discussions transcribed text. The perceptions and local understanding of the meaning of zoonoses are provided as examples of the main themes. What was the local understanding of the meaning of zoonoses? Were the specific symptoms of a particular illness in humans associated with symptoms in animals (syndromic framework) or was it associated with case definition and test result? Were photos or drawings used by the interviewer to convey questions?
The figure 2 of community knowledge about transmission of specific zoonotic diseases using pictures to illustrate the animals, vectors and animal products is well presented. In line 240 the reviewer notes a correction is needed to state that “many participants being unaware that they transmitted malaria”.
The table 2 and table 3 need the Odds Ratio 95% confidence intervals to be included as it is important to determine if the OR confidence interval includes the null value OR =1.
Table 2 is described as “factors associated with awareness of animal-to-human pathogen transmission” . The reviewer suggests changing the description to awareness of risk factors for zoonotic transmission and specific diseases. How is overall zoonotic awareness defined and calculated? Given the demographics of the study participants with 68.2 percent of participants in urban Kabale not having an occupation with animal contact, it is not surprising that the rural FGD participants were 3.53 times more likely to be aware that animals can transmit diseases to humans compared to urban participants.
The mode of transmission comment from FGD men, Ruhija (line 221-222) relating to eating food which a pig had also eaten and then suffering from diarrhea would need further investigation and could possibility be associated with transmission pathway for cysticercosis given Taenia solium is prevalent in pigs in many regions of Uganda?
It is interesting to note that bird flu (avian influenza) was mentioned once line 275 (zooanthroponoses) though respiratory diseases were included in table 2 therefore flu could be part of this specific zoonotic disease transmitted category. Another priority zoonosis is anthrax which was only mentioned in the discussion (line 395-396) of the paper associated with transmission from consumption of beef from sick cows. The One Health zoonotic disease prioritization for multisectoral engagement in Uganda (2017) included anthrax, zoonotic influenza viruses, viral haemorrhagic fevers, brucellosis, trypanosomiasis, plague and rabies. The Uganda One Health strategic plan 2018 -2022 had a goal to reduce the burden of prioritised zoonoses and AMR by 50 percent. The authors should discuss how their study may support Uganda to reduce the burden of prioritized zoonoses especially in this hotspot area.
In table 3 the demographic factors of rural, age and healthcare worker, were associated with overall zoonotic disease awareness. This table needs to define the “age” factor. From the OR = 0.40 it could be concluded that older participants are less aware of zoonotic diseases but given the small sample size it is important to include the confidence interval for this odds ratio result. It is logical to make the assumption that health care workers would have a significant greater zoonotic disease awareness given their training than other occupations (agriculture, livestock, farmers). It would be useful to further examine the ten health care workers education background and training.
The results description in lines 264-266 about proportion of participants with awareness of anthroponotic (animal- to- human) transmission mostly residing in rural setting (n=21/26) should be moved to the previous paragraph and it would be useful to know the occupations of these participants.
The transmission knowledge of diseases from humans to animals were skewed toward transmission to gorillas (n=12/26). It is noted that one of the study team is Dr Benard Ssebide from the Gorilla Doctors and had been involved with the wildlife authority. It would be useful to review the interview guide to better understand the questions associated with zooanthroponosis knowledge and conduct further studies to evaluate the Uganda Wildlife Authority training for Park personnel and general public (noted in last paragraph of discussion). Did all 12 participants who knew about this risk transmission pathway from humans to gorilla’s undertake this training in the past and were most in the FGD men from Ruhija?
The study results about contact with animals is well presented and an important finding in this study. The sentence in line 298-299 requires changing to read more clearly and could be “There is recognition that disposal of animal remains requires contact with animals that can expose people to diseases”. It is important to note that although some participants knew the animals could be infected with pathogens, they did not carry out appropriate infection prevention and biosecurity practices while handling carcasses. It would be useful to know if higher risk of zoonotic contact with animals was associated with gender? Is it mainly women who unset the animal traps? Gender was not found to be a demographic risk factor with overall zoonotic disease awareness as not included in table 3 results.
The study results on contact with meat from sick and dead animals are important findings. The statement that “people eat the meat because of poverty” by village health teams of southern division demonstrates the need to understand the drivers of behaviour and addressing the root causes of risk taking. A One Health approach is needed to support community health through improving livestock and wildlife health. Training of Community animal health workers (CAHW’s) is needed and the World Organisation for Animal Health WOAH (formally OIE) has recently launched competency and curriculum guidelines for community animal health workers which should be referenced. https://www.woah.org/app/uploads/2024/09/woah-competency-and-curriculum-guidelines-for-cahws-071024.pdf. Additionally, the WOAH and African Union commenced a project called ZOOSURSY to further build One Health collaborations for disease surveillance of priority emerging and re-emerging zoonotic diseases with implementation of the WOAH Wildlife health framework. The reviewer recommends that outcomes from this small qualitative study may support further research in this zoonosis hotspot area and more widely.
In the reporting of disease outbreaks results the willingness of participants to report diseases in humans and animals was found to be low (n=28/153, 18%) with half of those reporting contacting the community health workers. As there was no mention of community animal health workers or veterinarians for reporting disease occurrence in animals – perhaps participants were more focused on disease outbreaks in humans?
Reviewer #3: Overall, the results are presented in a clear and comprehensive fashion. There are just a few comments:
- Line 218, "diarrheal" should be "diarrhea".
- Table 3: please list the age groups (i.e., <35 yrs, >35 yrs) in the table or table legend. Also, some cells are missing the percentages in parentheses.
- Line 275: "influenza" not "Flue".
- Line 291: the first sentence of this section ("Contact with animals") appears to be missing a word.
- Line 294: a closed parenthesis is missing after "primates".
Conclusions :
-Are the conclusions supported by the data presented?
-Are the limitations of analysis clearly described?
-Do the authors discuss how these data can be helpful to advance our understanding of the topic under study?
-Is public health relevance addressed?
Reviewer #1: My general feeling is that the authors have prioritised their quantitative results over the qualitative results – with the outcome being that the discussion and conclusion focus overly on a “lack of awareness” rather than the reasons for the lack of awareness, and the broader context around managing zoonotic disease risk in the community. This can be seen in the abstract, for example, where only the quantitative findings are mentioned. One of the benefits of using qualitative approaches alongside quantitative is that rather than just saying “awareness was low because XX% were not aware of X” – is that you can also start to think about why that might be the case, and what could be done to address this. The conclusion regarding lack of awareness is supported by the data, but I think there are additional interesting and worthwhile conclusions that could be drawn from the results (for example -the mention of poverty as a driver for activities which put individuals at risk of exposure to potentially infected meat). Situating “lack of awareness” as one of multiple challenges facing these communities would, I feel, give the results more weight and help in drawing some conclusions for how to advance research and action on zoonotic disease management.
My concern really relates to the fact that the only recommendation of this paper is for policy makers and government to prioritise education regarding zoonotic diseases – it would be ideal if the authors could identify other recommendations on the basis of their results and to put these in a broader context.
Additional reflections upon the limitations of the study would be appreciated.
Reviewer #2: In the discussion several statements are missing references to support them – for example line 370 “our research augments previous studies into communities’ views of zoonotic diseases”.
The authors state that misconceptions about the origins of zoonotic diseases and transmission can be overcome through providing education citing a cross-sectional study in DRC following the end of the 2018 Ebola outbreak. The conclusion in this study recommended co-developed culturally sensitive and inclusive community evidence-based programs which compliments early anthropological insights from the West African Ebola epidemic about engaging communities and building trust. (Wilkinson A, Parker M, Martineau F, Leach M. 2017 Engaging ‘communities’: anthropological insights from the West African Ebola epidemic. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 372: 20160305. http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2016.0305).
Increasing community knowledge and awareness alone is unlikely to be sufficient to successfully change human behaviours that drive zoonotic disease risk as described in a scoping review by Anna Durrance-Bagale et al (Drivers of zoonotic disease risk in the Indian subcontinent: A scoping review. One Health 2021. 13:100310). Co-designing context specific interventions using interdisciplinary and participatory methods are needed using One Health approaches. The cited (#31) Mangesho et al 2017 study among pastoralists in northern and eastern Tanzania also supports context specific interventions using One Health approaches taking into consideration social, cultural and economic aspects of communities.
Reviewer #3: In the Discussion, there are a few items that should be addressed:
- Lines 370-371: the sentence beginning, "While we found that only ⅓..." is a fragment.
- Lines 371-373:: pastoralists were compared to what other group(s)? Please clarify.

Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications?

Use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity. If the only modifications needed are minor and/or editorial, you may wish to recommend “Minor Revision” or “Accept”.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: Major revision required. Refer to comments in review.
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
Summary and General Comments :
Use this section to provide overall comments, discuss strengths/weaknesses of the study, novelty, significance, general execution and scholarship. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. If requesting major revision, please articulate the new experiments that are needed.
Reviewer #1: This is an interesting paper on an important topic, and the importance and the context of this topic was well established in the introduction. The strengths of this paper include the focus on a topic of high public health importance and inclusion of a community of direct relevance for the topic, and the broad range of topics included for discussion with the participants. This is already a good paper, but I would like to recommend some few changes which I think could help to improve this paper further. My requests for revision relate principally to the methodology, and the discussion/conclusion.
- I think the methodology could benefit from some additional structure and detail, and my comments on the method I have recommended use of the Standards for Reporting Qualitative Research (SRQR). My main concern relates to the mention of grounded theory in the abstract, which is not mentioned in the methodology – nor is any other approach to the qualitative data. Additional information on this would be needed. Additionally, somewhere in the paper (either in the introduction or the discussion) to understand the rationale behind why a mixed-methods approach was chosen.
- I think the discussion could go further in putting the results in context and in the depth of analysis. For example, when observing that this study and many others have identified a lack of awareness – it may be useful to see if there are similarities which may contribute to the lack of awareness, or to consider the body of research that has suggested that awareness alone is not sufficient to change behaviour. In addition to mentioning papers that have similar findings, it is important that the authors explain what broader conclusions or questions can be drawn from this, and thereby show the relevance of their research for broader contexts.
Reviewer #2: A One Health approach with multi-sectoral and transdisciplinary collaborations, to zoonotic and reverse zoonosis prevention is urgently needed in this area as highlighted in this small semi-structured questionnaire FGD study. Currently strengthening of multisectoral collaboration for Mpox and anthrax prevention is occurring in the Kanungu district due to the location near DRC and cross-border interaction between school children. Training of approximately 200 school managers with IEC materials (posters and flyers) and a collaborative response action plan is centred on child-to-child strategy of empowering learners to share health message with peers, families and communities.
Further validation studies are required to evaluate the reason why some participants had awareness of reverse zoonosis transmission of disease from humans to gorillas. It is not evidence based to state that this reverse zoonosis awareness was due to targeted educational gorilla health programs surrounding BINP. A scoping review of all current educational programs and training relating to zoonosis and reverse zoonosis prevention and One Health practices is needed.
The recommendations need to be re-written in light of the reviewer’s comments. A One Health approach for co-developed culturally sensitive and inclusive community evidence-based programs for health system strengthening across human, animal/wildlife and ecosystem is needed. Additionally continuing to invest in long-term community livelihood projects that support poverty alleviation and improving the health of livestock and wildlife is recommended.
Reviewer #3: Overall, this is an interesting study reporting on the knowledge of rural and urban communities in southwestern Uganda on the possibility of transmission of infectious diseases between wild animals and humans. The manuscript is mostly well written, clear, and concise. Appropriate conclusions and policy recommendations have been made that are backed up by the findings.
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes:  Dr Andrea Britton
Reviewer #3: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]

Figure resubmission:

While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step. If there are other versions of figure files still present in your submission file inventory at resubmission, please replace them with the PACE-processed versions.

Reproducibility:

?>
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Comments_PNTD-D-24-01469.docx
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Review Bwindi impenetrable forest Uganda.docx
10.1371/journal.pntd.0013701.r002Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version1
6 Jun 2025

AttachmentSubmitted filename: PNTD-D-24-01469 Response to Reviewer.docx
10.1371/journal.pntd.0013701.r003Decision Letter 1
BrookesVictoria J.Academic EditorMshelbwalaPhilip P.Academic Editor© 2025 Brookes, Mshelbwala2025Brookes, Mshelbwalahttps://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.Submission Version1
3 Aug 2025

Assessment of exposure to zoonoses and perceptions of zoonotic transmission surrounding the Bwindi Impenetrable Forest, Uganda
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
Dear Dr. Haven,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases's publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript within 60 days Sep 02 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosntds@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pntd/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
* A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'. This file does not need to include responses to any formatting updates and technical items listed in the 'Journal Requirements' section below.
* A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
* An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, competing interests statement, or data availability statement, please make these updates within the submission form at the time of resubmission. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Philip P. Mshelbwala
Academic Editor
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
Victoria Brookes
Section Editor
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
Shaden Kamhawi
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
orcid.org/0000-0003-4304-636XX
Paul Brindley
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
orcid.org/0000-0003-1765-0002

Additional Editor Comments :

Reviewers raised serious methodological concerns regarding the approach used in this study, as well as issues related to previously provided comments that remain unaddressed. We therefore invite the authors to revise their manuscript, taking these concerns into account, and to provide a detailed point-by-point response to all reviewer comments.
For the quantitative component, the authors should clearly describe the data used in the analysis, explain how the outcome variable (zoonotic understanding) was derived, and provide more detail on the analytical methods and results, including how model performance was assessed. I'm not sure what you meant by "while minimizing the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC)." Do you mean that you selected the model with the lowest AIC value?

Journal Requirements:

1) Please ensure that the CRediT author contributions listed for every co-author are completed accurately and in full.
At this stage, the following Authors/Authors require contributions: Scott Kellermann, Evan Andrew Rusoja, Micheal Wilkes, Nicole R Gardner, and Tierra Smiley Evans. Please ensure that the full contributions of each author are acknowledged in the "Add/Edit/Remove Authors" section of our submission form.
The list of CRediT author contributions may be found here: https://journals.plos.org/plosntds/s/authorship#loc-author-contributions
2) We have noticed that you referred to "Supplementary material Appendix 1" on page 5 in your manuscript. However, there is no corresponding file uploaded to the submission. Please upload it as a separate file with the item type 'Supporting Information'. Please add a full list of legends for your Supporting Information files after the references list.
3) Please ensure that the Data Availability Statement mentioned in the manuscript matches the one provided in the online submission form.
Note: If the reviewer comments include a recommendation to cite specific previously published works, please review and evaluate these publications to determine whether they are relevant and should be cited. There is no requirement to cite these works unless the editor has indicated otherwise.

Comments to the Authors:

Please note that one of the reviews is uploaded as an attachment.

Reviewers' Comments:

Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Key Review Criteria Required for Acceptance?

As you describe the new analyses required for acceptance, please consider the following:

Methods

-Are the objectives of the study clearly articulated with a clear testable hypothesis stated?
-Is the study design appropriate to address the stated objectives?
-Is the population clearly described and appropriate for the hypothesis being tested?
-Is the sample size sufficient to ensure adequate power to address the hypothesis being tested?
-Were correct statistical analysis used to support conclusions?
-Are there concerns about ethical or regulatory requirements being met?
Reviewer #1: Please see the attached document
Reviewer #2: The title of the manuscript could be more descriptive of the study. The reviewer suggests a title including “ Study of zoonoses and anthropozoonosis knowledge and perception of transmission activities in rural and urban tribal communities surrounding the Bwindi Impenetrable Forest in Uganda”.
The mixed-methods study methodology section is much clearer. The reviewer acknowledges updates:
•No participants withdraw from the study line
•Inclusion of study being conducted near the Bwindi Impenetrable Forest in Uganda
•Importance of One Health approach in zoonotic disease control
Reviewer #4: Overall the results presented match the goals of the analysis. Here are some few recommendations: I will advise authors to consider some potential limitations of the snowball technique used. Include some limitations of using this sampling method in your discussion. As it is non randomised, what are the potential limitations that would impact your data and results? This was not discussed.
Line 171 - was this selection done before the snowball sampling was done? If after, was sample size sufficient for the investigation? You stated that target population was individuals with direct or indirect contact with wild animals, What were the other group/s excluded and was there a reason? Please make this clear
**********

Results

-Does the analysis presented match the analysis plan?
-Are the results clearly and completely presented?
-Are the figures (Tables, Images) of sufficient quality for clarity?
Reviewer #1: Please see the attached document
Reviewer #2: The aim of the study was to better understand communities contacts with wild and domestic animals and their knowledge of potential disease risks associated with interactions around the Bwindi Impenetrable National Park, a known foci for spillover events.
Knowledge is skills and information which is objective while awareness or perception is interchangeable and is experiences of the observer which helps a person understand better. Knowledge is used when the information is factual like figure 2 summarizes community knowledge about transmission. Awareness is associated with perceptions people have and exhibit.
It is still unclear to the reviewer how overall zoonotic awareness in Table 2 has been calculated.
Reviewer #4: Figure 2- figure captions should be at the bottom.
Table 2- state if this is a univariable analysis. Parenthesis missing in contact with vermins.
Table 3 and line 289, if you want to include age as a factor, I will advise you flip this round and use <35 as associated, and put the OR, instead of >35 which does not show association in the tables.
**********

Conclusions

-Are the conclusions supported by the data presented?
-Are the limitations of analysis clearly described?
-Do the authors discuss how these data can be helpful to advance our understanding of the topic under study?
-Is public health relevance addressed?
Reviewer #1: Please see the attached document
Reviewer #2: The reviewer acknowledges the significantly improved conclusion emphasising the need for One Health strategies at national and international levels.
Reviewer #4: Line 393 – “We found that only 1/3 of the respondents were aware of zoonotic diseases, with rural communities having higher awareness” what do you suggest could explain this? If your data cannot explain this, would you suggest that future research is needed to understand this….?
Line 419- I understand that this maybe beyond the scope of this study, however, it does come up in your MLR that rural has more awareness, you need to provide at least some reasons why you believe this is so and then advice that further research can be done….
Line 448 - It will be good to include any suggestions here on the type of study that will be relevant
**********

Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications?

Use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity. If the only modifications needed are minor and/or editorial, you may wish to recommend “Minor Revision” or “Accept”.
Reviewer #1: Please see the attached document
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Reviewer #4: I have recommended some modifications that I believe will enhance the clarity of this publication. I will recommend minor revisions
**********

Summary and General Comments

Use this section to provide overall comments, discuss strengths/weaknesses of the study, novelty, significance, general execution and scholarship. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. If requesting major revision, please articulate the new experiments that are needed.
Reviewer #1: Please see the attached document
Reviewer #2: The revised manuscript is much improved and most reviewer comments were addressed.
Reviewer #4: Overall, the goals of the study was answered however, I have given a few points that the authors should consider. “the goal of this study was to better understand communities’ contacts with wild and domestic animals and their knowledge of potential disease risks associated with these interactions”. Add if this for policy purposes or for awareness raising somewhere in the discussion.
Some strengths of the research includes that the translation was reviewed by research team who were fluent in the local languages to ensure that meaning of words in the questionnaire was retained.
The methodology used, mixed model was appropriate, and odds ratio including confidence intervals were reported, I have advised risk factors such as decreasing age be reported rather than increasing age which seem like a protective factor.
It is an important piece of research that helps to provide some information on the understanding of zoonoses in the study area. I recommend for publication after revision of the minor corrections.
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes:  Andrea Britton
Reviewer #4: Yes:  Bibiana Zirra Shallangwa
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]

Figure resubmission:

While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step. If there are other versions of figure files still present in your submission file inventory at resubmission, please replace them with the PACE-processed versions.

Reproducibility:

?>
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Comments_PNTD-D-24-01469_R1.docx
10.1371/journal.pntd.0013701.r004Author response to Decision Letter 2
Submission Version2
15 Oct 2025

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Zoonosis PLOS NTD PNTD-D-24-01469_13OCT_Reviewer Response.docx
10.1371/journal.pntd.0013701.r005Decision Letter 2
MshelbwalaPhilip P.Academic Editor© 2025 Philip P. Mshelbwala2025Philip P. Mshelbwalahttps://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.Submission Version2
30 Oct 2025

Dear Mr Haven,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'Assessment of exposure to zoonoses and perceptions of zoonotic transmission surrounding the Bwindi Impenetrable Forest, Uganda' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us now if you or your institution is planning to press release the article. All press must be co-ordinated with PLOS.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases.
Best regards,
Philip P. Mshelbwala
Academic Editor
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
Shaden Kamhawi
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
orcid.org/0000-0003-4304-636XX
Paul Brindley
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
orcid.org/0000-0003-1765-0002
***********************************************************
p.p1 {margin: 0.0px 0.0px 0.0px 0.0px; line-height: 16.0px; font: 14.0px Arial; color: #323333; -webkit-text-stroke: #323333}span.s1 {font-kerning: none
10.1371/journal.pntd.0013701.r006Acceptance letter
MshelbwalaPhilip P.Academic Editor© 2025 Philip P. Mshelbwala2025Philip P. Mshelbwalahttps://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.Dear Mr Haven,
We are delighted to inform you that your manuscript, " 
Assessment of exposure to zoonoses and perceptions of zoonotic transmission surrounding the Bwindi Impenetrable Forest, Uganda," has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases.
We have now passed your article onto the PLOS Production Department who will complete the rest of the publication process. All authors will receive a confirmation email upon publication.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any scientific or type-setting errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. Note: Proofs for Front Matter articles (Editorial, Viewpoint, Symposium, Review, etc...) are generated on a different schedule and may not be made available as quickly.
Soon after your final files are uploaded, the early version of your manuscript will be published online unless you opted out of this process. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
For Research Articles, you will receive an invoice from PLOS for your publication fee after your manuscript has reached the completed accept phase. If you receive an email requesting payment before acceptance or for any other service, this may be a phishing scheme. Learn how to identify phishing emails and protect your accounts at https://explore.plos.org/phishing.
Thank you again for supporting open-access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases.
Best regards,
Shaden Kamhawi
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
Paul Brindley
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases