3398dghealthDigital HealthDigit HealthSAGE PublicationsPMC1021406310214063102140633725226210.1177/20552076231171496Dynamics of emotion trends in Canadian Twitter users during COVID-19
confinement in relation to caseloads: Artificial intelligence-based emotion
detection approach
WeerasingheSwarna OyebodeOladapo OrjiRita MatwinStan 1Department of Community Health and
Epidemiology, Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada2Faculty of Computer Science, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada*All authors contributed equally to this work.
✉Swarna Weerasinghe, Department of Community
Health and Epidemiology, Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax,
Nova Scotia BmH1V7, Canada. Email:
Swarna.weerasinghe@dal.ca
2252023920552076231171496205520762311714962752023© The Author(s) 2023This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which
permits non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work
without further permission provided the original work is attributed as
specified on the SAGE and Open Access page (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).

## Abstract
Multiple waves of COVID-19 have significantly impacted the emotional well-being
of all, but many were subject to additional risks associated with forced
regulations. The objective of this research was to assess the immediate
emotional impact, expressed by Canadian Twitter users, and to estimate the
linear relationship, with the vicissitudes of COVID caseloads, using ARIMA
time-series regression. We developed two Artificial Intelligence-based
algorithms to extract tweets using 18 semantic terms related to social
confinement and locked down and then geocoded them to tag Canadian provinces.
Tweets (n = 64,732) were classified as positive, negative, and neutral
sentiments using a word-based Emotion Lexicon. Our results indicated: that
Tweeters were expressing a higher daily percentage of negative sentiments
representing, negative anticipation (30.1%), fear (28.1%), and anger (25.3%),
than positive sentiments comprising positive anticipation (43.7%), trust
(41.4%), and joy (14.9%), and neutral sentiments with mostly no emotions, when
hash-tagged social confinement and locked down. In most provinces, negative
sentiments took on average two to three days after caseloads increase to emerge,
whereas positive sentiments took a slightly longer period of six to seven days
to submerge. As daily caseloads increase, negative sentiment percentage
increases in Manitoba (by 68% for 100 caseloads increase) and Atlantic Canada
(by 89% with 100 caseloads increase) in wave 1(with 30% variations explained),
while other provinces showed resilience. The opposite was noted in the positive
sentiments. The daily percentage of emotional expression variations explained by
daily caseloads in wave one were 30% for negative, 42% for neutral, and 2.1% for
positive indicating that the emotional impact is multifactorial. These
provincial-level impact differences with varying latency periods should be
considered when planning geographically targeted, time-sensitive,
confinement-related psychological health promotion efforts. Artificial
Intelligence-based Geo-coded sentiment analysis of Twitter data opens
possibilities for targeted rapid emotion sentiment detection opportunities.
Keywords: COVID-19, artificial intelligence, sentiment analysis, emotional impact assessment, latency period estimation, ARIMA modeling

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Jul 19; Accepted 2023 Apr 6; Collection date 2023 Jan-Dec.

## Introduction
Undoubtedly the COVID-19 pandemic has impacted the emotional well-being of all,
despite their at-risk status for infectivity. Some had to struggle to adapt to
social-environmental changes, to the so-called “new norm” and many were subject to
forced solitary confinement. These social and physical confinements not only
threatened physical health-related activities but encompassed emotional downturns
for all. Mandatory public health guidelines-imposed restrictions, such as social
isolation and business and entertainment closures further altered peoples’
lifestyles. These compounded factors stemming from social/physical confinement took
a toll on everyone's emotional health. , Yet there is limited
research-based evidence stemming from social /physical confinement-related emotional
health dynamics that illustrate latency/resumption and strength of the relational
effect of caseloads dynamics. The adverse psychosocial impact of COVID-19 lockdowns
is clearly noted in the literature including fear, anxiety, obsessive behavior,
increased substance dependence, and depression.
 
 There is an abundance of research-based evidence on the psychological impact
on frontline healthcare workers and some other selected community groups, but little
attention has been paid to uncovering general population-level emotional sentiments
resulting from COVID-19-related lockdown and confinement. This is partly due to the
inability to conduct population-based research data collection in a timely manner
during a pandemic. Social media expressions provide a unique opportunity to uncover
subpopulation-level emotional rapid assessment and to examine immediate emotional
responses to feelings of isolation during the confinement period.
The aim of this article is to apply a machine learning (ML) approach to assess the
dynamics (changes across time and geography) of emotional impact expressed in
Canadian Twitter data, at the geography level, concentrating on a provincial-level
analysis. Social media has been recognized as a viable platform for getting to know
people's instant reactions during the COVID-19 outbreak.
 
 Global literature supports the feasibility of social media data use, for
subpopulation-level emotional response detection. Social media users represent a
subset of the general population. A study conducted in Spain using opinions gathered
from several social media platforms, including Twitter, provided initial evidence of
the capability of capturing emotional sentiments expressed in social media during
the pandemic period.
 
 Even further, the global social media, Twitter/Weibo data analysis that
retained quarantine and locked down hashtags, uncovered emotional dynamics change in
relation to economic upturns and downturns.
 
 Several other studies that have used Twitter data provided promising results
in emotional sentiment detection related to the COVID pandemic.
 
 Furthering this knowledge, global Twitter data sentiment classification daily
percentages, distributed over three consecutive time intervals, have shown to be
related to mortality time series data depicting higher positive emotion rates with
low mortality, and surprisingly noted higher sadness daily Tweets when there was a
drastic decrease in COVID deaths.
 
 Authors recommended comprehensive research to find reasoning to explain those
emotional dynamics. There are no studies that explored the long-term temporal
association between confinement-related sentiment classification and COVID-19
morbidity data, and we argue morbidity dynamics may be more sensitive than mortality
to further explain emotional dynamics. To further understand the confinement-related
dynamics of emotional sentiment trends expressed in Twitter data, our study employed
a 395-day long time series modeling approach to uncover the relationship between
time-varying COVID caseload change on daily emotional sentiment fluctuations. The
findings will provide directions for the prevention of government-regulated
confinement-related negative emotions before reaching the mortality state.
Sentiment analysis has been recognized as a reliable method to track emotional
reactions embedded in social media posts. , Emotion sentiment detection
using Twitter data involves the extraction and classification of emotions expressed
in the text data. This type of analysis provides a unique opportunity for rapid
emotional burst detection during times of unanticipated, unprecedented events
occurrences such as pandemics and natural disasters, especially when traditional
data collection takes a lengthy period and greater effort. Specifically, the
spatial–temporal emotional sentiment analysis provides population-level emotional
outcome data to inform public health officials to take necessary geographically
targeted precautionary measures, and to act in a timely manner. Besides, Twitter
data capture free-flowing natural expressions and minimize research bias in emotion
expression detection from traditional survey data. A study in Southern Italy used 19
oncology professionals’ WhatsApp conversations, during a four-week period of
pandemic spread and detected both positive and negative emotional sentiment
variations over time in relation to the time-varying volume of COVID-related activities.
 
 Though it is encouraging that they detected positive and negative time
trends, albeit the period of weekly responses was short, there were no correlations
established. Another emotion sentiment research investigation on US healthcare
professionals used 53,063 Twitter expressions, over a pre-and post-pandemic two-year
period, and noted the post-pandemic increase in sadness, decrease in joy, and noted
fear as preceding the waves of the pandemic, which is considered as an anticipated
negative outcome in our analysis.
 
 We emphasize the importance of uncovering the emotional dynamics of the
general population in relation to caseload dynamics across time and geography. These
previous studies have demonstrated the capacity of sentiment analysis in detecting
dynamics of emotional expression using social media data, during the pandemic among
subgroups of healthcare professionals. Nevertheless, no study has captured the
spatial–temporal variations in the association between confinement-related dynamics
of negative and positive emotional sentiments in relation to dynamics of daily COVID
caseloads in Canada.
Canada is one of the countries, where strict lockdown measures, such as social
confinement and mandatory isolation regulations were imposed and enforced.
Nevertheless, to date, there were no time series studies that examined the
ecological level impact of public health measures on population-level emotional
sentiment dynamics in this country. A study that covered 17 European and North
American countries used a containment index that covered eight policies and
strictness levels, namely, closing schools, closing workplaces, cancellation of
public events, restrictions on gatherings, cancellation of public transportation,
stay-at-home requirements, internal movement restrictions, and international travel
restrictions. , These measures were the same as the ones imposed by the Public
Health Agency of Canada that we have captured using hashtags.
 
 Based on these measures of COVID-19 government responses, a stringency index
was developed, by these researchers, for regions of the world and Canada falls into
the second highest in their ranking of the 0-100 scale, falling within the range of 60−80.
 
 Researchers showed that there is a linearly increasing relationship between
caseloads and stringency index, across different countries, wherein measures were
stricken based on caseloads increase.
 
 In Canada, strict public health measures were imposed and released at
different time points by different provincial jurisdictions depending on the surge
and recede of provincial-level caseloads, thus making the case for provincial-level
analysis. According to media reports, the outburst of reactions to those
restrictions was more prominent in some Canadian geographies than the others, when
the social confinement was tightened after every caseload surge was noted, known as
waves. The outburst of negative emotional reactions is a result of perceived risk.
To our limited knowledge, there are no other studies that investigated the
association between emotional sentiment dynamics and caseloads variation over time,
neither effect sizes, nor latency of impact onset was available, within the context
of stringency such as social/physical confinement and locked down, that varied by
geography. By extracting Canadian Twitter data using confinement-related hashtags,
our findings will help to contextualize the emotional sentimental dynamics impact of
these stringency measures. The findings from Canada will uncover the emotional
sentiments dynamics within the context of strict public health measures and
facilitate timing and the extent of necessary countermeasures to be taken, to
control subsequent negative emotional impacts and to promote timely positive impacts
at the population level. While public health measures were essential tools to
control the impact of the pandemic, very little is known about the prognostication,
magnitude, direction, and latency of emotional impact on COVID caseload increase to
those control measures.
The practical basis of this study stemmed from multiple research-based evidence
sources. Twitter is known as a social media platform for freely communicating with
strangers, and sharing emotional feelings, during the time of restricted social
interactions, thus confirming the data quality used for this study.
 
 Even further, when the Twitter community is observed over a lengthy period of
time their emotional responses become stable and the dynamics of changes to events
can be captured effectively by using a lengthy period of observations.
 
 The theoretical basis for this study is situated within the phenomenon of
social amplification of risk framework, wherein the information sharing in social
media in response, to a perceived risk of an event, has further been related to the
attenuation of the risk associated with public events.
 
 Therein the framework provides how the risk events such as the pandemic
interact with the communication process of psychological feelings exchange through
news media and social networks. , The expression of
psychological feelings depicts inherent emotions, as Ekman argues, and he classifies
them into six basic emotions.
 
 In the present study, Lexicon-based sentiment analysis is used to study the
dynamics of Tweeters’ emotional expressions related to confinement. In this process,
natural flows of expressions, related to confinement, are captured and classified
into emotional sentiments using well-recognized emotional Lexicons. It was shown
that the words used to indirectly represent COVID-19-related emotional sentiments
are captured by Lexicons fairly well and reached greater accuracy of 81% than those
with direct representations.
 
 The Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) model for
sentiment classification uses a similar segment classification
 
 that results in multiple emotions in the same expression, and we used BERT in
conjunction with the emotional dominance theory to uncover the dominant sentiment.
 
 The BERT Natural Language Processing model classification of COVID
vaccine-related Tweets has received a maximum precision score.
 

Our study is unique in several aspects and contributes to advancing geographically
targeted ML-based sentiment analysis to uncover emotional dynamics over time and
provides statistical learning tools to examine the association with the temporality
of risk event changes. In essence, this study presents an ML-based methodological
framework that includes two Python-based algorithms for daily Twitter data
extraction using 16 different, COVID-19 confinement-related semantics, geocoding,
and emotional sentiment polarization using Natural Language Processing. It uses a
large volume of daily Canadian Twitter expression count data (n = 64,372) in English
and French, collected over a lengthy period of 396 days, covering the first three
waves of the pandemic. Even further, extracting all Twitter geo locations covering
an entire country, facilitated provincial-level analysis. Finally, we present
statistical learning methods to examine temporal dynamics detection of sentiments in
relation to COVID caseload variations. By considering the worldwide evidence of
possibilities of linking Tweet-based emotion detection to COVID pandemic-related
opinion mining, we expand the existing knowledge base specific to the stringent
measure of confinement and fill the gaps in knowledge on exploring emotional
sentiment time trends, resulting from COVID caseloads dynamics. Our study expands
existing knowledge into AI-based emotion detection algorithms development, the
latency of emotional reaction identification, and linear prognostic model-based
estimation of the emotional sentiment variation effect in relation to COVID
caseloads dynamics.
The main contribution of our work is listed below: 
Mapping polarity, negative or positive, and neutral emotion topics using
data extracted from daily tweets during the three waves of the pandemic,
reflecting multiple terms of public health-imposed confinement and
locked down related hashtags.
Development of Artificial Intelligence (AI)-based algorithms to geocode
tweets to tag Canadian provinces and to extract sentiments using the
National Research Council of Canada (NRC) word-based Emotion Lexicon
(NRCCEL). , 
Illustrate the patterns of latency effect of emotional sentiments in
relation to COVID case dynamics, within the context of quarantine and
locked down and finally,
Carry out emotion prognostication using time series modeling, uncovering
the dynamic linear relationship between COVID caseloads dynamics, and
resulting fluctuations in emotional moods as reflected in the Tweets
hash-tagged to quarantine and locked down.
The findings of this study will help future geographically targeted,
area-based public policy decision-making, and related emotional well-being measures
enactment through an understanding of geo-temporal dynamics of emotional variations
in relation to the vicissitudes of the pandemic caseloads.

## Related work
Emotion detection from large textual corpora using AI approaches has been applied to
online communication data analysis to tackle diverse health issues including
fitness, cancer, diabetes, and mental health. Recently, much attention has been paid
to COVID-related emotional sentiment classification using social media expressions.
Short-term sentiment analysis of lockdown-related Twitter data had shown positive
tweets outnumbering negative tweets.
 
 Detecting sentiment dynamics in Tweets during COVID has received ML
researchers’ attention in the past and the patterns exhibited were different. A
study that scrutinized Tweeters’ sentiment dynamics in seven consecutive pandemic
time intervals, found sentiment clusters of topics exhibiting variations of
occurrence over time, and the lockdown was one prominent topic shown in the first
interval, and no details of time-varying polarized sentiments were examined.
 
 Another study on the prominent topics and related sentiment variations found
the spread and growth of COVID cases as the second prominent topic (15.5% tweets)
and the average sentiment score for this topic was negative and then switched to
positive when prevention, treatment, and recovery were discussed.
 
 A time series tweet data analyses study, similar to ours, was conducted in
Ontario, Canada using a short record of daily tweets from March to October 2020.
Using a daily positive-to-negative sentiment ratio as the outcome measure, they were
unable to find a significant association with COVID case counts.
 
 They used the Valence Aware Dictionary for Sentiment Reasoning (VADER)
sentiment classifier for daily polarized sentiment calculation. Our study was
motivated by their funding but expanded on using a longer record of Twitter data,
confined to lockdown and emotional sentiment classification using NRCCEL which uses
a large volume of English words, to classify each type of PLUTCHIK emotion.
Our study used two of the most popular emotional classification Lexicons in tandem, NRCCEL,
 
 and VADER.
 
 There is evidence coming, since the early twenties, on the development and
application of emotional classifiers. Taking the advantage of Natural Language
Processing, a large volume of social media opinions is mined to uncover people's
emotions. A system that was developed to extract and analyze emoticons, from
pictorial presentations of Chinese text related to health and fitness, classified
emotions into seven pre-identified categories: happiness, sadness, fear, anger,
disgust, surprise, and love.
 
 Their system is based on a kinesics model, which divides emoticons into
semantic areas and differs from the lexicon-based system that we propose.
Lexicon-based graph models have been developed to extract sentiments from the most
important words in a co-occurrence graph model (pictorial presentation) of the
sentences extracted from the text.
 
 The model was later expanded to use a support vector machine classifier to
determine sentiment polarization for a given text corpus. Sentiment analysis moves
beyond emotion detection in text corpora and includes polarization of extracted
emotions into positive, negative, and neutral sentiments.
The most popular and validated lexicon used for COVID-related sentiment analysis is
the NRCCEL, which we propose to leverage.
 
 This lexicon was selected due to the reasons of giving scores to a broader
scheme of eight different emotions joy, sadness,
anger, fear, disgust,
surprise, trust, and
anticipation, depicted in the text corpora and most importantly
fits into our aim of uncovering dynamics of variation of emotions. The NRCCEL
Lexicon consists of 14,182 English words, the largest text corpora, and their
association score of 0 or 1 indicates whether a word is associated with a specific
emotion. The NRCCEL has been validated using manual coding and has shown to have 90% accuracy.
 
 This approach is based on the components of two well-established and widely
used theoretical frameworks: Ekman's theory of basic emotions 
 
 and Plutchik's emotion theory.
 
 This Lexicon was chosen to categorize Twitter statements that do not
explicitly express emotions and they are built into dictionaries to carry out
ML-based sentiment analysis. Ekman, a 19th-century psychologist, pioneered the basic
emotion theory and characterized human emotions into six families, and within each
family, there are commonly shared characteristics. The Ekman framework comprises six
basic emotions—joy, sadness,
anger, fear, disgust, and
surprise—while Plutchik emotion theory extends to
include—trust and anticipation. Both
frameworks have been applied extensively over the years in many health research
domains—including a mental illness group, 
 
 an Australian COVID social media group,
 
 Twitter expression classifications around the world,
 
 and COVID-related vaccination topic modeling.
 
 VADER is another widely used but simple rule-based model for sentiment
classification and has been validated again in most of the other sentiment analysis
models for social media text analysis but NRCCEL was not one of them.
 
 VADER has the advantage of scoring each segment of the expression, as
negative, positive, and zero (for neutral) to obtain a cumulative score to assign
polarity as negative, positive, or neutral for the entire expression. Our approach
to using NRCCEL linguistic valence classification is different in that each Twitter
expression is assigned to one of the eight emotions of PLUTCHIK classification prior
to polarity classification. Afterward, emotions are classified into negative,
positive, and neutral. Researchers used other recursive classification-based
approaches for COVID-related sentiment Tweet data analysis to show a pattern of
negative sentiments proceeding with positive sentiments.
 
 We used a bidirectional encoder representation
 
 that results in multiple emotions in the same expression and then in
conjunction with the emotional dominance theory
 
 the prominent sentiment classification was assigned.
We propose an AI-based emotion detection approach. Recent studies have applied
similar ML approaches such as Naïve based and logistic regression classifiers to
process coronavirus-related Tweets like fear and other negative sentiments.
 
 The results showed 91% classification accuracy for Naïve Bayes and 74%
accuracy for Logistic regression. Both classification methods were shown to perform
well for short-length Tweets but weaker performance for long Tweets used for COVID
fear sentiment classifications. Nevertheless, their findings showed that public
sentiments were more negative in areas with higher COVID-19 cases.
 
 Our study of COVID confinement and locked down hash-tagged data comprised a
mixture of short and long Tweets in lengths, thus requiring a better classification
algorithm such as NRCCEL to be used. A research study that analyzed two Twitter data
sets, one on worldwide data and the other India-specific, examined the impact of
COVID on human life, during a short three-month period from 19 January to 12 April
2020. They used the mean of the polarity score from different Tweets as the daily
measure to find the time trends.
 
 Their sentiment classification based on ML and classification modeling using
the BERT model was validated against the emotional classification in the GitHub
repository and found to have 94% accuracy.
 
 We propose to use the percentage of the polarity score for each of the
negative, positive, and neutral types as the daily measure and to use extended
versions of the BERT model.
For a country-wide emotional sentiment classification, using NRCCEL, Dubey (2020)
analyzed Tweets from 12 different countries in April 2020: Australia, Belgium,
China, France, Germany, India, Italy, Netherlands, Spain, Switzerland, the UK, and
the USA.
 
 Their analysis uncovered a worldwide trend of people expressing a mixture of
sentiments, some showing hope and positivity about COVID-19 along with fear,
sadness, and disgust. North American countries showed distrust and anger on a bigger scale.
 
 The current research bare future promises. Indian researchers who identified
moods expressed by the Indian nations, during the pandemic, used real-time Twitter
posts. They further extended their findings by developing a web-based platform for
viewing changes in emotional trends across India. Their system allows viewing of the
moods of Indians on specific events happening in the country during COVID-19.
 
 A study that examined cross-cultural polarity using sentiment analyses of
COVID-19-related Tweets found differences in emotional reactions in neighboring
countries, thus stressing the need to consider geo location in the sentiment
analysis of social media text data.
 
 A global Tweet study on the COVID lockdown that analyzed sentiments for a
short duration of 23 days using VADER found a significant association between
negative/positive Tweets and infections and deaths.
 
 Another study explored COVID-19 lockdown and coping behavior using a mixed
method, automated Lexicon-based and qualitative analysis, and found the majority
were sharing positive opinions, some expressing negative sentiments, and others on
the fence, changing their opinion based on the government decisions.
 
 Both studies add credibility to Lexicon-based sentiment analysis of Tweets.
Our study takes one step forward in temporal and spatial pattern recognition of
dynamics of emotional sentiments in relation to COVID caseloads dynamics, in that we
quantify the impact and estimate the latency.

## Methods
To achieve the first two objectives (listed under contributions a and b) of the goal
of empirically investigating provincial-level differences, we employed a hybrid
approach consisting of an AI-based text mining of Twitter data depicted in and then a
statistical learning method of ARIMA time series modeling approach to uncover
patterns of temporal variations and associations with covid caseloads dynamics. The
first phase involved collecting COVID confinement-related Tweets and associated
metadata and then tagging the Tweets with geolocations. In the second phase, we
preprocessed the geotagged Tweets using natural language processing (NLP) 
 
 techniques and then performed an analysis to identify different emotions
expressed in the Tweets and then identified corresponding sentiment polarity. In the
third phase, we calculated the daily percentage of counts of negative, positive, and
neutral sentiments and carried out a time series analysis by province.
 

## Data collection
Permission was obtained from Twitter Inc. through their Academic Research Track
to perform a full-archive Tweet search over a long period. Next, we developed a
C# utility that mines historical tweets related to confinement caused by federal
and provincial COVID-19 isolation public health policies from the Twitter
database. We extracted tweets and associated metadata using the following
confinement-related hashtags, keywords, and key phrases: #StayAtHome OR
#quarantine OR #quarantined OR #lockdown OR #stayhome OR #quarantinelife OR
#QuarantineAndChill OR #selfquarantine OR (((prolonged stay
at home) OR isolation OR (locked
in) OR (long stay)
OR (social isolation) OR
(prolonged stay) OR (social
withdrawal) OR seclusion OR segregation OR
(stuck inside) OR confinement)
AND (coronavirus OR covid-19 OR covid19 OR
SARS-CoV-2)). These comprehensive lists containing
confinement-related semantics vocabulary terms were obtained using three
dictionaries: Urban Dictionary, SNOMED-CT (Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine
clinical terms), and Unified Medical Language System Mata thesaurus. 
 
 We collected a total of 8,832,129 tweets, covering 396 days, between 1
March 2020 and 31 March 2021. The metadata associated with the Tweets includes
users/authors’ profile and
places (such as cities and countries).
We obtained daily COVID-19 caseloads by province and territories from the
Canadian COVID Data archive.
 
 The two databases were merged using the date as the identifier to proceed
with Time series modeling. R software was used for data management and time
series ARIMA analysis.

## Geo-Tagging of tweets
We developed a GEOTAGGING algorithm ( ) to tag each tweet with its
corresponding geolocation such as city, province, region, and country. The
algorithm, implemented in Python, receives the following parameters as input:

Collection of tweets
Ʈ = {T1,
T2,…,Tn}
where 1 ≤ n ≤ 8,832,129. Each tweet
Ti∈Ʈ is a tuple
(I, F, Â,
Ƿ), where I is the tweet's
unique identifier, F is the full text of the tweet,
Â is the identifier of the tweet's author, and
Ƿ is the identifier of the place where the
tweet originates.
A set of geo-places
Ƥ = {P1,
P2,…,
Pm}. Each
Pi∈Ƥ = (Ƿ,
Ct,
Co), where Ƿ is the
place's unique identifier, Ct is the
city, and Co is the country.
A set of authors
A = {A1,
A2,…,
Ak}. Each
Ai∈A = (Â,
L), where Â is the author's
unique identifier and L is a description of the
author's location.
A dictionary D = (C,
V, R) containing Canadian
cities (C) mapped to their provinces
(V) and regions (R). We
formulated the dictionary D using the geodata
obtained from the Canadian government's open data portal. , 
 The algorithm first tags all tweets in T with the country using
the LOCATIONTAGGER function which leverages the
locationtagger Python package 
 
 for extracting the geolocation from unstructured texts (such as the
location description provided by tweet authors). Afterward, the algorithm tags
Canadian tweets with city, province, and region using the dictionary. The output
of the algorithm is a collection of geotagged tweets
T-tagged.
After executing the algorithm, 4,898,155 tweets were geo-tagged and distributed
across 248 countries including Canada. There were 262,204 Canadian tweets, out
of which 60,264 could not be mapped to any geolocation (i.e. city, province, or
region) in Canada due to a combination of the following reasons: (i) location
description provided by tweet authors contains incorrect or wrongly spelled
city/province names, (ii) location description was not specified by authors, and
(iii) tweets’ place of origin was not available. The algorithm is robust enough
to detect abbreviated province names, having supplemented dictionary
D with various abbreviations for Canadian provinces (such
as “Alb,” “Alta,” and “AB” representing the Alberta province).
 shows the
breakdown of Canadian tweets by province. The importance of ethical
considerations related to geo-referenced tweets for mental health research have
been emphasized by Fadda et al.,
 
 and we conducted detailed statistical analysis only on provinces with a
large number of tweets and for that reason, all four Atlantic provinces were
combined.
 Next, we preprocessed the Canadian tweets (n = 201,940) by applying the following
NLP techniques using Python and the Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK) library:

Removal of Tweets that are neither English nor French
Removal of hashtags, mentions, and URLs
Removal of punctuation and other special characters
Removal of numbers
Removal of stop words
Stemming words to convert them to their root form
Removal of duplicates
Afterward, we performed sentiment analysis on the remaining 64,372
Canadian tweets to detect dominant emotions and the corresponding sentiment
polarity (positive, negative, or neutral). French tweets were translated, using
Google translator, into English before processing.

## Sentiment analysis
To classify the tweets into their respective dominant emotion (because multiple
emotions were depicted in the same tweet) and to identify sentiment polarity, we
developed a scoring algorithm named SENTIDETECT ( ) that accepts
three parameters: 
A set of Canadian tweets
Lc = {T1,
T2,…,Tn},
where 1 ≤ n ≤ 64,372.
The NRC word-based emotion lexicon
L = {Wi,
W2,…,
Wm}, where
1 ≤ m ≤ 14,182. Each
Wi∈ L is a tuple
(W, E, S),
where W is the word, E is the
emotion, and S is the associated score.
A set of emotions
ɛ = {E1,
E2,…,
Ek}, where 1 ≤ k ≤ 8.
Each Ei∈ ɛ is a tuple
(E, P, R),
where E is the emotion, P is the
corresponding sentiment polarity, and R is the rank
(see ).
 The algorithm ( )
first tokenizes each tweet Ti into words using the
WORD_TOKENIZE utility in NLTK, and then proceeds to check if a word
Wi is associated with an emotion
E in L. If a match is found,
E is retrieved and the associated score S,
as well as the polarity P, is mapped to E. In
addition, S is incremented by 1 for E. The
dominant emotion (i.e. the emotion with the highest score) is automatically
assigned to each tweet Ti. However, if multiple
emotions are dominant, the function HIGHEST_RANK in line
16 of the algorithm returns the emotion with the top rank ( ). For
instance, if anger and disgust are both
dominant, the function returns anger since anger ranks higher
than disgust. We generated the rankings shown in based on the literature on
emotional dominance, which was established following the hypothesis that people
engage “more quickly and with greater force with negative emotions (such as
anger and fear) than positive emotions (such as joy) because the former carry
greater survival potential.”
 

Thus, for text responses with multiple emotions, we created the algorithm to rank
anger and fear higher in the negative
category and joy in the positive category, and also ranked
negative sentiments above positive
sentiments in the same text, based on the theory of psychoanalysis of emotions.
 
Neutral sentiment is the least ranked since no emotion is
elicited. We implemented the SENTIDETECT algorithm ( ) that we
developed in Python.

## Time series analysis
Seven-day k-mean smoother was used to estimate active cases from the
daily reported case counts and this seven-day period is on par with the Statistics
Canada used bandwidth. For the tth day, k-mean
smoothing with k = 7 days was used
Mt=17∑i=t−3t+4Ciwhere Ci denotes the reported caseload
for the ith day. A seven-day period was chosen to smooth out random
variation and to capture the reporting delays. We used the seven-day mean smoother
of positive, negative, and neutral sentiment, calculated from the daily total
percentage of sentiments expressed by different Tweeters, for the time series analysis. On
an ith day, = total number of positive sentiments, = total number of negative sentiments, and = total number of neutral sentiments. Then
Ei=100×pi(pi+ni+ti)for ith day percentage of positive sentiments, for example,
St=17∑i=t−3t+4EiWe tested which provinces have overall sentiments percentage of
positive tweets surpassing negative sentiments or vice versa using chi-square
tests.
To examine the emotional sentiment or mood changes over the pandemic waves we
classified waves based on the dates of (a) emergency measures imposed in each
province and (b) the beginning of the wave surge, both happening within a few days,
if not coincidental, consistently across Canada. Final ARIMA negative binomial time
regression model
 
 includes daily negative (or positive) sentiment daily percentage as the
target (dependent variable St) and daily caseloads
(smoothed over seven days), as the regressor (predictor)
(Ct).
St=a+βCtIn this model, St denotes the number of
negative (or positive) sentiments extracted from tweets expressed on the
tth day. Three separate models were fitted, one to each wave.
Wave 1: first 100 days, wave 2: next 130 days, and wave 3: last 163 days. The
negative binomial AR model provided a better fit due to skewness in daily Twitter
emotion sentiment count percentages.
For the purpose of properly informing psychological surveillance measures, we
estimated the latency period, the time period from the beginning to the end of
emotion effect lasting after caseloads variations occurred, by carrying out
cross-correlation analysis to daily sentiment counts. The latency was determined by
estimating the lag associated with the first instance of the statistically
significant cross-correlation. The cross-correlation at lag i,
(ri) is estimated using the function , where the symbol cov stands for the covariance
and sd stands for the standard deviation. Given that the
cross-correlation expands over a latency period, covering several lag days. We used
a visibility graph algorithm that was proven to be more efficient.
 
 The method cross-correlates residuals and , from fitting AR time series model to and . Statistical significance was determined using the level of
significance at alpha < 0.05.
The time lag (or lead) for emotional sentiment exacerbation from the date of the case
load surge was estimated using the residuals, filtered using the visibility graph
algorithm cross-correlation method that was proven to be more effective than using
the cross-correlation without filtering.
 

Power calculation for time series analysis was carried out using a method described
in the literature.
 
 Based on our power calculations to reach 80% power with alpha = 0.05 level of
significance the length of the time series needed to detect a significant beta
coefficient of case load influence of 2.5% (sentiment increase per 100 case load
increase) with a standard deviation of 1.1% for 35% negative/positive/neutral
sentiments is 2073 days. Given that there is a small number of tweets in four
Atlantic Provinces and concurrence of the timing of public health restrictions, the
four Atlantic Provinces were lumped together in the analysis. We used the formula
given in Yukon, Nunavut, PEI, and Atlantic Provinces do not meet these requirements
given that there are lots of missing days with no cases and sentiments detected.
Therefore, we decided to combine Atlantic Provinces together and only descriptive
analysis results are provided for Yukon and Nunavut.
We used the following formula for power calculation for time series regression based
on the published literature.
 
 We used and are 1.96 and 1.28 for 0.05 level of significance and 80% power. We
used as 2.5 and the standard deviation as 1.1 based on post-hoc
estimation of minimum values. Based on the percentage of negative/positive
sentiments of p = 33.3% ( Canadian average). The required
length of n = 243 days. The use of 396 day-long time series for time series
regression was justified.
n=⌊(zα+z1−β)2(β+SD(β))2⌋pNRCCEL sentiment classification: NRCCEL emotional
sentiment classifier has been shown to perform the best in an emotional
classification's lexicon validation study.
 
 However, upon examination of NRCCEL sentiment analysis results, it was
revealed that over 50% of sentiments were neutral. Emotion polarization detection
literature suggests categorization of “anticipation” as a positive
or negative sentiment depending on the context and in relation to COVID researchers
have used anticipation as a positive sentiment with vaccine-related text classification.
 
 In order to overcome this bias, we used the VADER,
 
 which has been evaluated for word-by-word classification of social
media-related text emotional sentiment classification using human raters
classification of Tweeter data, and this dictionary was found with 96% accuracy.
 

## Results

## Validation of sentiment topics classification
For this validation segment of the study, we first considered comparison with the
Ekman Lexicon, which was originally designed based on facial expressions,
 
 and later expanded for textual data analysis. It performed poorly in the
extraction of the prominent sentiments of COVID-19 twitter expression
classification, especially when there were multiple emotions. Even more
importantly it excluded two important categories of pandemic induced quarantined
and locked-down related expressions of “anticipation” and “trust.” We manually
examined randomly selected tweets and found Ekman lexicon puts weights on single
words such as sorry in the part of the expression of “sorry to anyone in social
isolation” and classified as “fear,” for example. Whereas the overall meaning of
the Twitter expression “sorry to anyone in social isolation, allow actually get
tested, hope everyone stay safe” was classified by NRCCEL as a positive
sentiment of “joy” and neutral sentiment of “anticipation.” Given that
anticipation and trust are important sentiments for quarantine-related
sentiments, further analysis was conducted using NRCCEL sentiment analysis. Even
further, COVID lockdown tweets emotion sentiments of anger, fear, joy, and
no-emotion were significantly (p < 0.0001) over-estimated,
and disgust and sadness were underestimated (p < 0.0001) in
the Ekman Lexicon classification. Additionally, NRCCEL classification identifies
the expression using a string of words (phrase), each phrase is given a score
and then add the scores to obtain overall sentiment polarization classification.
After NRCCEL classification of the sentiments, we further validated one neutral
emotional classification “anticipation” using two lexicons, VADER and Wordnet
lexicons. We obtained an F score of 1.29 for VADER and 0.007
for the WordNet classifier. Herein, anticipation was further classified as
either positive or negative, or neutral based on the VADER lexicon scoring.
 shows
the sentiment polarity for each emotion topic classified by NRCCEL with further
classification of “anticipation” by VADER.
 

## Variations of sentiment expressions across Canadian provinces
Of the 262,204 tweets, 64,372 met the inclusion criteria for further analysis.
Yukon (n = 76), Nunavut (n = 293), and Prince
Edward Island (n = 119) had the least number of Tweets and did
not meet the statistical power for time series analysis ( ). While most (36.4%) Tweets
were classified as neutral, statistically significant higher percentages of
negative tweets were noted in all provinces but Saskatchewan, PEI, and Yukon,
for the chi-square test. The daily time series of negative and positive Tweet
sentiment counts showed a peak shortly after the middle of the first wave and
then exponentially decayed overtime during the second and third waves.
Most of the tweets (64.5%) were in the first wave of the pandemic, from 2 March
2020 to 10 June 2020. Overall, in Canada, the three waves of Tweets comprised
the negative sentiments of Anticipation (30.1%), Fear (28.1%), Anger (25.3%),
Sadness (8.6%), and Disgust (7.0%). Positive sentiments were mostly reflected by
Anticipation (43.7%), Trust (41.4%), and Joy (14.9%). The tweets classified as
neutral had mostly no emotions (86%), anticipation (9.6%), and surprise
(4.4%).

## Dynamics of Canadian sentiments and caseloads for the first three
waves
The study period covered three waves of COVID caseloads, of which the first wave,
the period covering March to June in most provinces is shown, before the first
vertical line in . In many provinces, the lowest peak of caseloads was in the first
wave, while the third wave (19 October 2020 to 31 March 2021) showed the highest
peak ( ). shows seven-day
daily caseloads (the bottom line in black), averaged using a seven-day
k-mean smoother. In almost all provinces the second wave
from June to October 2020, had the least number of cases. Nevertheless, negative
sentiment expressions in the second wave were greater than in the other two
waves.
 When considering the cross-correlation analysis of the Canadian daily caseloads
and sentiment variations, there was a minimum of a five-day lag period shown for
negative sentiments to arise in waves two and three, but there was no lag effect
detected for wave one, during which negative sentiments were sprouted
immediately, on the same day of caseloads increase. However, Tweeters’ positive
sentiments took a slightly longer period to emerge, in response to rising cases.
It took a minimum of six to seven days to subside positivity in all three waves.
In addition to the lag effect, we were able to uncover the magnitude of the
effect, when all Canadian data are combined, which calls for provincial-level
analysis. In all three waves, when the percent of daily caseloads increased by
100 cases, the daily percent of negative sentiments decreased with varying
magnitudes across waves, wave 1(β = −0.47, SE = 0.07), wave 2
(β = −0.20, SE = 0.04), and in wave 3 (β = −0.08,
SE = 0.01). This time-varying decline of the magnitude of the gradient, from
wave one through to three may indicate getting used to the new norm. Predictive
power measured by R2 varies from 30% in wave 1, 12%
in wave 2, and 17% in wave 3, which may be a result of having fewer tweets in
waves 2 and 3.
The daily percentage of positive sentiment expressed by Canadian Tweeters did not
show any association with case dynamics in waves 1 and 2 but in wave 3, perhaps
because vaccines were approved in wave 3. Overall, when all three waves’ Tweets
combined as the caseloads increased by 100, Canadian daily positive sentiments
decreased by 5.5% (SE = 0.07). Those Canadian Tweeters who were neutral
increased their neutral sentiment expressions in the first two waves with
increasing caseloads. For 100 caseloads increase, neutral sentiments increased
in wave 1 (β = 4.8% SE = 0.6) and in wave 2 (β = 2.3% SE = 0.42), but not in the
third wave. In what follows, the geographical level analysis by province is
presented.

## Dynamics of daily Canadian caseloads and sentiments by province and
regions
Most of the Tweets were in the first wave and we have presented the daily
percentages of counts of negative, positive, and neutral for six provinces,
covering the first three waves, and therein the four Atlantic provinces were
combined ( ).
Emotional sentiments started even before the first case of COVID appeared in
Canada ( ).
Nevertheless, as the daily COVID case numbers increased the three polarized
sentiments of daily negative, positive, and neutral classifications showed
varying levels and directions by geography and time ( ).
 

## Latency of emotional sentiment response to COVID caseloads dynamics:
Cross-correlation analysis
Provincial-level latency period estimation detected the first lead time (in
days), in that statistically significant negative/positive sentiment
correlations with changing caseloads, were noted. These correlation results
provided an estimate of latency, which can be interpreted as an estimate of the
time in days taken to react to the caseload changes and we have noted the
shortest latency period with the magnitude of the correlation, in . The latency
period of emotional sentiment expressions appearing on Twitter, for caseloads
changes, varies by province and by COVID waves. In most provinces, except
Ontario (with the longest lag time of 14 days), NB, Quebec, and Alberta (no
significant latency), negative emotional sentiment responses increased within
two to three days of caseload increase in wave 1. Manitoba (latency = 4) and NS
(latency = 9) showed a negative correlation of negative response decrease to
caseloads rise in wave 2 and no significant latency in wave 3. Positive
sentiments took a slightly longer period and in some provinces four to eight
days to decline in response to increasing caseloads, except in Alberta (waves 2
and 3). In Quebec, the latency period for positive sentiment decline was the
longest 18 days.
 

## Emotional sentiments dynamics prognostication using COVID caseloads dynamics:
ARIMA time series regression results
The percentage of variation in negative sentiments explained by the caseloads,
overall, measured by R2, varied from 30% in wave 1
to 12% and 17% in waves 2 and 3. Positive sentiment prognostication was very
poor (around 2.1%), but neutral sentiment predictive power was 42% in wave 1 and
19% and 1.6% in waves 2 and 3.
Negative sentiment prognostication: Canadian Tweeters’ emotional
responses to increasing COVID caseloads showed geographic variations, in
magnitude and direction, across all three waves ( ). As caseloads increased by
100, in Alberta, BC, and Quebec, Tweeters in these provinces showed resilience
with decreasing daily percent of negative sentiments, whereas smaller provinces
such as Manitoba and Atlantic Canada showed increased negative emotional
sentiments with increasing caseloads in wave 1 ( ). We also found Alberta and BC
Tweeters’ negative emotional sentiments in wave 2 showed a reversing trend in
wave 1, with increasing negative sentiments with increasing caseloads. Quebec
Tweeters consistently showed resilience towards increasing caseloads (1% decline
per 100 case caseload increases). Saskatchewan's negative sentiments were not
significantly related to caseloads in all three waves. Overall, Canadian
Tweeters showed resilience with increasing caseloads, but the magnitude declined
from waves 1 through 3.
 Positive sentiments prognostication: Alberta Tweeters showed an
increasing trend of positive emotional sentiments during waves 1 and 3 with
increasing caseloads and changed the direction in wave 2. But Ontario Tweeters
remained increasingly positive with increasing caseloads in all three waves
( ).
Manitoba, Atlantic, and Quebec Tweeters’ positive emotional responses declined
with increasing caseloads in wave 1 and this pattern continued only in wave 3 in
Quebec. Saskatchewan Tweeters’ positive sentiments went down with increasing
caseloads in waves 2 and 3, not in wave 1.
 Neutral Sentiment prognostication: In wave 1, Neutral sentiments
increased with rising caseloads except in Alberta, which happened in wave 2
( ). Of
all provinces, Manitoba and Saskatchewan showed the highest magnitude of the
trend in wave 1. Alberta and BC trends reversed in wave 3 showing a decline in
neutral sentiments with increasing caseloads. Atlantic Canada neutral sentiments
associations were not significant.
 Principal findings: Our hybrid modeling approach that combined
AI-based emotion detection tools, as well as supervised learning methods of
ARIMA time series modeling and cross-correlation analysis, demonstrated the
feasibility of detecting the association between caseload dynamics and polarized
emotion sentiments. The major thrust of this study was emotional sentiment
extraction algorithm development and application covering an entire country,
including many Canadian tweets, 64,372 gathered for a lengthy period of 396
days, covering the first three waves of the pandemic. We used established
AI-based techniques and explored the dynamic relationship between daily neutral,
negative, and positive sentiments with daily COVID caseloads, stratified by
geographic regions. Using Canadian Tweets hash-tagged quarantine and locked down
related multiple terms, study findings depict sentiments arising from these
regulations. Thus, findings from Twitter data provided a basis to interpret
emotional reactions in relation to this social/physical confinement. Overall,
our findings suggest daily negative, positive, and neutral sentiment variations
are weakly linearly related to caseload changes. It is likely that there are
other factors contributing to emotional sentiment dynamics. Nevertheless, daily
emotional sentiment variations are significantly influenced by daily caseload
changes among those Tweeters who were concerned about being locked down and
confined. We found latency of the emotional sentiments to come into effect when
the caseloads changed, which was five days for negative emotional sentiments,
but a little longer six to seven days for positive sentiments to be
expressed.

## Discussion
Using several thesauri, we found 19 semantic vocabulary terms representing social and
physical confinement measures imposed by provincial public health regulatory
systems. Combined with four COVID terms of expressions to these terms, we hash
tagged and extracted 8,832,129 tweets, more terms than used in other COVID Tweet
data analyses in single country studies. The two algorithms that we developed
successfully extracted tweets, covering 396 days, and after geo-tagging and
discarding those with no emotions and geo locations, we included 64,732 tweets
representing Canadian twitter users’ verbal emotional reactions to these
restrictions imposed by the government to control the outbreak. A global study that
used two hashtags, COVID-19 and social isolation resulted in over 10 million tweets,
 
 and another global study of a short duration of 48 days, that used four COVID
and three confinement-related hashtags, revealed 20,051 emotional sentiments labeled tweets.
 
 Whereas a study that used three keywords of COVID-19 resulted in 20,325,929
tweets from more than 170 countries.
 
 In comparison to these global and multi-country study numbers of tweets, the
size of our single-country study sample is large enough to represent a general
population of Tweet users in the country. Our sample of Tweets, when stratified by
province/region, contains 1600 to 26,992 tweets per province, which may provide a
large enough sample to represent the community of Twitter users in each geography.
Research conducted in China analyzing 62,119 twitter discussions on news forums
stated their sample sufficiently represented a community sample, because of wider coverage.
 

Most of the Canadian tweets (64.5%) were in the first wave, which occurred from March
to June 2020, and the number of daily Tweets exponentially decayed over time
starting from the mode of the first caseload wave. A Spanish COVID sentiment
analysis time series study that covered a shorter time span (60 days) showed a
similar linearly increasing pattern at the beginning of the pandemic and then
leveled off after reaching the peak of the caseload wave.
 
 Another short-term (4 weeks) study conducted in Italy among oncology
physicians’ sentiments expressed in WhatsApp messages showed a declining pattern in
positive emotions overtime during the pandemic.
 
 These geographic variations emphasize the importance of tracking
geo-locations of sentiment exacerbation data collected from social media platforms
and the necessity of following up for a longer duration, to capture the time-varying
patterns across geographies.
Following the literature that examined people expressing positive and negative
anticipation when coping with COVID,
 
 we further classified NRCCEL neutral sentiment classified anticipation using
VADER to extract positive anticipations and negative anticipations. Our study
revealed negative anticipation as one of the dominant negative expressions followed
by fear and anger, in most Canadian provinces, while positive anticipation and trust
were major topics of positive sentiments shown in all Canadian provinces. Given that
the positive anticipation sentiment was the highest-ranked topic among positive
sentiments, Canadian Twitters’ may be optimistic about an upcoming promising end
result and this finding is similar to the results shown in a US study. 
 
 Two other studies that analyzed healthcare professionals’ tweets, one using
the Ekman lexicon noted fear and the other Italian study using the NRCCEL lexicon
also noted fear, anger, and sadness as the dominating negative sentiments and both
studies noted joy as the dominating positive sentiment for their COVID-19
information concepts. , Our confinement/social isolation tweet study results that used
the NRCCEL lexicon provided a somewhat similar pattern to the aforementioned studies
and the subtle differences noted in positive sentiments may be due to the
differences in populations, general versus health professionals. In addition, our
Tweet data representation of confinement and social isolation may account for the
noted differences. Despite hashtag, geographical, and use of lexicon classifications
differences, our finding of fear and anger dominating COVID-related social media
expressions is congruent with other studies. None of the above studies,
polychotomized anticipation into positive, negative, and neutral and we emphasize
future research to consider this extended classification.
Daily negative tweets outnumbered positive tweets indicating most Canadians relate
their social confinement with anticipated negativity, combined with fear and anger
as dominant negative emotions expressed. Similarly, a global study on Twitter trends
during the early stage of the pandemic from January to April 2020, identified
negative emotions (predominantly fear) as exceeding positive emotions.
 
 This pattern that we observed was only consistent with the early days of the
eight-day worldwide COVID-19-related tweet sentimental analysis results.
 
 There were no consistent temporal patterns of negative sentiments dominating
positive sentiments or vice versa that we observed across Canadian provincial
jurisdictions shown in their short-period world tweet analysis. One Chinese study
showed the opposite of the pattern we observed. Wherein Chinese tweets text analysis
showed the number of positive emotions (happiness) exceeding negative emotions and
they indicated the influence of religion on staying positive.
 
 In addition, variations across geo-locations within a country were not
tracked in those studies. The aforementioned research findings that supported the
consistency of the sentiment polarity dynamic may justify the capability of our
hybrid modeling approach to capture essential temporal dynamics from a lengthy
recording period. Decides the influence of religion, other social media researchers
had explained this pattern of negative emotions exceeding positive emotions using
Grey's neuropsychological theory which states that the behavioral inhibition system
(BIS) tends to negatively respond to social uncertainty increase.
 
 It is possible the pandemic-related confinement and locked down related
Tweets that we analyzed reflect more of the BIS-related negative psychological
impact than what is shown among the general public.
We were unable to find many studies that estimated the time taken for negative and
positive sentiments to exacerbate or recede (latency) after COVID caseloads surge or
vice versa. The provincial level cross-correlation between the daily percentage of
negative (and positive) sentiments and daily caseloads exhibited two to three days
on average latency, and in some provinces like Quebec exhibited 14 days of onset of
delay in the first wave. Overall, in Canada, negative sentiments were exacerbated
after five days of caseload surge, in waves 2 and 3, and it took six to seven days
after caseloads increase for the positive sentiments to recede. These latency
periods differ not only by province and also across waves but happened within the
entire “confinement” or “stay at home” 14-day period. This may reflect this study
tweets extracted were related to confinement, which lasted 14 days. One may argue
this ecological relationship discovery is spurious. A study conducted in China
applied a system dynamic model to establish a causal relationship between public
sentiments and government responses to COVID-19.
 
 Their validity and rationality of the model performances revealed two
findings: (1) increased government positive responses facilitated an increasing
trend of positive responses and (2) changes in the epidemic a “worse disaster
context” promoted negative emotions.
 
 This research evidence may rationalize the dynamic pattern that we observed
in some provinces, showing an increasing trend of both negative and positive
emotions in relation to increasing caseloads. This may also indicate that Canadian
provincial jurisdictions promptly responded to create a positive impact so that
positive sentiments increased with daily caseloads increase and this needs to be
confirmed in future research. A Chinese study identified significant correlations
between COVID case numbers and public attention up to a six-day lag period, with the
highest correlation in lag of two to three days.
 
 Our findings underscore the need to examine the latency period of emotion
exacerbation after caseloads surge to properly inform the timing of the onset of
psychological sentiment exacerbation, during the lockdown.
Our study added another layer to the existing knowledge base by classifying the
responses into negative, positive, and neutral sentiments and significantly
predicting these polarized responses in relation to increasing caseloads. This ARIMA
time series regression prognostic modeling of confinement and lockdown Twitter
response emotions was unique to this study. Overall sentiment daily variations over
time and caseload dynamics showed a weak relationship and explained 12% on average
for Canada. But when considering the percentage of daily polarized tweets, by
province, the daily caseload dynamics significantly predicted the negative and
positive emotional sentiment exacerbation/recedes. We were able to identify a
significant prognostication effect of the negative emotional effect in four to five
provinces in the first three waves. In wave 1, the percentage of variation in
negative sentiments (30%) and neutral sentiments (42%) explained by caseloads was
higher than for positive sentiment prognostication (2.1%). While most of the Tweets
(64.5%) are in the first wave and most Tweets were significantly negative sentiment
expressions and this may explain the poor predictive power of positive sentiments. A
study that analyzed country-level google trends depicting awareness of coronavirus
found a positive serial correlation over time with an increasing volume of responses
at the beginning of the pandemic,
 
 and this may explain the weak relationship that we observed in some provinces
with fewer tweets.
It is noteworthy, that the most populated Canadian provinces, Alberta, BC, and Quebec
showed a significant resilience effect with linearly declining negative emotional
sentiments and inclining positive sentiments in relation to the caseloads increase.
This pattern of being vulnerable to increasing caseloads changes, showing increasing
negative daily percentages of emotions and decreasing positive emotions were shown
in less populated provinces of Manitoba and the region of the Atlantic. Moreover, we
uncovered an association between the dynamics of neutral sentiments and caseloads,
one that showed increasing neutrality in emotional sentiments with increasing
caseloads in the first wave. Confirming the vulnerability, a study conducted in
Ontario used a multifactor ARIMA model that included the daily positive-to-negative
sentiment ratio for 200 days (that covered the first two Canadian COVID waves) and
found a negative association with increasing cases (−0.98 per 100 caseloads
increase, p = 0.02).
 
 The results are incompatible in magnitude since we used the daily percentage
of sentiments, not the ratio, and only confinement-related Tweets but confirmed a
similar direction of the association between dynamics of caseloads and sentiments
using ARIMA models.
Chandrasekaran et al.
 
 stated that there is a dearth of knowledge on the temporal pattern of
emotional sentiments in relation to COVID outbreaks and our study findings filled
this gap in knowledge. They used topics of emotional expressions in global tweets
that included 20 topics including the spread of the virus and lockdown regulations
for a five-month period, from January to May 2020 and their analysis revealed a
higher proportion of negative sentiment scores during the 12 weeks of spread and
growth of cases.
 
 This pattern further confirms our study finding of significant associations
of negative emotional effects with increasing caseloads noted in time series
regression models. They illustrated positive sentiments were related to government
announcements of incentives for people affected by regulating lockdowns
 
 and the positive sentiment trends we noted may also be a result of the
Canadian government provision of incentives such as supplementary income packages
during the lockdown. Literature suggests other factors contributing to emotional
dynamics. A study conducted among nurses’ Facebook expressions found a peak in
negative sentiments during the period of isolation. They stated this effect was a
result of being away from friends and family, loneliness, and fear of being
infected, and they found a peak in the positive sentiments during the period of
granting incentives.
 
 These global study findings justify the dynamic relationships that we
uncovered and there are other factors contributing to sentiment temporal variations
in addition to caseloads variations.
Though we did not follow a cohort of tweeters using an ID, our findings, when
contextualized within confinement and lockdown regulations, may suggest (a) there
are three cohorts of tweeters, depending on being pessimistic, optimistic, and
naturalistic expressing negative, positive, and neutral sentiments or (b) there is
one cohort of tweeters changing their views, from negative to positive or being
neutral, depending on external circumstance including caseload dynamics.

## Conclusion
Our hybrid modeling approach that combined AI-based sentiment analysis and ARIMA time
series regression modeling provided important tools for emotion sentiment detection.
Within the context of lockdown and confinement, our findings provided directions for
public health regulatory authorities to curb the public emotional crisis in relation
to surging caseloads. Emotional exacerbations were greater at the beginning of the
pandemic during the first wave and within this period caseloads alone explained up
to 30% of negative emotions variations. Even though, the caseloads peaked higher
during the third wave of the pandemic, Twitter's emotional sentimental expressions
were lesser in magnitude than in the first wave, possibly due to getting used to the
new norms of confinement and lockdown. It is important to take necessary measures to
address rising negative emotions at the early stage of the pandemic within two to
three days of the caseloads surge. Our findings suggest geographic heterogeneities
of public reactions, depicted by emotional dynamics in tweeter expressions in
relation to COVID caseload changes within the same country. The magnitude,
direction, and latency periods of the emotional sentiments varied provincially.
These noted dynamics of provincial-level differences, in public emotional sentiment
expressions, should be considered when planning provincial-level confinement-related
psychological health promotion efforts. Future research should validate social media
text corpora-based emotional sentiment polarities using geo-linked data obtained
from a community sample.
Implications: In addition to public health implications, this study
contributed an AI-based theoretical framework for extracting and geo-coding Tweets
and classification of expressions with a mixture of emotions into a dominant emotion
using Lexicon-based emotional sentiment classifications. The hybrid modeling
approach with statistical methods expanded to uncover the ecological relationship
between temporal variations of emotions and caseload dynamics. The results of the
application provide directions for geographically targeted psychological health
monitoring. Another dimension uncovered in this study is the benefit of the use of
social media as a venue for the free expression of negative outcomes of
anticipation, anger, and fear as well as positive outcomes of joy and trust during a
confinement and lockdown period. Free expression can be interpreted as a form of
social therapy.
 

## Supplemental Material

## sj-docx-1-dhj-10.1177_20552076231171496 - Supplemental material for
Dynamics of emotion trends in Canadian Twitter users during COVID-19
confinement in relation to caseloads: Artificial intelligence-based emotion
detection approach
Click here for additional data file.
Supplemental material, sj-docx-1-dhj-10.1177_20552076231171496 for Dynamics of
emotion trends in Canadian Twitter users during COVID-19 confinement in relation
to caseloads: Artificial intelligence-based emotion detection approach by Swarna
Weerasinghe, Oladapo Oyebode, Rita Orji and Stan Matwin in DIGITAL HEALTH

## Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the permission granted by Twitter Inc, to extract data.

## Footnotes
Authors contributions: Data extraction, curation, and sentiments analysis: Oladapo Oyebode, supervised
by Rita Orji and Stan Matwin. COVID data extraction, statistical analysis, and
interpretation of results: Swarna Weerasinghe. Original manuscript Writing:
Swarna Weerasinghe, Oladapo Oyebode, and Rita Orji. Editing and comments: Rita
Orji and Stan Matwin.
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Ethical approval: Anonymous aggregated data were extracted and no IRB approval was needed.
Funding: The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.
Informed consent: No participant consent was applicable. The data extracted from Twitter was
completely anonymous and Statistics Canada released daily COVID caseload numbers
that did not contain any personal identifiers.
ORCID iDs: Swarna Weerasinghe https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2787-2330
Oladapo Oyebode https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5797-7790
Rita Orji https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6152-8034
Supplemental material: Supplemental material for this article is available online.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## sj-docx-1-dhj-10.1177_20552076231171496 - Supplemental material for
Dynamics of emotion trends in Canadian Twitter users during COVID-19
confinement in relation to caseloads: Artificial intelligence-based emotion
detection approach
Click here for additional data file.
Supplemental material, sj-docx-1-dhj-10.1177_20552076231171496 for Dynamics of
emotion trends in Canadian Twitter users during COVID-19 confinement in relation
to caseloads: Artificial intelligence-based emotion detection approach by Swarna
Weerasinghe, Oladapo Oyebode, Rita Orji and Stan Matwin in DIGITAL HEALTH