pmcPLoS Comput BiolPLoS Comput Biol328ploscomp101238922plosPLOS Computational Biology1553-734X1553-7358PLOSPMC10171658PMC10171658.110171658101716583711576310.1371/journal.pcbi.1011086PCOMPBIOL-D-22-009061Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitionMemoryVisual Object RecognitionBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceLearning and MemoryMemoryVisual Object RecognitionBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyPerceptionVisual Object RecognitionBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyPerceptionVisual Object RecognitionSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyPerceptionVisual Object RecognitionBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyBrainVisual CortexMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyBrainVisual CortexBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyPerceptionSensory PerceptionVisionBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyPerceptionSensory PerceptionVisionSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyPerceptionSensory PerceptionVisionBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceSensory PerceptionVisionBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaAnimalsVertebratesAmniotesMammalsBearsBiology and Life SciencesZoologyAnimalsVertebratesAmniotesMammalsBearsBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyBehaviorImitationSocial SciencesPsychologyBehaviorImitationComputer and Information SciencesNeural NetworksBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceNeural NetworksBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaAnimalsVertebratesAmniotesMammalsPrimatesApesGorillasBiology and Life SciencesZoologyAnimalsVertebratesAmniotesMammalsPrimatesApesGorillasBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyBehaviorAnimal BehaviorAnimal MigrationAnimal NavigationSocial SciencesPsychologyBehaviorAnimal BehaviorAnimal MigrationAnimal NavigationBiology and Life SciencesZoologyAnimal BehaviorAnimal MigrationAnimal NavigationThe representational hierarchy in human and artificial visual systems in the presence of object-scene regularities
The representational hierarchy in the biological and artificial brainhttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-1435-2536BracciStefaniaConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing MrazJakobFormal analysisWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing ZemanAstridData curation LeysGaëlleData curation Op de BeeckHansConceptualizationFunding acquisitionSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Center for Mind/Brain Sciences—CIMeC, University of Trento, Rovereto, Italy2
Brain & Cognition Research Unit, Leuven Brain Institute, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium3
Mathematics and Statistics, University of Melbourne, Carlton, AustraliaYangTianmingEditor ]. Here we investigate how information about object domain and their cross-domain structure is represented through the visual processing in human and artificial neural systems.
While visual information is fully intertwined at the retina level, soon through the human hierarchical visual pathway, information pertaining to the different object domains is processed in largely separated brain networks [e.g., , ] as confirmed by human neuroimaging revealing rich domain-specific object spaces characterizing the different processing channels. As an example, behaviourally relevant image dimensions are encoded in object and scene areas: animate features such as the eyes/mouth, useful for identifying living entities in the former [ – ], and spatial layout, informative for scene navigation in the latter [ – ]. At the same time, statistical regularities of the world influence perception [ – ] as shown by faciliatory effects of context observed during object recognition [ ] and evidence for interaction between object and scene processing at the neural level [ – ]. While such studies indicate that the representation of objects might be influenced by whether they share similar context statistics, to our knowledge, none of them included a multivariate test pinpointing the representational similarity of neural patterns across objects and scenes. Is the frequent occurrence of a penguin in ice landscapes sufficient to modulate how penguins and ice landscapes are coded despite the separate processing channels? Or does interaction occur at a later stage of visual processing when information becomes relevant to support goal-directed behaviour?
Even less is known about how this across-domain segregation and integration happens in artificial vision models. In the past decade, artificial computer vision models have been developed that are able to classify visual patterns with human-level performance, such as deep convolutional neural networks [DCNNs; ] and recent adaptations including residual, recurrent, and transformer networks [ ]. These artificial models appear to develop representations similar to those in human visual cortex [ , ]. Various avenues have been suggested to further improve this correspondence, such as the use of recurrent processing and changes in training regimes [ , ]. But does the representational hierarchy learnt by DCNNs mimic the information transformation emerging through the human visual hierarchy? The presence of object-scene regularities potentially provides a critical test of this correspondence. Many DCNNs employed in computational vision are trained on object recognition which is considered the main computational goal of visual cortex [ ] and employ large image sets in which each image is attached to a single label [ ]. In such scenario, DCNNs trained in object recognition do not need to explicitly separate objects from background scene; short cuts are available and sufficient to solve the problem. In other words, visual information from image background might be equally useful to succeed at the task at hand, thus shaping the learnt object space. This suggests that DCNNs might very well mimic the ability of the human perceptual system to take advantage of image statistical and contextual regularities experienced during lifetime [ , , ], but these artificial models might find this solution in a different way without explicitly segregating object and scene information.
Here, we compare “neural” representations in the human brain and in artificial DCNNs using an original stimulus set that includes object images and background images with a variety of object/scene domain specific properties, as well as a manipulation of object-background co-occurrence in real-world images. The results show that DCNNs in a quite remarkable way, appear capable of mimicking conceptual-like human knowledge of the world such as capturing the conceptual similarity for a specific object-scene pair (gorilla and jungle forest) as well as the hierarchical representations observed along the human visual pathway, all the way up to frontoparietal areas. At the same time, results suggest difference in the underlying computational strategy implemented by the two systems.

## Results
To test how the biological or artificial brain represent object within-domain and cross-domain regularities through their computational hierarchy, we created a stimulus set which includes two category domains of contextually related pairs of images ( ). Each pair includes one animal (clownfish, ladybug, passerine bird, seagull, polar bear, and gorilla) and its associated background scene (anemone, leaves, tree branches, seashores, ice landscapes, and jungle forests). We carefully selected images of animals that have a neutral background (e.g., the polar bear and the gorilla have a similar grayish background) to avoid possible confounds where the object background might be informative for recognition.
 This unique stimulus set allows us to differentiate between alternative hypotheses about how objects and scenes might be represented ( ). The domain model predicts a separation between animals and scenes. On the contrary, the co-occurrence model predicts contextually related associations between each animal and its specific background scene. These two models are orthogonal to each other (r = -0.05). Two additional control models rule out the role of visual factors: (1) The GIST model [ ], a good descriptor of scene statistics [ ], well describes responses in lower visual areas [ ]; (2) the condition model captures within-category similarities for each animal and scene condition. Representational similarity analysis [RSA; ] allows to test each model’s ability to capture the object space in the brain and DCNNs.
 

## Object and scene information is processed in separate visual pathways, with contextual effects emerging in frontoparietal areas
How does the human brain encode both object-scene separation and interaction? To test this, we analyzed fMRI scans from participants (N = 19; two long scan sessions per participant) while they watched the stimuli from in an event-related design. Participants were asked to indicate to what extent each image would normally co-occur with the previous image. This task allows us to investigate representations in both task-independent and task-dependent areas [ , ]. We investigated the representational structure along the hierarchy of visual regions from the primary visual cortex over regions involved in object and scene perception up to regions in the frontoparietal cortex that encode flexible goal-directed representations [ ] and that are known to be connected to domain-specific regions [ ].
Results in visual cortex reveal a clear separation between animal and scene representations, despite their co-occurrence in our visual experience. The domain model captures most variance in many areas from posterior to anterior temporal cortex but, importantly, not in early visual cortex BA17 where only the GIST model reached significance (z = 0.14; p = 0.0001, ). The separation between animals and scenes is particularly evident in animal-selective areas (domain model: z > 0.84; for all ROIs, p < 0.0001, ) with an additional minor contribution of the GIST model in posterior VTC (z = 0.17; p < 0.0001, ). This separation is also very obvious when visually inspecting the dissimilarity matrices displayed in (bottom). In scene-selective areas, the domain model also best captures the representational structure in 2 out of 3 ROIs (PPA: z = 0.46; OPA: z = 0.29; both p < 0.0001, ). The remaining models did not explain any additional variance in these areas. The very same results were observed using single-subject data ( ).
The information comes together again when moving downstream, with a small but significant effect of the co-occurrence model in frontoparietal areas (IPS: z = 0.18; DPFC: z = 0.16, both p < 0.0001, ), thus shifting the representational content in these ROIs from object-scene separation to object-scene contextual association. When using individual subject data, the effect for the co-occurrence model in these ROIs is relatively small but highly significant (DPFC and IPS: z > 0.04, both p < 0.005, ). It also reaches reliability boundaries (IPS: 0.09; DPFC: 0.04), which indicates the highest expected correlation in a brain region after accounting for signal noise [ ]. In DPFC, the remaining models did not explain any significant variance in the patterns, while in IPS there were significant correlations for the domain model (z = 0.18; p < 0.0001, ; z = 0.05; p < 0.0001, ) and condition model (z = 0.03; p = 0.001, ). Together, these results show that the overall representational content in visual cortex largely distinguishes category information at domain level (object vs scene), with interaction of these components emerging at a later processing stage in regions known to support goal-directed behavior [ ]. The whole-brain RSA confirmed these results revealing that the domain model strongly activates regions in the ventral and dorsal visual pathways, whereas the co-occurrence effect for animals and matching scenes is confined within frontoparietal areas ( ). We note that, although the distribution of strongest effects in suggests a shift in emphasis towards frontoparietal cortex for the co-occurrence relative to the other models, this shift did not result in significant differences in a whole-brain analysis. Finally, to evaluate the potential impact of metrics’ choice, we re-run the RSA with two alternative distance measures: the cross-validated Mahalanobis distance (following [ ]) and the Euclidean distance. Results confirmed the RSA analysis performed with 1 minus correlation ( ). In line with results reported in [ ], these three metrices tend to give similar results, and discrepancies are only noted in very specific designs.

## The representational hierarchy in DCNNs mimics representational transformations observed in the human brain
DCNNs widely employed in image classification [ ], are now considered a promising venue to explain biological object vision at the neural level, proving to match human object recognition abilities in several benchmarks [ – ]. Yet, it is unclear the extent to which machine vision learns brain-like representational hierarchy and computational strategies [ ]. To test this, we use RSA to evaluate the predictive power of our models in four DCNNs: Alexnet, VGG16, GoogLeNet, and ResNet-50. All models are trained in object recognition (ImageNet) which is widely considered the main computational goal of ventral visual cortex [ ] and are the most frequent benchmarks used in the literature that suggests similarities in representational structure between human and computational vision [ , ].
Quite remarkably, results revealed high similarity between biological and artificial systems in their representational hierarchy ( ). At an early stage of computational processing, the GIST model best predicts representations in all neural networks (p < 0.001 relative to all models). At mid/high-level layers, when the GIST model drops in performance, the domain model increases and reaches significance relative to the remaining models (p < 0.001). Finally, the representational space at the latest processing stage shows a salient object-scene association. For all networks, the co-occurrence model peaks at the final processing stages (i.e., fully connected layers) and, relative to the remaining models, explains significantly better the DCNNs’ representational space (p < 0.001 relative to all models; for summary statistics, see ). This structure is also visible in the secondary diagonal emerging in the lower left and upper right quadrant of the networks’ representational dissimilarity matrices ( ). The entangled animal-scene representation emerges later through the network’s hierarchy, ruling out the contribution of low-level image properties best captured by low-level visual models such as the GIST (e.g., visual similarities between each animal category and its associated environment).
 Overall, these results suggest that DCNNs are able to capture the way visual information is transformed through the human brain visual hierarchy, from early visual cortex encoding low-level visual properties, through VTC encoding domain specific information in separate channels, all the way up to frontoparietal areas where information from the different domains is combined to support goal-directed behavior focused upon object-scene regularities ( ). These results were also confirmed in an follow up exploratory analysis where we directly correlated the hierarchical representational space for each DCNNs with the representational space in the selected ROIs as well as across the whole brain ( ).

## DCNNs capture humans’ conceptual knowledge of object-scene co-occurrence
An object code that incorporates statistical regularities of an object in its background might be relevant to mimic human-like object recognition behavior, which indeed is influenced by the object-scene interaction [ , ]; context facilitates object recognition and vice versa [ ]. Given that DCNNs representations at their final layers appear to capture a degree of contextual regularities between an object and its recurring background scene, we might expect similarities with human behavior when humans judge image similarities in terms of co-occurrence (see ).
Results confirm this prediction. The correlation between human co-occurrence judgments and DCNNs’ object space ( ) increases throughout the DCNNs’ processing hierarchy to reach its peak at the final processing stages for all DCNNs (AlexNet: z = 0.46; VGG16: z = 0.59; GoogLeNet: z = 0.65; ResNet-50: z = 0.56). The DCNNs’ ability to capture human behavior is also visible when inspecting the MDS’s space ( ). In a similar fashion as the object space generated by behavioral judgments, the DCNNs object space in their final layer shows an orderly structure: each animal (e.g., yellow circle) sits close to its semantically associated scene (e.g., yellow square), thus revealing a clear contextual effect. To confirm this observation statistically, we tested similarities for congruent pairs (polar bear and iceberg) versus the average of all remaining incongruent pairs (polar bear and jungle). We observed significantly higher similarity for congruent relative to incongruent pairs in behavioral (p < 0.0001; ) as well as DCNNs data (for all models, p < 0.001). Thus, DCNNs’ sensitivity to image statistical regularities of objects occurring in typical environments results in the acquisition of a “representation of the world” that closely resembles humans’ conceptual judgments.
 

## Knowledge about object-scene co-occurrence is reached through different computational strategies in DCNNs
The ability of DCNNs to capture human high-level conceptual knowledge about the world is striking, but does this prove that the artificial networks have a real understanding of objects and scenes? One possibility is that object-background segregation might be less optimized in DCNNs architectures trained with natural images (e.g., ImageNet) where regularities between objects and backgrounds are common. For instance, a whale lives in open water, not on the street. As such, any image feature (e.g., not necessarily object-specific) might become a useful piece of information to recognize the object [ ]. Here, we test this hypothesis by systematically manipulating object/background co-occurrence during DCNNs training (see ): from 0% co-occurrence (objects within the same category were no more likely to occur on the same background type than objects from different categories) to 100% co-occurrence (objects within the same category were always presented on the same background). Confirming the role of image regularities in facilitating object recognition ( ), the model’s validation test revealed significantly higher model performance for the 100% co-occurrence condition (accuracy: 0.85) relative to remaining conditions (accuracy < 0.72; t(4) 3.95, p < 0.02, for all pairwise t-tests). Furthermore, we predicted an increasing representational bias towards human-like conceptual object-scene associations in accordance with increasing object-scene co-occurrence. We run an RSA analysis with each of our predicting models and tested correlations for fully connected layer 7 in a 4x4 ANOVA within Co-occurrence (0%, 58%, 83%, 100%) and Model (GIST, condition, domain, co-occurrence) as within-subject factors. Results revealed a significant Co-occurrence x Model interaction (F(9,36) 11.82, p < 0.0001; ) showing that different levels of object-background regularities in the training set result in differences in DCNN’s representational content (fc7) as captured by our models. These results are important to also confirm the effects observed in DCNNs ( ) through a much larger stimulus set.
 Follow-up analyses revealed that the contextual-related effect is absent when the training is based on random object-scene associations (0% co-occurrence: z = 0.01) but emerges when regularities in the training set increase (58%: z = 0.20; 83%: z = 0.27; 100%: z = 0.32). This effect is already significantly higher for the 58% condition relative to 0% condition (t(4) 3.68, p = 0.02) and it increases for higher levels of object-scene co-occurrence (83%: t(4) 6.51, p = 0.003; 100%: t(4) 20.22, p < 0.0001; both relative to 0%). Interestingly, the effect of the condition model is significantly high when the network cannot rely on scene information (0%: z = 0.17), but strongly decreases when regularity increases (58%-100%: z < 0.06; t(4), > 6.24, p < 0.004, for all 3 comparisons). In the 100% co-occurrence condition, the correlation with the GIST model reaches significance (z = 0.18; t(4), > 5.78, p = 0.004), probably because in this condition there is an increase of lower-level background features that can be relied upon. This last condition shows that finding a representation of object-scene correspondences can be obtained through various processing strategies. This motivated us to take closer look at the processing stages right before the stage at which object-scene correspondences are represented.

## Multiple object (domain-specific) spaces in the visual cortex but not in DCNNs
In visual cortex, the domain model captures most of the variance in animal as well as in scene areas, but the dissimilarity matrices ( ) reveal a marked difference between the two sets of regions that likely reflect differential domain-specific object spaces [ – , , ]. This rich dimensionality can support the need of our brain to employ different representations for different behavioural needs [ ]. For instance, in scene selective areas, the degree of navigational layout well characterizes its representational content which is relevant for naviation [ , ]. In a similar fashion, in animal selective areas, the degree of animacy [ , ], and the animal-specific features [ , ] might be relevant to support social-related computations. In our results, DCNN’s mid-layers show domain division for animals and scenes ( ), but does this division embed rich domain-specific object spaces like those observed in the human visual cortex? We tested two domain-specific dimensions that well characterize the object space in animal and scene areas: the animacy continuum for the animal domain and navigational layout information for the scene domain. These two dimensions were included in our stimulus set ( ) and are captured by the animacy continuum and the navigational layout model, respectively (see ). To test the ability of DNNs, trained on object recognition, to capture domain-specific object spaces in scene and animal selective areas, as above we used RSA to test the two domain-specific models (animacy continuum and the navigational layout) and two control models (condition and GIST) in brain and DCNNs data. To account for the different domains we tested two instances of the same DCNNs architecture (GoogLeNet), trained to classify the basic level category in the two domains: objects (ImageNet) and scenes (Scene 365).
 As expected, the RSA on the brain data ( , left) confirms differential representational spaces reflecting domain-specific object spaces in visual cortex. Whereas VTC areas show a significant preference for the animacy continuum model (VTC post: z = 0.76; VTC lat: z = 0.84; VTC inf: z = 0.70; all p < 0.001, relative to the remaining models), scene-selective PPA and OPA show a significant preference for the navigational layout model (OPA: z = 0.47; PPA: z = 0.38; both p < 0.001, relative to the remaining models). Results were replicated in a follow-up analysis, where each domain-specific space (upper quadrant RDM for animals and lower quadrant RDM for scenes) was tested separately ( ). Together, these results highlight the functional specialization of the human brain for multiple domain-specific computations and it highlights a representational richness that is exactly what one expects in a system with separate streams to process animal and scene information relevant to support domain-specific computations.
Do DCNNs trained on category (objects or scenes) recognition learn representations that mimic brain domain-specific object spaces? To address this question, we tested the same architecture (GoogLeNet) trained either on object or scene recognition. The RSA for DCNN data trained on object recognition (GoogLeNet trained on ImageNet) partially replicates results observed in VTC showing a significant effect for the animacy relative to all remaining models in those same layers that revealed a domain-division effect in the previous RSA analysis ( , gray-shaded areas). Interestingly, at the latest processing stage the representation was best predicted by the condition model which reflects the representation expected when a network learn to distinguish the different conditions at the basic-level. Overall, this result reveals higher sensitivity for the dimension DCNNs were trained on (note that the Imagenet dataset contains a high % of animal images) and points to a potentially critical role that training tasks play in developing domain-specific spaces in DCNNs. On the contrary, the DCNN trained in scene recognition (GoogLeNet trained on Scene 365), throughout its layers, did not reveal any similarity with the object space observed in scene-selective areas ( ). It did not learn a representational space that reflects the amount of navigational layout features present in the image. This result is not totally unexpected; scene recognition tasks require the elaboration of information that substantially differs from the information necessary to support scene navigation computations, thus questioning the role of purely recognition-based training tasks in capturing the richness of object space observed in visual cortex. We note that the methods employed here allow us exploring the dominant dimensions that diverge/converge across brain and DCNNs data. Alternative methods [e.g., ] might be more sensitive to detect less preponderant dimensions yet present in the data. Finally, the different training task did not influence the representations learnt in the early layers. In early layers, both object and scene recognition DCNNs showed a representational space that was best captured by the GIST model relative to the remaining models ( ). These results were replicated when the representational space for animals (RDM upper quadrant) and scenes (RDM lower quandrant) was tested separatedly ( ).

## Discussion
We investigated how human and machine object vision represent within-domain and across-domain information of animals and scenes matched for contextual regularities and to what extent the latter mimics human object vision computations. We measured the representational similarity within domain (for animals and scenes) as well as across domains (animal-scene association), in a stimulus set that includes object-scene pairs that often co-occur in the visual environment. Results revealed that DCNNs employed in computational vision are able to capture conceptual representations humans have about object-scene correspondences. Not only DCNNs trained to perform object recognition are able to capture human judgments about contextual associations between and animal and its typical scene, but most importantly, they show a good hierarchical correspondence at the neural level. Nevertheless, our results do also show differences in terms of implemented computational strategies. In the visual cortex, object and scene information is processed in separated pathways, which reveal domain-specific representational contents for animal (animacy continuum) and scene (navigational layout) processing. Interaction between object and scene components was observed at a later processing stage in areas that contribute to goal-directed behavior. DCNNs’ mid-layers showed a similar degree of object/scene separation, but its information content shows reduced domain-specificity even when DCNNs were trained on domain-specific recognition tasks (i.e., scene recognition). Further, the emergence of human-like high-level conceptual representation of object-scene co-occurrence in DCNNs depends upon the amount of object-scene co-occurrence present in the image-set thus highlighting the fundamental role of training history. In sum, despite the remarkable achievements shown by convolutional object recognition trained DCNNs, when aiming to mimic the rich and multiple representational spaces observed in the human brain, future brain models should extent their focus beyond recognition tasks.
The primate brain is, at least in part, characterized by separated modules for domain-specific processing [ ]. These modules are relatively independent such that confined lesions disrupt computations for one domain (e.g., animate entities) leaving unaffected other domains [e.g., inanimate objects; ]. In visual cortex, domain-specific areas encode object dimensions tailored to support specific computations [ , , ]. As an example, view-invariant features represented in face- [ , ] and hand-selective regions [ , ] reflect domain-specific computations: the former to support identity recognition [ ], the latter to support action understanding [ ]. In agreement, our results show that in addition to a large division between animal and scene representations, within each domain, representational content reflects the type of computations these networks support: animacy features in animal-selective areas [ , , ] and layout navigational properties in scene-selective areas [ , ]. We can show this representational diversity because in our study we included separate behavioral-relevant dimensions for objects (i.e., animacy continuum) and background scenes (i.e., navigational properties), while this was typically not done in previous studies. Furthermore, by including objects and backgrounds that co-occur in the environment, we also demonstrate that at the level of domain-specific representations there is not yet a strong effect of such statistical regularities. This is not to say that there is no interaction between object and scene representations in human object vision, which in fact, has been reported in previous studies [ , , , ]. Representations of scenes and objects are modulated by various statistics, including the extent to which objects co-occur in the same scene [ , ]. However, in these studies the neural responses to objects and scene were tested separately, and never directly compared across domains (e.g., from objects to scenes). Thus, the nature of such an interaction is still debated and it might occur on top of domain modularity for objects and scenes [ , ]. Our study points in this direction, showing that, ultimately, all such interaction effects ride on top of a fundamental division of labor for animal versus scene properties, in those areas supporting flexible goal-directed representations [ , ].
In a quite remarkable fashion, DCNNs capture both human behavior as well as the hierarchical representations observed in the human brain. When it comes to behavior, DCNNs pick up typical object-background regularities reflecting conceptual knowledge we have about the world, thus reaching the human-unique conceptual knowledge level. However, the information processing strategy might be very different in DCNNs. Indeed, when we manipulated object-background systematically in a smaller-scale training regime, even arbitrary object-background associations resulted in strong effects of such associations upon the representations that these networks develop ( ). This result highlights the critical role played by training on the resulting object space. In the context of a one-image, one-label approach, any pixel in the image might contain features useful to recognize objects. When such regularities are prevalent in a dataset, as it is for natural image databases, shortcuts can be taken [ ]. In these situations, background information becomes as relevant (or even more relevant) as the object to be recognized [ ]. This points to a substantial difference between human vision and feedforward DCNNs. Although, faciliatory effects on object recognition have been observed when an object and its background are congruent [ ], thus highlighting the potential role of statistical regularities in the environment in supporting human behavior [ ], the ability to separate foreground objects from background information is a prerequisite to object recognition, for which the VTC plays a critical role. On the contrary, the object recognition DCNNs tested here, which are widely used in computational vision, in their final layers, do integrate background information in their learnt object space.
The effect of background on the object space in DCNN’s fully connected layers raises the question of how much of the previously reported domain-specific effects (e.g., animacy division) observed in these same layers are due to the sensitivity of these layers to represent background information in addition to objects [ – ]. Such questions arise because apparently DCNNs in their final layers, learn representations in which object and scene information is more entangled than what we observe in the human visual cortex. In other words, the final DCNNs layers, represent both the animal and its associated scene (e.g., polar bear and ice landscape), whereas VTC represents animals and scenes in separated areas. One possibility is that DCNNs represent animals separated from inanimate objects because the former is typically seen in specific backgrounds. Taking such shortcuts can be advantageous such as the case shown here, where DCNNs acquired human-like “knowledge” on which they were not trained. However, in general, studies show that relying too much on background information can result in remarkable non-human-like errors. Examples have been reported where DCNNs accuracy for animal recognition drops in unfamiliar backgrounds [ ], large animals go undetected in unlikely environments such as a living room [ ], or more simply, object classification might be primarily driven by object-irrelevant information present in the image, which happen to correlate with categorization-relevant features [ ].
Previous studies have shown that DCNNs learn a hierarchical representational space that mimics the visual hierarchy observed in the ventral pathway, where the top DCNNs layers are those that best fit with VTC representations [ , ]. Our results go beyond previous observations and show that VTC domain-specific representations are well captured by mid-level layers instead, because final layers appear to even be able to predict high-level representations observed in downstream frontoparietal areas, generally associated to goal-directed behavior [ ]. How can we explain these findings? We believe that the answer lies in the selection of the stimulus set. Previous studies have mainly focused on independent category representations (e.g., animate-inanimate), here instead we created a stimulus set that in addition to within-domain relations allows to test similarities across domains that can be found in the co-occurrence of an object in its typical scene. Thus, the crucial difference between our design and that of previous studies is that we manipulated scene congruence, which results in a remarkable dissociation between late DCNN layers (which incorporate this congruence) and VTC regions (which do not).
Although DCNNs might implement different computational strategies they do still develop “rich” internal representations for different object categories [e.g., faces, objects; , , ], and their features [e.g., eyes for faces; ]. These representations/features are the result of specific tasks DCNNs are trained on (e.g., object recognition). Already in our study, the object space in mid-layers, revealed evidence for a degree of animacy continuum on top of object-scene division. What these representations lack, however, is the diversity and division of labor that we see in the human brain ( ). The representational diversity observed in visual cortex is likely to result from the need of our brain to employ visual information to support diverse behavioral goals over and above object recognition: from recognizing the identity and mental states of people we constantly interact with, to the ability to navigate in the surrounding environment. These computations are implemented in parallel brain networks and the representations in domain-specific networks are optimized to support the different computational goals our brain constantly deals with. Thus, for instance, in visual cortex, scene-selective areas represent scene layout information relevant to support navigation which is not captured by DCNNs trained on scene recognition tasks ( ). DCNNs can be trained in separate domains though. Training a network on a specific object domain (e.g., faces and objects) leads to diverging object spaces in late DCNNs’ layers [ ], which however, do not generalize well to other domains [ , , ]. Together, this highlights the advantages of domain-specialized modules evolved by biological vision [ ]. We suggest that future DCNNs that aim to capture the rich and diverse representational space found in VTC need to employ tasks that go beyond standard object recognition tasks and target the diverse computational goals our visual system supports [ ].
For our DCNNs analyses, we employed a relatively small dataset in comparison with dataset available in computer vision. We acknowledge that this might be a limitation but at the same time, the dataset we tested has the advantage to be carefully controlled for many factors. This is why we can compare multiple competing models. The problem with many datasets of natural images is that many dimensions of interests are naturally correlated. Therefore, in many cases, it becomes difficult to disentangle the relevant dimensions unless creating an ad-hoc stimulus set which despite its size limitation, allows to tackle specific experimental hypotheses. We therefore believe that to complement results based on big data sets, the need for well controlled (but inevitably small) data sets is of great added value to test cognitive/psychological theories/hypotheses.
In sum, our study confirms and goes beyond previous studies showing a quite remarkable ability of DCNNs to mimic human object vision at the behavioral and neural representational level in a previously unexplored aspect: the representation of object-scene correspondences. At the same time, it demonstrates the importance of a unique aspect of human information processing relative to machine vision: human information processing represents rich and diverse object spaces. Most likely, this is related to the fact that the human brain has evolved and has been trained to implement a wide variety of tasks that require to extract different information type from the different domains present in the visual scene: object information might be more relevant for computations that pertain human-object interactions, whereas information from the background is more relevant to spatial computations such as navigation in the environment. As a consequence, humans understand that an object is not just a collection of features, which could erroneously lead to the assumption that green leaves are inherently linked to ladybugs or to adversarial errors such as classifying a set of yellow and black stripes as a school bus [ ]. While the human brain is definitely also prone to the use of shortcuts and heuristics [ ], the presence of multiple streams of processing and of a multitude of modular systems has the potential of limiting the impact of such shortcuts. It is a major challenge for the future to develop neural network models with a similar richness of representational content.

## Methods and materials

## Ethics statement
All participants signed the informed consent approved by the ethic committee at the Katholieke Universiteit of Leuven (B322201630276).

## Participants
We recruited 21 participants (7 females, mean age 29). All participants took part in the behavioral test and in 2 functional neuroimaging sessions. Due to technical problems, 1 session from 2 participants and 2 sessions from 1 participant went lost. Additionally, due to excessive head motion, all data from 1 participant and 4 runs from an additional participant were excluded from the data analyses. The head motion exclusion criterion was set to 2 mm (equal to 1 voxel size) and defined before data collection.

## Stimuli
We constructed a stimulus set with contextual-related pairs of images ( ). For each contextual pair (1 background and 1 animal), we selected 6 conditions, each containing 4 examples. The animal conditions were depicted on a neutral background to avoid low-level associations between animals and their typical backgrounds. To balance the animals’ shape information, we included 2 similarly colorful (red) rounded shaped and small size animals (clownfish and ladybug), 2 birds (passerine and seagull) and 2 mammals with similar body shape (polar bear and gorilla). Thus, conditions within each animal pair are matched in terms of taxonomic and visual information (the two birds have a similar shape, visual features, and both fly), but are specifically associated with a different background: one was associated with a watery background (polar bear and ice landscapes) and one with a greenery background (gorilla and jungle). Finally, each stimulus domain is characterized by a behaviorally relevant dimension: the animacy continuum for the animal conditions [fish/bug, birds, mammals; ] and the degree of navigational properties [ , ] for the background conditions (seashore, ice landscape, forest jungle versus anemones, leaves, tree branches).

## fMRI data
The fMRI data was acquired in two separate sessions within 2 weeks. Each session comprised 8 runs for the main experiment and 2 runs for the functional localizer. For the main experiment, each run lasted 6 min and 52 sec (206 volumes). For each run, the 48 image trials and 16 fixation trials were presented twice in a random order. Each trial was presented for 1500 ms and followed by a fixation screen for 1500 ms. Each run started and ended with 14 s of fixation. During scanning participants performed a one-back task judging on a scale from 1 to 4 the degree of co-occurrence of each pair of stimuli (“How often do you see these images occurring together?”). The response order was counterbalanced across runs. Before the first scanner session, participants familiarized with the stimuli and performed a similarity judgments task [ ] arranging the 48 images ( ) according to “the degree to which you see these images occurring together”. The resulting behavioral dissimilarity matrices were averaged across participants.

## Acquisition parameters
The fMRI scans were acquired on a 3T Philips scanner with a 32-channel coil at the Department of Radiology of the University Hospitals Leuven. MRI volumes were collected using echo planar (EPI) T2*-weighted scans. Acquisition parameters were as follows: repetition time (TR) of 2 s, echo time (TE) of 30 ms, flip angle (FA) of 90°, field of view (FoV) of 224 mm, and matrix size of 112 x 109 and voxel size of 2 x 2 x 2 mm. Each volume comprised 60 axial slices (0.2 mm gap) acquired with a multi-band factor of 2, covering the whole brain. The T1-weighted anatomical images were acquired with an MP-RAGE sequence, with 1 x 1 x 1 mm resolution.

## Preprocessing
Before statistical analysis, functional images underwent a standard preprocessing procedure (SPM 12, Welcome Department of Cognitive Neurology) including three-dimensional head-motion corrected (2nd degree spine interpolation), coregistration to the individual anatomical images and normalization to an MNI (Montreal Neurological Institute) template. Spatial smoothing by convolution of a Gaussian kernel of 4 mm full width at half-maximum was applied to functional images [ ]. For each participant, a general linear model (GLM) was created to model the 48 conditions and the six motion correction parameters (x, y, z for translation and for rotation). Each predictor’s time course was modeled for 3 s (stimulus presentation + fixation) by a boxcar function convolved with the canonical hemodynamic response function in SPM.

## Regions of interest (ROIs)
All ROIs were defined at the group level based on anatomical masks defined with the Neuromorphometrics SPM toolbox, and functional masks defined with an independent localizer. All visually active voxels (all 48 conditions vs baseline) exceeding the uncorrected threshold p <0.0001 within the functional/anatomical masks were included. The anatomical-based ROIs included 2 visual areas (V1, posterior VTC), and 2 frontoparietal areas, intraparietal sulcus (IPS) and dorsal prefrontal cortex (DPFC). The functionally defined ROIs included animal- and scene-selective areas defined with an independent localizer. Whereas “scene-selective” is standard terminology, “animal-selective” is not. We chose this terminology for the following reason. We know that medial VTC responds more to inanimate objects including scenes, whereas the lateral VTC responds more to animate objects including faces, bodies and animals more in general. For this reason, in a separated localizer, we defined animal- and scene-selective areas based on the direct contrast between these two conditions (animals versus scenes; scenes versus animals). This contrast successfully highlighted animal-selective areas in lateral and ventral VTC and scene-selective areas in parahippocampal gyrus (PPA), retrosplenial cortex (RSC), and transverse occipital sulcus (TOS).

## DCNN data
We extracted the vector spaces for images in our stimulus set from 4 recent DCNNs with different depth: Alexnet [ ], VGG-19 [ ], GoogLeNet [ ] and ResNet 50 [ ]. DCNNs consist of various feedforward processing stages including (1) convolutional layers, (2) rectified linear unit activation, (3) max pooling layers, and (4) fully connected layers (resembling a multilayer perceptron). For each DCNNs and each convolutional and fully connected layer, we extracted the vector space for all 48 stimuli by means of the Deep Learning Toolbox (https://uk.mathworks.com/products/deep-learning.html) in MATLAB. All DCNNs were pre-trained in object recognition on 1.2 million natural images belonging to 1000 classes for the ImageNet dataset (http://www.image-net.org/). In addition, GoogLeNet was also pre-trained in scene recognition on the Place365 dataset which contains 10 million images comprising more than 400 scene classes. Each scene contains between 5000 to 30,000 training images.

## Statistical analysis
We used representational similarity analysis [RSA; ] to compare the neural activity patterns from the brain’s ROIs and DCNNs’ layers to our experimental models. CoSMoMVPA [ ] was used to create the representational dissimilarity matrices (RDMs) for brain and DCNNs data. For neural data, for each voxel within a given ROI, GLM parameter estimates for each stimulus condition (relative to baseline) were extracted for each participant and each run and normalized by subtracting the mean response across all conditions. Similarly, for each DCNNs, the vector features for each stimulus condition within each layer were normalized by subtracting the mean feature activations across all conditions. Next, we computed Pearson’s correlation across voxels (fMRI) or units (DCNNs) between all condition pairs and converted the resulting correlation matrix into a representational dissimilarity matrix (RDM; 1 minus Pearson’s r) and used it as input for the RSA analysis. We performed two main analyses. To test our main experimental hypothesis, we run two RSAs for both brain and DCNNs data. The first analysis tested two main models: the domain model which assumed high similarity for stimuli within each domain (animals and scenes) and the co-occurrence model which assumed high similarity for each animal-scene contextual-related pair. These two models were derived from our two alternative hypotheses and were orthogonal to each other (r = -0.05). Two additional control models were included: the GIST model [ ] to capture low-level image information and the condition model to account for within condition similarities. The correlations between all models are the following: (domain and GIST: r = 0.11; domain and condition: r = 0.27; co-occurrence and GIST: r = 0.16; co-occurrence and condition: r = 0.62; GIST and condition: r = 0.23). For the neural data, the RSA was performed for group averaged data and for single subject data. For the latter one we calculated reliability of RDMs which indicates the highest expected correlation in a brain region given its signal-to-noise ratio. For each subject and each ROI, the RDM was correlated with the averaged RDM of the remaining participants. The resulting correlation values (averaged across participants) capture noise inherent to a single subject as well as noise caused by inter-subject variability. For the second RSA ( ), in addition to the two control models, the following experimental models were included: the animacy continuum model which captures the well-known animacy continuum described in VTC and the navigational layout model which instead captures the degree to which a scene contains features useful for navigation. The animacy continuum model [ ] captures the degree to which an animal is perceived as animate (within the animate/inanimate division some animals are perceived more animate than others: mammals > birds, birds > fish/bugs). The navigational layout model captures the degree to which scene layout provides relevant information for scene navigation. 50% of scene images (jungle forests, ice landscapes, and beaches) contain high degree of layout information. These images are those associated with large animals (e.g., gorilla) and can be considered typical scenes that convey information enough about scene navigation. On the contrary, the remaining images contain little layout information (e.g., leaves, anemoni, and tree brunches). In other words, these images represent zoom-in scenes that from a human point of view provide little information to support navigation. Based on this consideration, the navigational layout model includes a binary distinction between these 2 sets of backgrounds. The backgrounds with low-navigational layout properties are also characterised by object-like properties, as justified by their labels (e.g., ‘leaves’), which we also incorporated in the model by a partial similarity between these backgrounds and the animal images. As for the first RSA, two control models were included: (1) the condition model, is considered the default model for the classification tasks employed in computational vision model which predicts classification at the level of basic category (e.g., polar bears, beaches etc), and the GIST model to control for low-level image properties. For all RSAs, we used partial correlation to account for any partial relationship between models. Before statistical analyses, results from the RSAs were Fisher transformed (0.5*log[(1 + r)/(1—r)]) and tested with ANOVAs and pairwise t tests when individual-subject data were available, or permutation tests for DCNNs and fMRI group averaged data.
In addition to ROI-based RSAs we performed two whole-brain RSAs. The whole-brain RSA was implemented in CoSMo MVPA (Oosterhof et al., 2016) using the volume-based searching approach (Kriegeskorte et al., 2006). For each condition (relative to baseline), parameter estimates were extracted for each participant and each run and normalized by subtracting the mean response across all conditions. Resulting values were then averaged across all runs. For each brain voxel, a searchlight was defined using a spherical neighborhood with a variable radius, including the 100 voxels nearest to the center voxel. For each searchlight, the neural dissimilarity matrix was computed for the 48 stimuli. The neural dissimilarity matrix (upper triangle) was then correlated with the dissimilarity matrices derived from the 4 models ( ) and dissimilarity matrices derived from all layers of AlexNet. The output correlation values were Fisher transformed and assigned to the center voxel of the sphere. Resulting whole-brain correlation maps for each model and layer were tested against baseline using random effects whole-brain group analysis corrected with the threshold-free cluster enhancement (TFCE) method [ ]. Voxelwise-corrected statistical maps for each model/layer relative to baseline (z 1.96; p < 0.025, one-sided t test) are displayed on a brain template by means of BrainNet Viewer [ ].

## DCNN experiment with congruency manipulation
Construction of the training datasets: Custom datasets were constructed by joining masked images of objects with inverse-masked images of scenes obtained from two publicly available datasets. Images of 6 object categories (’bus’, ’clock’, ’dog’, ’giraffe’, ’television’, ’umbrella’) were obtained from the Microsoft COCO dataset that consists of over 300.000 images labelled with more than 2 million object instances [ ]. Each object instance is associated with a mask which allows extraction of object-representing pixels. Objects of small size (ratio between object size versus total image size smaller than 3%) were enlarged and objects of object-image ratio smaller than 0.15% omitted in order to avoid unsatisfactory classification performance on images with hardly any object-associated pixels [ ]. Scene images of 6 categories (’church indoor’, ’sand desert, ’glacier’, ’ocean underwater’, ’broadleaf forest’, ’landfill’) were obtained from the Places dataset that consists of more than 2 million images of 205 scene categories, most of them containing several thousand unique images [ ]. This allowed generation of a total of 10500 training images (1750 per object category) of 256 x 256 x 3 pixels per dataset, in which each image showed an object of one of the 6 object categories embedded in a scene of one of the 6 scene categories. Note that with only 6 image classes with a total of 10500 training images we are not claiming that the resulting DCNN models will be usable as state-of-the-art models in image classification or as reference models to compare with neural representations. Instead, these models are merely developed to provide a proof-of-principle showing how strong the impact of scene-object congruency in a training set that is controlled in terms of this congruency, in contrast to typical training sets such as ImageNet.
Four different datasets of 0%, 58.3%, 83.3% and 100% of object-scene co-occurrence were constructed by manipulating the likelihood of objects being joined with their adhering background type. Each dataset was constructed out of the same set of object and background images that were, however, joined in a different fashion. To illustrate this on the example of 83.3% object-scene co-occurrence dataset, backgrounds of every 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th image were object-specific (80%) and background of every 5th image was belonging to either one of the six background categories (20%). Thus, there is an additional 1/6 chance that randomly chosen backgrounds will come from the object-specific category (adding additional 3.3% to the total object-scene specificity of the dataset). In the 0% object-scene co-occurrence, none of the 6 scene categories is more likely to be associated with a particular object category than the other scene categories (all have a 16.7% chance).

## Training of the models
Five individual DCNN models were trained on each of the constructed datasets. The models followed the standard AlexNet architecture with five convolutional and three fully-connected layers with one minor difference in input layer accepting images of size 256 x 256 x 3 instead of 224 x 224 x 3 pixels, as originally defined by Krizhevsky and colleagues (2012)[ ] to better fit the size of our image stimuli. All models were trained for 150 epochs in batches of 75 training images, with the Adam optimizer and categorical cross-entropy loss function. A dropout regularization rate of 0.5 was added to the first two fully-connected layers. Additionally, image augmentation was employed to improve generalization of the trained models. At the end of the training, only the weights of the best performing epoch (lowest validation loss calculated on a total 750 validation images, 125 per object category) were stored. All models were implemented in Python utilizing functions of the Keras library.

## Representational similarity analysis with congruency manipulation
Additionally, representational similarity analysis was performed to compare patterns of inner neural representations of the trained networks with our experimental models. In order to do so, neural activations of each networks’ 7th layer (fully connected) were extracted by presenting them with 48 image stimuli, each sprouting 4096 neural activations. This set of stimuli consisted of 24 images of objects on neutralized backgrounds and 24 images of scenes without the object entities (4 for each object category and 4 for each scene category). Neutralized backgrounds were obtained by averaging pixels of 6 scene images randomly chosen from Places dataset [ ], each of them belonging to one of the above specified scene categories. This was done in order to provide objects with a background that possessed no relevant scene information yet were not too atypical/homogeneous and thus too different from training examples (usage of monotonous backgrounds was found to be problematic as it significantly impacted internal representations of the networks). Next, correlations between internal activations for each stimulus were obtained by calculation of Pearson correlation coefficients. This resulted in a single similarity matrix for each model which was in the end transformed into an RDM matrix by subtracting it from a unit matrix (with all values equal one) of a matching dimension.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## Dissimilarity matrices computed with alternative distance metrics.
The main brain RSA analysis is replicated with alternative distance measures: (A) cross-validated Mahalanobis distance following [ ] and (B) Euclidean distance. As for the main RSA, we tested 4 models: GIST, condition, domain, co-occurrence. Results confirm data analysis performed with 1-corr distance. Filled bars indicate significant values against baseline (p <0.005, corrected for n. or ROIs) calculated with pairwise t-tests across subjects (n = 19).
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Fig

## VTC representations are best captured by mid-level DCNNs layers.
(A) For each DCNNs, the RSA results show the degree of similarity between the representational space of individual layers in each brain area. (B) The random-effects whole-brain RSA results corrected with Threshold-Free Cluster Enhancement [TFCE; ] are displayed separately for each layer of AlexNet against baseline [BrainNet Viewer; ].
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Fig

## Domain-specific spaces tested within-domain data.
The RSA results for the 4 models (GIST, condition, animacy continuum, navigational layout) are shown for group-averaged brain (left) data and DCNNs (right). The same DCNN architecture (GoogLeNet) was trained either on object recognition (ImageNet), or scene recognition (Scene 365). For comparison with the first RSA analysis (see ), gray shaded areas indicate the network’s layers in which the domain model significantly outperformed the remaining models. Color-coded lines on top of bar/graphs indicate the network’s layers/ROIs where each model significantly outperformed the remaining models (p < 0.001) computed with pairwise permutations tests (10000 randomizations of stimulus labels).
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.

 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011086.r001Decision Letter 0
SerreThomasSection EditorYangTianmingAcademic Editor© 2023 Serre, Yang2023Serre, Yanghttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
28 Jul 2022

Dear Dr. Bracci,
Thank you very much for submitting your manuscript "The representational hierarchy in human and artificial visual systems in the presence of object-scene regularities" for consideration at PLOS Computational Biology.
As with all papers reviewed by the journal, your manuscript was reviewed by members of the editorial board and by several independent reviewers. In light of the reviews (below this email), we would like to invite the resubmission of a significantly-revised version that takes into account the reviewers' comments.
We cannot make any decision about publication until we have seen the revised manuscript and your response to the reviewers' comments. Your revised manuscript is also likely to be sent to reviewers for further evaluation.
When you are ready to resubmit, please upload the following:
[1] A letter containing a detailed list of your responses to the review comments and a description of the changes you have made in the manuscript. Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.
[2] Two versions of the revised manuscript: one with either highlights or tracked changes denoting where the text has been changed; the other a clean version (uploaded as the manuscript file).
Important additional instructions are given below your reviewer comments.
Please prepare and submit your revised manuscript within 60 days. If you anticipate any delay, please let us know the expected resubmission date by replying to this email. Please note that revised manuscripts received after the 60-day due date may require evaluation and peer review similar to newly submitted manuscripts.
Thank you again for your submission. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive so far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Tianming Yang
Associate Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
Thomas Serre
Deputy Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
***********************
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Authors:

Please note here if the review is uploaded as an attachment.

Reviewer #1: This paper investigates the separate and conjunctive representations of scenes and objects in the brain and deep neural network models trained for visual object recognition. A set of four models are used to capture different hypotheses on the nature of the representation. By comparing the brain activity in different regions of the ventral temporal and parieto-frontal regions, it is shown that how each area represents objects (animate) and scenes in various ways. The rest of the paper then takes a deep dive into comparing different DNN architectures on the degree of brain-similarity in representing these two category of stimuli. In summary, similar to the brain, different DNNs also show similar representations for coding objects and scenes and their interactions, capture human-like representational biases in coding scenes and objects, but fail to replicate some aspects of the brain representation - namely "multiple object spaces".
Overall, this was an interesting and well written paper that was easy to follow. The stimulus set and the accompanying fMRI experiment were designed thoughtfully. The modeling experiments were also justified and were used to support specific claims. I however had some concern with the particular method used for investigating representational similarity and found parts of the manuscript unclear.
- The present study uses a correlation-based RSA metric to investigate similarity between different models and the brain. It is known that correlation distance metrics are sensitive to stimulus activations, unlike Euclidean distance and its derivatives [1]. It is therefore unclear to me whether the chosen metric is the best metric for the analyses carried out throughout the manuscript and to what degree the findings are dependent on this choice of metric. Can the authors show that for example by choosing a Euclidean distance metric, the claims and findings of the paper remain valid?
- It is unclear why the subjects were instructed to "indicate to what extent each image would normally co-occur with the previous image". Could this task not bias the brain representations in regions underlying decision making like PFC to be biased towards interactive effects like those observed in the study? Why hasn't a simpler task like passive fixation used instead? The logic here was unclear to me.
- It is unclear what "animal-selective areas" was referring to. Are all VT regions considered animal-selective?
- In figure 3, the ordering of brain ROIs in Fig. 3B implicitly suggests a particular hierarchy between them and lack thereof in the models. However the hierarchy of these brain areas are not as strictly linear and thus this part of the figure may be misleading.
- In Figure 4, resnet50 model does not seem to follow one of the claims associated with this figure: "representational correspondence with frontoparietal areas increases and remains high till the final processing. This effect was observed regardless of DCNNs architecture.". This divergence should be discussed in text.
- The notion of "multiple object spaces" was somewhat unclear to me, especially in the context of DNNs. It is known that these models contain category-specific kernels that are selective for particular objects or object parts. The last section of the results seems to claim that DNNs lack "rich domain-specific object spaces". I found this claim to be contradicting more than several other works highlighting the richness of these representations e.g. see [2, 3]. Perhaps what is meant to be claimed is specific to the representational of navigational layout? If yes, this point needs to be better clarified. Even so, can this failure to find similar detailed distinction across the scene stimuli be due to the high dimensionality of these networks and the limitations of the method (RSA) used?
- Related to the previous point, it was unclear how the "navigational layout" in Fig7A produced. There are 4 columns that presumably correspond to 4 of the scene stimuli (?).
- Line 520: it is claimed that "object and scene information is more entangled than what we observe in the human visual system". The evidence supporting this statement is unclear to me. Please add appropriate references and discussion.
- Also line 566-568: it is claimed that machine vision lacks "rich and diverse object spaces". It is unclear in what ways this feature is missing in current DNNs
- I'm also somewhat concerned with the sufficiency of the dataset used to train the DNN models for Fig 6. In the methods section, it is mentioned that a total of 10,500 stimuli were used to train the DNN. Considering that there are around 60 million parameters in this model, the dataset of this size sounds way too small and I'm worried about the findings from this experiment. It would be helpful to see a plot of training and validation losses for these experiments as well as examples of some of these images used for training/validation.
- typos: line 230, what -> which; line 287: in -> and; 412: an -> a
1. Walther, A. et al. Neuroimage 137, 188–200 (2016).
2. Cohen, U., Chung, S.Y., Lee, D.D. & Sompolinsky, H. Nat. Commun. 11, 1–13 (2020).
3. Murty, N. A. R., Bashivan, P., Abate, A., DiCarlo, J, and Kanwisher, N. Nat. Commun. (2021).doi:10.1038/s41467-021-25409-6
Reviewer #2: In Bracci et al’s paper, the authors investigated the representation of the animals and their living environmental images in the human brain with fMRI, as well as the DCNN. They not only found the areas that represent the within-domain, but also the ones representing the across-domain, which indicates the co-occurrence of the animals and their living environment. The Similar representations of the within-domain and across-domain were also observed in the DCNN and the latter was dependent on the training image-sets. In addition, they also tested the animal continuum model and navigation layout model in human brain and DCNN. They confirmed that the animal continuum model was represented in both, while the navigation layout model only existed in the human brain.
In general, I think the whole experiment is well designed and some of the results are very interesting. The whole paper is well written and clear. However, I still have some comments/questions:
1) I am not sure I understand navigation spatial layout RDM model in Fig. 7A. For the animal continuum model, I understand that the authors consider the natural scene images as the non-animal images. But for the navigation spatial layout RDM, they consider the first two (or three?) groups of scene images are similar to animal images, but have zero similarity with the other scene images. How do the authors determine such RDM structure? Also for the animal continuum model, it is highly similar to the within-domain model structure. So, given the previous results, it is not surprising that they can find the animal continuum representation in the brain and DCNN. They might consider testing the animal continuum model only with animal images. The same analysis could be also applied with the spatial layout model. In addition, I think the whole analysis is Figure 7 is not that convincing, due to the small number of images and test conditions. For the animal continuum model, they only have 3 different conditions within the animal images, and two conditions within the scene images. They can test with more images with more conditions at least with DCNN.
2) In Figure 2, it is very interesting to see the effect of animal-scene co-occurrence emerges in frontoparietal areas. But given the low correlation value, I am not sure whether it really reflects co-occurrence. One way to test it is to build the wrong co-occurrence models (e.g., gorilla associated with landscape, and polar bear associated with forest), and then tested the significance level between the correct co-occurrence model and wrong co-occurrence models. Such analysis can be applied with ROI analysis and search light analysis to further confirm that the frontoparietal areas are really representing the co-occurrence structure that exists in the natural world.
Besides these two main points, I have some other minor points:
1) In Keyword part, Line 462,659, DCCN should be DCNN.
2) In line 703, the equation for fisher transformation is wrong.
3) In Fig.2AB, 3A 6B, 7, I don’t understand why the name for Y axis is “partial correlation”. And there is no explanation for “partial correlation” in the method part.
Reviewer #3: The article consists of 3 separate data-sets, each related to the question how animal and scene perception interact. A BOLD-MRI part, a DNN part with the same stimuli, and a DNN part with an extended data-set.
The topic is timely, and the article ambitious with its scope. Papers that manipulate images to test DNNs are only starting to appear and are likely one of the keys to connect psychology with AI. In particular, the results depicted in figure 3, figure 5 and figure 6 are gorgeous! Congratulations, nice work indeed.
However, I have some worries about the design of the MRI experiment, size of the stimulus set and the overall approach used for testing RDMs.
Specifically:
* what is the correlation between the condition and co-occurance model? This is less relevant for the partial correlation, but comes into play in the whole brain results of figure 2. Does co-occurence significantly differ from condition? This should either be an explicit test, or the presentation should be removed (otherwise suggestive of something that is not significant).
* The stimuli used in part 1 and 2 of the paper are limited in size. The conclusions that the authors want to draw on the basis of fig 3 are substantial. It should be possible to do an internal replication of these results with a additional set of stimuli. Preferable of different animals and background scene's.
* In general the RDM comparison approach the authors use is somewhat dated. Would it not be better to use a cross validation approach as used by for instance Storrs et al., 2020 (Diverse deep neural networks all predict human IT well, after training and fitting), or at least crossvalidation in general? Alternatively the authors should argue why not. This is the current state of the art and with good reason.
* The whole brain analysis in figure 4b are correlations, and not differences between layers, however, the results are discussed in those terms (likely the differences will turn out to be not significant).
* The second data-set is more extensive than the first data-set, however the results presented in figure 7 on navigational lay-out are likely still underpowered.
Minor comments:
* I miss the noise ceiling for BA17 and RSC for figure 2
* There is a smooth overlap between scenes with lots of objects and a typical background. The scenes the authors use are somewhat more than a typical textures background but certainly not complex scenes. It would be good if the authors comments on this.
* What is the added value of figure 2a above figure 2b (and 2b has proper statistics).
* Yes, DPFC dips less (fig 4) at the end than OPA, but OPA is still the better model for the top layer, So what point do the authors want to make? Also, are these differences significant?
**********

Have the authors made all data and (if applicable) computational code underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?

The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data and code underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data and code should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data or code —e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: No: the stimulus set and statistics data will be made available through OSF. The plan for sharing the code is not discussed.
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: No: The war data is not immediately open because of ethical reasons. However, the data is on OSF, and the authors indicate that on request researchers will be added to the full data. So this should be OK.
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: Pouya Bashivan
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes: H Steven Scholte

Figure Files:

While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org.

Data Requirements:

Please note that, as a condition of publication, PLOS' data policy requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions outlined in your manuscript. Data must be deposited in an appropriate repository, included within the body of the manuscript, or uploaded as supporting information. This includes all numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.. For an example in PLOS Biology see here: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5.

Reproducibility:

To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011086.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
25 Jan 2023

AttachmentSubmitted filename: ResponseToReviewers_final .docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011086.r003Decision Letter 1
SerreThomasSection EditorYangTianmingAcademic Editor© 2023 Serre, Yang2023Serre, Yanghttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
1 Mar 2023

Dear Dr. Bracci,
Thank you very much for submitting your manuscript "The representational hierarchy in human and artificial visual systems in the presence of object-scene regularities" for consideration at PLOS Computational Biology. As with all papers reviewed by the journal, your manuscript was reviewed by members of the editorial board and by several independent reviewers. The reviewers appreciated the attention to an important topic. Based on the reviews, we are likely to accept this manuscript for publication, providing that you modify the manuscript according to the review recommendations.
Please prepare and submit your revised manuscript within 30 days. If you anticipate any delay, please let us know the expected resubmission date by replying to this email.
When you are ready to resubmit, please upload the following:
[1] A letter containing a detailed list of your responses to all review comments, and a description of the changes you have made in the manuscript. Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out
[2] Two versions of the revised manuscript: one with either highlights or tracked changes denoting where the text has been changed; the other a clean version (uploaded as the manuscript file).
Important additional instructions are given below your reviewer comments.
Thank you again for your submission to our journal. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive so far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Tianming Yang
Academic Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
Thomas Serre
Section Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
***********************
A link appears below if there are any accompanying review attachments. If you believe any reviews to be missing, please contact ploscompbiol@plos.org immediately:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Authors:

Please note here if the review is uploaded as an attachment.

Reviewer #2: I have no other further questions.
Reviewer #3: The authors have gone over the comments of myself and the other reviewers with diligence. Most of my comments were fully addressed.
For point 1: I understand that the authors would like to keep fig 2c and they have now added additional text in the paper. Would it not be fair to add: the conditions do not differ from each other in the caption of figure 2c?
Nice paper!
For crossing the t's, the disclosure of the data and code is not entirely clear. The MRI data can be requested from the authors? It is not clear if the analysis code will be made available (currently not). Can this be rectified?
**********

Have the authors made all data and (if applicable) computational code underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?

The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data and code underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data and code should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data or code —e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: No: The authors indicate that the stimulus and statistics data will be made available through the Open Science Framework. This is not the case yet (the paper has been created but it is still empty as far as I can see). Also the authors do not indicate that they will share the code.
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes: H.Steven Scholte
Figure Files:
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org.
Data Requirements:
Please note that, as a condition of publication, PLOS' data policy requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions outlined in your manuscript. Data must be deposited in an appropriate repository, included within the body of the manuscript, or uploaded as supporting information. This includes all numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.. For an example in PLOS Biology see here: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5.
Reproducibility:
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
References:
Review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript.

If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.

10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011086.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
3 Apr 2023

AttachmentSubmitted filename: rebuttal_secondRevision.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011086.r005Decision Letter 2
SerreThomasSection EditorYangTianmingAcademic Editor© 2023 Serre, Yang2023Serre, Yanghttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
9 Apr 2023

Dear Dr. Bracci,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'The representational hierarchy in human and artificial visual systems in the presence of object-scene regularities' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Computational Biology.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us now if you or your institution is planning to press release the article. All press must be co-ordinated with PLOS.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Computational Biology. 
Best regards,
Tianming Yang
Academic Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
Thomas Serre
Section Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
***********************************************************
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011086.r006Acceptance letter
SerreThomasSection EditorYangTianmingAcademic Editor© 2023 Serre, Yang2023Serre, Yanghttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
25 Apr 2023

PCOMPBIOL-D-22-00906R2 
The representational hierarchy in human and artificial visual systems in the presence of object-scene regularities
Dear Dr Bracci,
I am pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Computational Biology. Your manuscript is now with our production department and you will be notified of the publication date in due course.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. 
Soon after your final files are uploaded, unless you have opted out, the early version of your manuscript will be published online. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
Thank you again for supporting PLOS Computational Biology and open-access publishing. We are looking forward to publishing your work! 
With kind regards,
Timea Kemeri-Szekernyes
PLOS Computational Biology | Carlyle House, Carlyle Road, Cambridge CB4 3DN | United Kingdom ploscompbiol@plos.org | Phone +44 (0) 1223-442824 | ploscompbiol.org | @PLOSCompBiol