CBE Life Sci Educ421cbelifesciCBE-LSECBE Life Sciences Education1931-7913American Society for Cell BiologyPMC2995746PMC2995746.1299574629957462112367510.1187/cbe.10-09-011736437701FeaturesEditorialThe Next Five Years
DolanErin L. ), the number of “science faculty with education specialties” has grown ( , ), and Vision and Change ( ; ) has outlined an agenda for transforming undergraduate biology education. For example, with support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, the National Science Foundation, and other organizations, national movements are under way to reform introductory biology education and integrate research experiences into undergraduate courses for majors and nonmajors alike. This reform effort now faces a thornier issue: institutional and cultural barriers that prevent widespread employment of effective instructional practices. One of my priorities as Editor-in-Chief will be for CBE–LSE to serve as a venue for publishing research and evidence-based practices that characterize, mitigate, and even eliminate these barriers.
 Another priority will be to broaden readers' and authors' views of what constitutes data. Specifically, I want to make sure that CBE–LSE is a venue for publishing well-designed studies that reveal “what works,” as well as studies that reveal what “working” means and “why or how it works.” Identifying unanticipated learning outcomes and determining why teaching methods work will require an openness to approaches and results utilized in qualitative research, which are more typically seen in sociology or anthropology ( ). My intention is to maintain the high standards for what constitutes publishable work (i.e., CBE–LSE will not publish “anecdotes”), while asking readers and authors to consider data and methods that are inherently different from those used in bench research.
For example, an increasing number of programs involve scientists and scientists-in-training in K–12 classrooms. In some cases, scientists' involvement has been correlated with increased student achievement and improvements in students' attitudes toward science (e.g., ; ; ). Are scientists acting in certain ways that foster student learning? Are scientists serving as role models, thereby enhancing student motivation to learn science? Is the involvement of another adult in the classroom providing students with more opportunities for feedback about their thinking? What is happening in instances where these outcomes are not observed? These questions may be best addressed using qualitative or ethnographic methods, such as classroom observation and participant interviews. Researchers can use these approaches to formulate hypotheses that can be tested in future research. To this end, the board has reviewed and approved changes in instructions to authors and reviewers that clarify the full range of data and methods that are appropriate for publication in CBE–LSE. The revised instructions, which are available on the journal website and printed in the 2010 Highlights issue, also more clearly delineate the differences between articles and essays.
CBE–LSE remains a unique venue for reaching the “grassroots”—biology faculty who want to improve their own teaching and their students' learning. The journal will continue to be written by and for professionals engaged in biology teaching in all environments, including K–12 schools, two-year colleges, four-year colleges, universities, and professional schools, as well as science centers and museums. CBE–LSE will continue to publish articles and essays that influence science education at all levels, from policy-making to classroom teaching and learning to partnerships among students, teachers, and scientists. The journal will strive to maintain a rapid review process and to offer authors thoughtful critiques aimed at improving their scholarship and, ultimately, their manuscripts. CBE–LSE is a venue for featuring educational innovations and their impacts and for understanding what is happening during biology teaching and learning as well as why particular outcomes occur, at the level of the learner, the classroom, the organization, and the broader community.