Insights ImagingInsights Imaging1720insightsInsights into Imaging1869-4101SpringerPMC3481066PMC3481066.1348106634810662269612710.1007/s13244-012-0153-41531ArticleECR 2012 Book of Abstracts - A - Postergraduate Educational Programme
European Society of Radiology (ESR)2132012320123Suppl 12156861134210320120612201210012013© European Society of Radiology 2012pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlyyespmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesissue-copyright-statement© European Society of Radiology 2012
 S1
European Congress of Radiology 2012
A
Postgraduate Educational
Programme
Categorical Courses (CC)
EFOMP Workshop (EF)
ENCITE Session
ESR meets Sessions (EM)
ESR Undergraduate Working Group Session
EuroAIM Session
European Excellence in Education (E)
Honorary Lectures (HL)
Mini Courses (MC)
Multidisciplinary Sessions:
Managing Patients with Cancer (MS)
New Horizons Sessions (NH)
Opening Lecture (OL)
Professional Challenges Sessions (PC)
Refresher Courses (RC)
RTF - Radiology Trainees Forum (TF)
Special Focus Sessions (SF)
State of the Art Symposia (SA)
Standards and Audit Session
Thursday 5
Friday19
Saturday
49
Sunday79
Monday117
Presentations for which the author(s)
have submitted additional material and
images to EPOSTM are marked with
the icon.
Insights Imaging (2012) 3 (Suppl 1):S1 S134
DOI 10.1007/s13244-012-0153-4
ss-ssssSS
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S2 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S3
C D E F G H
A
Thursday, March 1
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S4 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
A003 13:10
C. PET-CT-MRI and radiotracers for MI
L. MartiBonmati; Valencia/ES (marti_lui@gva.es)
Medical imaging is achieving greater effectiveness as a tool to make accurate
diagnoses, assess biological aggressiveness and monitor treatment response.
Molecular imaging represents a group of integrated and complementary methods
that evaluate the biological information resolved in time and space in vivo, at high
resolution and by using with specific probes, contrast agents or MR methods with
a view not only to understand cell biology but also to provide early diagnosis and
support emerging therapies. The use of imaging probes based on different trac
ers with advanced high-resolution equipment allows viewing complex molecular
and cellular structures. Implementation and evaluation of multimodality molecular
imaging technology producing multiparametric and multivariable techniques is
reinforced. Recent developments in CT technology (increased number of detector
rows, shorter turnaround times and radiation dose modulation) and PET technology
(more efficient scintillation crystals, 3D and 4D detection technology, TOF and itera
tive reconstruction algorithms) have been spectacular. PET-MR produces images
with excellent tissue contrast, dynamic and functional information. The simultaneous
acquisition of PET and MR images allows temporary correction of dynamic PET
studies. Positron-emitting radionuclides for PET images, created in a cyclotron
(18 F, 11C, 15O, 64Cu, 124I, 13N) or in a generator (68Ga), will be described. In
this talk, the principal radiotracers and multimodality (PET-CT and PET-MR) devices
will be summarised by showing their possible contribution to the early diagnosis,
risk stratification and prognosis and treatment monitoring of biological processes
and disease-related cell. The main indications for multimodality PET in the field of
oncology, neurology and cardiology will be commented.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the multimodality approach to MI based on PET-CT-MRI.
2. To learn about the different radiotracers that can be used with multimodality
equipment.
3. To be informed about future developments that may potentially be used with
these techniques.
14:00 - 15:30 Room B
Interactive Teaching Session
E 220
Acute abdominal inflammatory disorders
A004 14:00
A. Colitis and enterocolitis
C. Hohl; Siegburg/DE (christian.hohl@helioskliniken.de)
The clinical picture of acute abdominal inflammatory disorders comprises of a variety
of different disease patterns. In daily practice our colleagues are often referring
patients with unspecific clinical symptoms such as abdominal pain, elevated inflam
mation markers and diarrhoea. Depending on the referring department there are
always some presumptive diagnoses - if you are holding a hammer everything looks
like a nail. Now it is our turn as diagnostic radiologists to choose the appropriate
imaging modality as we have a whole toolbox instead of just holding a hammer.
The first step is to get clear about the most likely differential diagnoses. In patients
with acute abdomen without history of trauma, the most common diagnoses are
ischaemia, inflammation and obstruction. The second step is to adapt the diagnos
tic tools to the individual case. Beside abdominal plain film and ultrasonography
(US), computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are two
new and powerful imaging methods that have basically revolutionised the role of
conventional radiology in the evaluation of the acute abdomen. To date, contrast-
enhanced CT is the gold standard in the study of acute abdomen. MRI can add
crucial additional information with its superior intrinsic contrast and the options of
functional-MRI. In specific cases such as ischaemia angiography can complete the
diagnostic workup in patients with acute abdomen. In the third step images have
to be interpreted and correlated with the clinical findings. In order to successfully
solve the case it is of paramount importance to know the appearance of the top
differential diagnoses.
Learning Objectives:
1. To know how to choose the appropriate imaging modality.
2. To be familiar with the patterns of distribution and appearance in imaging.
3. To learn how to differentiate ischaemia from inflammation.
12:30 - 13:30 Room Z
Molecular Imaging
MC 23 A
Basics in molecular imaging (1)
Moderator:
S. Chatziioannou; Athens/GR
A001 12:30
A. Introduction to molecular imaging: a challenge for radiologists?
P. Brader; Vienna/AT (peter@brader.md)
The rapid technological development of medical imaging over the past few decades
has transformed radiology into an essential part of modern medical practice. In
parallel with this, the rapid pace of biologic advances has made this the age of
molecular medicine. Thanks to the emerging field of molecular imaging, the radiol
ogy community has the opportunity to help lead a revolution in modern medicine
towards optimisd diagnosis and therapy of individual patients. Molecular imaging
is the in vivo characteristion and measurement of biological processes that occur
at the cellular and molecular level at a macroscopic level of resolution. This is in
contrast to the current conventional, anatomically based radiology. The most widely
used molecular imaging modalities include optical (fluorescence, bioluminescence);
radionuclide (PET, SPECT); ultrasound; and MRI (spectroscopy, diffusion-weighed
imaging). The interaction of several disciplines, including molecular cell biology and
chemistry, has demonstrated the advantages of multi-modality, multi-disciplinary
approach to molecular imaging. There are three currently used imaging strategies
to noninvasively monitor and measure molecular events. They have been broadly
defined as "direct", "biomarker" and "indirect" imaging.Although most of these imag
ing techniques are in the preclinical or early clinical phases, radiology will benefit
greatly from these methods in the effort to detect and diagnose these diseases, to
target therapies and to monitor results at the molecular level. Molecular imaging
is the key technology by which to accomplish these goals. Imaging practitioners
should think of themselves primarily as biologists whose task is to image what
happens functionally and structurally at the molecular level.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about basic concepts, principles and strategies of molecular imaging.
2. To understand the multimodality and multidisciplinary approach of molecular
imaging.
3. To become familiar with task of imaging functional and structural events at the
molecular level.
A002 12:50
B. Multiscale imaging: from in vivo to in vitro and back
B. Tavitian, A. Dubois, A. Winkeler; Orsay/FR (bertrand.tavitian@cea.fr)
Imaging scientists are similar to the fly floating in a swimming pool described by
Richard Feynman: they imagine the real world from the few waves that reach their
small niche. Biological time scales range from fractions of seconds to evolutionary
ages; biological spatial dimensions from atomic scales to tens of centimeters. Not
one single technique can produce images spanning more than three temporal or
spatial orders of magnitude. To reach further precision, either a priori information
must be introduced in the imaging method, or several imaging techniques must be
combined through co-registration. Here we give one example for each approach.
Optical reporter genes can be exquisitely addressed to sub-cellular organelles through
targeted genetic encoding. A protein emitting light upon abrupt rises of local calcium
concentrations is genetically encoded into the mitochondria of a mouse. Providing that
the sampling of data acquisition is fast enough, the localistion of the signal is attributed
to the mitochondria, roughly one micrometre in size each, even though the detection
sensors have a millimetric spatial resolution. In neuroscience research, it is a clas
sical paradigm to superimpose molecular images from PET with anatomical images
from MRI. New experimental techniques allow co-registering multimodal images with
widely differing spatial resolutions, by rebuilding 3D sets of in vivo PET images of the
rat brain with post mortem histological stains of the same brains. Extension of such
techniques beyond the artisanal knowhow is bound to become a major experimental
tool for translation of molecular information into in vivo clinical applications.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the temporal and spatial scales within living animal systems.
2. To become familiar with the temporal and spatial scales imaged by in vivo and
in vitro imaging methods.
3. To learn how to bridge temporal and spatial scales between the different
imaging methods.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S5
C D E F G H
A
Thursday
European Congress of Radiology 2012
A008 16:45
B. Peripheral skeleton
V.N. CassarPullicino; Oswestry/UK (Victor.Pullicino@rjah.nhs.uk)
In this interactive session focussing on peripheral musculoskeletal lesions pre
senting to the Accident and Emergency Department, we will review the strengths
and weaknesses of the imaging modalities applied to chosen bone, joint and soft
tissue lesions. The imaging-based approach will strengthen the understanding of
the different pathological entities which vary from trauma to infection in both the
paediatric and adult age groups.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn when and how to use the different imaging modalities in acute skeletal
lesions.
2. To learn the US and MRI findings in infection.
3. To understand the value of MDCT in acute MSK lesions.
16:00 - 17:30 Room C
Abdominal Viscera
RC 301
Abdominal tumour evaluation: from morphology to
biology
A009 16:00
Chairman's introduction
D.J. Lomas; Cambridge/UK (djl15
@radiol.cam.ac.uk)
The historical role of imaging in the clinical management of abdominal tumours will
be reviewed in respect of detection, staging, treatment monitoring and followup. The
concept of biomarkers will be introduced. Recent developments in tumour therapy,
management and the importance of the increased understanding of tumour biol
ogy will be outlined and the impact of these on tumour imaging briefly discussed.
The questions that oncological imaging will need to address in the future will be
speculated upon along with the resulting need for new strategies and imaging
concepts. This will set the scene for the following talks.
A010 16:05
A. Morphological assessment of tumour extension
I. Bargellini; Pisa/IT (irenebargellini@hotmail.com)
Evaluation of tumour extension plays a major role in treatment planning and
evaluation of tumour response. Multidetector Computed Tomography (MDCT) and
Magnetic Resonance (MR) are the most common imaging modalities to evaluate
tumour extension. Several studies have demonstrated that MR may provide a
more accurate evaluation of tumour extension compared with MDCT; however,
costs, availability and patients' tolerance might be major issues when dealing with
the followup of oncologic patients. Moreover, regardless of the imaging modality
adopted, optimisation and standardisation of imaging protocols are essential to
guarantee diagnostic accuracy and image reproducibility. The need for established
methods of assessing tumour response to therapy has been extensively discussed,
as a way to allow consistency in image interpretation and to facilitate communication
with oncologists. RECIST (Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumour) criteria
are the most widely adopted criteria to define tumour extension before, during and
after treatment; they have been updated in year 2009, to improve accuracy and
standardisation. However, limitations of RECIST criteria have been pointed out,
particularly when dealing with loco-regional (percutaneous ablation and intra-arterial
treatments) and molecular-targeted therapies. In this specific scenario, conventional
RECIST criteria underestimate the rate of tumour response, and assessment of
tumour necrosis and volumetric information need to be incorporated into size-based
criteria. Assessment of early response to treatment and non-invasive identification
of residual viable tumour might be challenging, particularly in hypo-vascular lesions,
and new imaging tools are therefore under investigation.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the commonly applied imaging tools in assessing neoplasm
extension.
2. To know the current applied method for quantification of viable tumour tissue.
3. To go through a critical review of criteria actually used in oncologic manage
ment.
A005 14:45
B. Liver and bile ducts
C.D. Becker; Geneva/CH (Christoph.Becker@hcuge.ch)
Obstruction of the extra- or intrahepatic bile ducts may occur in stone disease and a
variety of other benign or malignant pathologic conditions and may be complicated
by acute cholangitis and pyogenic liver abscess. We review the role of the different
radiologic techniques that are used in the context of obstructive jaundice and its
complications and discuss the advantages and shortcomings of each modality with
regard to the clinical situation and treatment.
Learning Objectives:
1. To know the advantages of each imaging technique.
2. To be familiar with the findings in infrequent infections.
3. To learn how to study obstructive jaundice.
14:30 - 15:30 Room Z
The Beauty of Basic Knowledge: Interpretation of the Chest
Radiograph
MC 27 A
The mediastinum
A006 14:30
The mediastinum
J. Caceres; Barcelona/ES (josecac@gmail.com)
The study of the mediastinum starts with a thorough knowledge of the radiographic
anatomy and most common variants. Differentiation of pulmonary from mediastinal
masses is easily made by knowing basic semiology (pregnancy sign). To facilitate
the differential diagnosis among different pathologies it is convenient to divide the
mediastinum into different areas (thoracic outlet, anterior middle and posterior, in
cluding supra and infravascular compartments). PAand lateral chest radiograph are
very useful as the initial examination to detect mediastinal masses and to suggest
the next procedure to perform. The radiographic appearance and location of masses
on cross-sectional imaging will contribute to narrow the differential diagnosis.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be able to describe the basic anatomic landmarks.
2. To learn to identify mediastinal masses.
3. To be able to classify mediastinal masses according to their density.
16:00 - 17:30 Room B
Interactive Teaching Session
E 320
Musculoskeletal emergencies
A007 16:00
A. Axial skeleton
E. Llopis, E. Belloch, V. Higueras; Valencia/ES (ellopis@hospitalribera.com)
Acute setting myelopathy should be evaluated with MR imaging. Optimising imag
ing strategy is needed for efficient and accurate diagnosis. Spine emergencies can
be divided into traumatic, non traumatic and postsurgical causes. In the setting on
traumatic myelopathy we should rule out primary, and usually only the traumatised
region needs to be scanned: 1. Fracture fragment cord compression, 2. acute herni
ated disc, 3. spinal canal haematoma.Acute non traumatic spinal emergencies have
non specific clinical findings and a wide variety of causes. The entire cord should be
evaluated in two planes. According to the location can be grouped under intramed
ullary, intradural-extramedullary and extradural. Depending on the causes can be
divided into neoplasic, infectious (spondylodiscitis, epidural abscess), inflammatory,
haematomas, vascular. Our objective is to describe MRI technique, to recognise
specific imaging features and pitfalls and to discuss the differential diagnosis.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the principal indications for emergency spinal imaging.
2. To be able to analyse pros and cons of each imaging modality in spinal trauma:
how, why, when?
3. To be familiar with MRI key findings in spinal infection, tumour cord compres
sion and other non-traumatic spine disorders.
4. To be familiar with the main emergency complications after spine surgery.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S6 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
16:00 - 17:30 Room D1
Emergencies in Neuroradiology
CC 319
Ischaemic stroke (`acute neurologic deficit')
Moderator:
R.D. Bruning; Hamburg/DE
A013 16:00
A. Early diagnosis of ischaemic stroke: CT, MRI or other?
A. van der Lugt; Rotterdam/NL (a.vanderlugt@erasmusmc.nl)
In the era of intravenous thrombolysis and intra-arterial thrombolysis/ thrombectomy
a fast and accurate diagnosis of acute cerebral ischaemia is mandatory. Several
requirements for imaging are relevant: 1)All acute stroke patients should be imaged
and treated as fast as emergency trauma patients. 2) Exclusion of other causes
of acute stroke. 3) Detection of early signs of acute ischaemic stroke. 4) Assess
ment of the type of ischaemic stroke. 5) Assessment of the severity and extent
of cerebral blood flow impairment. 6) Evaluation of the vasculature for causes of
ischaemic stroke. 7) Optimal logistics with continuous interaction between nurses,
technicians, radiologists and neurologists. Both structural and functional imaging
have to be performed. Both CT and MRI are adequate techniques to deal with the
imaging requirements, although CT with CT perfusion and CT angiography has
become the standard technique in most hospitals. Nevertheless, MRI has several
advantages over CT and should be available as back-up or substitute for CT.
Important questions are 1) can CT detect all non-ischaemic causes of stroke? 2)
Can CT detect ischaemic stroke in the early phase and make a distinction between
the different types of ischaemic stroke? 3) How to interpret CT- and MRI-perfusion
images? 4) How to detect distal occlusions? 5) How to differentiate between real
and pseudo-occlusions of the internal carotid artery? Finally, a systematic approach
in the analysis of the acquired images will facilitate a fast and accurate contribu
tion of radiology to the optimal treatment of patients with acute ischaemic stroke.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the role of CT in acute stroke: advantages, limitations, early
signs.
2. To learn about the role of MRI in acute stroke: advantages, limitations, early
signs.
3. To understand what the role of CT or MR perfusion imaging is.
4. To become familiar with the best algorithm for the management of stroke
patients.
A014 16:30
B. Which patients are candidates for thrombolysis?
K.O. Lovblad; Geneva/CH (karlolof.lovblad@hcuge.ch)
Stroke has gained acceptance as a treatable disease due to new developments
both in diagnostic and therapeutic tools. The aims of therapy in stroke are to
reperfuse hypoperfused areas and to open occluded vessels in the presence of
a neurological deficit. Initially after the occlusion there is a sudden decrease in
local blood flow. After a sufficient decrease, there is at first a reduction in function
that is still associated with viability: this area where the thresholds for irreversible
ischemia have not yet been attained is called the penumbra. While initially this was
an area with reduced electric function but retained viability and membrane integrity,
this area has been defined by diminished blood flow. Additionally a "core" infarct
can be detected that is constituted of irreversibly ischaemic tissue. On MRI the
penumbra was first delineated as the so-called diffusion-perfusion mismatch. CT-
based algorithms also allow defining areas of reduced flow that are not yet necrotic.
The ischaemic core can be both seen on DWI MR images or on unenhanced CT
images: the addition of perfusion CT and perfusion MR techniques allows us to
refine the visualisation of what should be the therapeutic target: the penumbra,
since its reversibility should restore function.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the physiology of cerebral blood flow.
2. To be familiar with the concept of `core infarct' and `penumbra'.
3. To learn how we can identify the penumbra on CT perfusion imaging.
4. To learn how we can identify the penumbra on MR perfusion imaging.
A011 16:28
B. Perfusion: a reliable tool for tumour activity assessment
F. Berger; Munich/DE (Frank.Berger@med.unimuenchen.de)
At initiation, tumours in a pre-vascular phase are supplied with oxygen and nutrients
that diffuse from pre-existing normal vessels. When the tumour reaches a critical
size of approximately 1-4 mm diameter, the resultant ischaemia leads to the se
cretion of angiogenic factors. These factors, such as vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF), recruit and maintain tumour vessels. New" vessels (neovasculature)
exhibit increased blood volume and permeability compared with normal vessels.
Various new specific therapies target tumour vasculature or tumour neoangiogen
esis. It is not uncommon that these targeted therapies have pronounced cytostatic
and not predominantly cytotoxic effects. This limits the usefulness of size-based
morphological tumour response assessments. Of newer CT or magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) modalities, perfusion has emerged as valid marker of tumour-induced
blood vessels and their function. Perfusion measures the vascularity within a tu
mour, as well as its component heterogeneous parts. Of parameters which can be
measured to date, blood volume and permeability are commonly applied in patient
studies. Blood volume measures the aggregate size of the vascular space, while the
permeability function informs about the integrity of vessels and their leakiness` to
contrast agents. We will describe the use of MR perfusion to monitor new targeted
therapies and discuss its advantages and disadvantages in comparison with CT
perfusion protocols. Ultrasound as an alternate modality for perfusion assessment
will be briefly presented. PET strategies for treatment-monitoring will be mentioned,
with prospect on the role of combined vascular and metabolic imaging to further
optimise non-invasive response assessment in specific anticancer therapies.
Learning Objectives:
1. To know about perfusion imaging protocols, specific advantages and technical
challenges.
2. To learn about the latest antiangiogenic/antivascular treatment strategies in
oncology.
3. To understand the significance of CT or MR perfusion imaging in the manage
ment of oncologic patients.
A012 16:51
C. Beyond vascularisation: exploring tumour biology
L. MartiBonmati; Valencia/ES (marti_lui@gva.es)
Apart from morphology and perfusion characterisitcs, the evaluation of tumor
agressiveness is closely related to other components of the tumor biology. Some
of these "tumor variables" can be measured by the use of imaging biomarkers of
tumour activity and phenotype. Imaging biomarkers are objectively measured char
acteristics that can be used as indicators of tumour biopathological changes. By
using the qualitative and quantitative information of the different imaging modalities
(US, CT, MR, PET) imaging specialists may be able to predict tumor prognosis and
define the most appropriate therapeutic strategies. In this talk the most relevant
components (cell density, cell and vascular heterogeneity, tissular entropy, tumor
metabolites, cellular receptors, intracellular and interstitial physiological changes,
pH, oxygen and iron concentration, elastic properties, physical quantities as the T1
and T2 relaxation times and biochemical molecular expresions) will be commented
together with the different ways to explore them thought imaging parametric and
multiparametric maps. These graphic maps characterice imaging biomarkers in two
ways. First, they represent quantitative variables that characterize and measure
different parameters obtained from medical images that are relevant to the tumour
grading. Second, parametric images allow us to analyze the spatial distribution of
the biomarker in the tumor through its visual representation. These images are
generated to provide a graphical representation of the values of the calculated
parameters on the basis of original image by post-processing computing. The use
of imaging biomarkers in information-driven decision-making in clinical trials and
oncologic clinical care will be simplified and supported through computer-aided
diagnosis/quantitative image analysis.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the most appropriate imaging biomarkers of tumour
activity.
2. To recognise the qualitative and quantitative information of the different modali
ties.
3. To appreciate the clinical role of these techniques in planning therapeutic
strategies.
Panel discussion:
How can you easily implement morphological and functional tools
into your clinical practice? 17:14
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S7
C D E F G H
A
Thursday
European Congress of Radiology 2012
A017 16:30
B. Cholesteatoma and chronic infection
F. Veillon; Strasbourg/FR (Francis.Veillon@chrustrasbourg.fr)
Imaging investigation of cholesteatoma is required before surgery. If no surgery has
been performed previously, CT will provide information about the location of the
lesion (epi, pro, meso, retro, hypotympanum), the partial or total destruction of the
ossicles and possible extension to the inner ear. If there is no doubt about any of
these factors CT is sufficient. In doubtful cases an MRI examination is performed
to confirm or refute the presence of cholesteatoma using T1 sequences without IV
contrast medium, and diffusion-weighted imaging with or without high-resolution
T2, depending on the age of the patient. In postoperative recurrent cholesteatoma,
MRI is becoming the first choice modality for detecting cholesteatomas, appearing
low in signal on T1 sequences and high in signal on diffusion-weighted imaging.
However, care is required since performing diffusion-weighted imaging without T1
may lead to false positives. A granuloma with a slightly or markedly increased T1
signal is often associated with a high signal on diffusion. Measurement of ADC is
useful for detecting cholesteatomas, infected cholesteatomas or abscess. Finally,
whilst MRI is the first examination in the followup of postoperative patients, the
use of contrast medium is not necessary in most of the cases.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about different causes of hearing loss within the external auditory
canal and middle ear.
2. To learn to differentiate cholesteatoma from chronic infection.
A018 17:00
C. Enhancing inner ear structures
J. Casselman; Bruges/BE (jan.casselman@azbrugge.be)
Inner ear enhancement can only be seen in a reliable way on gadolinium-enhanced
MR images. High field MR even allows inner ear screening with sub-millimetric
contrast-enhanced T1-weighted images. On these images one can distinguish
whether the enhancement is in the scala tympani or scala vestibule of the cochlea.
The most frequent causes of inner ear enhancement are intralabyrinthine schwan
noma (ILS) and labyrinthitis. Labyrinthitis can be viral, bacterial, autoimmune and
luetic. Moderate to strong enhancement will only be seen in the acute phase and
when the labyrinthitis is causing an important enough blood-labyrinth barrier rup
ture. Most often both the cochlea and the vestibular system are involved and the
edges of the enhancement are unsharp. Under treatment this enhancement gets
weaker and will finally disappear. Schwannomas have a stronger enhancement,
the enhancement is better delineated, the lesions are most often restricted to the
cochlea or the vestibular labyrinth and they can grow over time. When they grow
they follow the pre-existing intralabyrinthine anatomical pathways. Many other less
frequent lesions like meningiomas, granulomatous diseases (e.g. tuberculosis),
trauma-surgery, cholesteatoma, etc., can also affect the inner ear and cause in
ner ear enhancement. The most frequent causes of inner ear enhancement, their
MR characteristics and their natural behaviour will be discussed in this lecture.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with different types of enhancing inner ear structures.
2. To learn how to differentiate enhancing inner ear structures.
3. To learn the natural behaviour of different types of enhancing inner ear struc
tures.
16:00 - 17:30 Room E1
Special Focus Session
SF 3
Neuroimaging in neonates, infants and children:
when to do what
A019 16:00
Chairman's introduction
A. Rossi; Genoa/IT (andrearossi@ospedalegaslini.ge.it)
This session will provide the participants with a practical update on the principal
indications to pediatric neuroimaging with a discussion of the main study techniques.
The first presentation deals with the indications for ultrasound in neonates, where
the advantages compared to MRI will be elucidated. The second presentation
focuses on the applications of MRI in the study of normal brain development both
before and after birth with an emphasis on how to correctly report an MRI study
and the main pitfalls in children. The third presentation focuses on advanced MRI
A015 17:00
C. Interventional neuroradiology for the treatment of ischaemic stroke
I. Szikora, I. Gubucz, M. Marosfoi, Z. Berentei, C. Ovary, D. Varga; Budapest/HU
(h13424
szi@helka.iif.hu)
Acute stroke is increasingly being treated by neurointerventional techniques.
Intra-arterial recanalisation provides better recanalisation rates and potentially
better outcome for large vessel occlusion as compared with systemic thrombolysis.
The key to success is to select patients with salvageable brain tissue at the time
of intervention. Besides the time window, this largely depends on the collateral
circulation provided to the involved tissue. Diffusion-perfusion weighted MRI and
perfusion weighted CT scan are being used to demonstrate viable penumbra around
the infarct core. Direct injection of thrombolytics (rTPA) provides recanalisation in
50-60% of cases treated with this technique. This is associated with a 9-10% rate
of symptomatic parenchymal haemorrhage. Today, mechanical thrombectomy or
thrombaspiration is the first choice of interventional treatment. Stent thrombectomy
is capable of providing a recanalisation rate of 80-90% on the TICI scale and
good clinical outcome (0-2 on the modified Rankin scale) in 45-60% of patients.
Results might be improved applying the bridging technique, that is a combination
of iv-thrombolysis and local thrombectomy. Faster and more effective recanalisa
tion as well as reduced usage of thrombolytics results in a lower symptomatic
haemorrhage rate (4-10%).
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn how to select stroke patients for interventional neuroradiological
treatment.
2. To be familiar with the techniques for intra-arterial thrombolysis.
3. To be familiar with the techniques for mechanical thrombectomy.
4. To understand what the advantages, disadvantages, risks and limitations of
these methods are.
16:00 - 17:30 Room D2
Head and Neck
RC 308
Temporal bone imaging
Moderator:
C. Czerny; Vienna/AT
A016 16:00
A. Normal anatomy and congenital malformations of the ear
S. Kosling; Halle a.d. Saale/DE (sabrina.koesling@medizin.unihalle.de)
Quite often radiologists consider the anatomy of the temporal bone (t.b). as dif
ficult. Therefore, the first part of the lecture will give a compressed presentation
of radiologically relevant t.b. structures. Optimal findings require the knowledge of
normal morphology. This is especially true concerning malformations, which are
in the focus of the second part. Malformations are characterised by a deviation
from the normal morphology combined with functional disturbance (in t.b. predomi
nantly congenital hearing loss). They count among rare diseases. Most of them
are diagnosed in early childhood, but in cases of unilateral hearing loss of lesser
degree without deformed auricle the diagnosis may be delayed until adulthood.
Due to different tissue of origin and different times of development, typical and
less typical combinations of malformed parts of the ear result. Combined external
and middle ear malformations (congenital aural atresia) are more common than
combined malformations of the middle and inner ear. While in suspicion of mid
dle ear malformations a correlate on images can be found in a high percentage,
presumed inner ear malformations show a normal radiological finding in about
four-fifths of the cases. Nowadays, middle ear malformations are diagnosed by CT
or Cone Beam CT. Both methods can also detect most radiologically discernible
inner ear malformations, but MRI delivers more details at this. The radiological
appearance of malformations of the external auditory canal, middle and inner
ear will be demonstrated by giving examples. Therapeutically relevant points are
briefly mentioned at the end.
Learning Objectives:
1. To review the normal anatomy of the temporal bone.
2. To become familiar with congenital malformations of the external and middle
ear.
3. To recognise and differentiate the most frequent congenital malformations of
the inner ear.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S8 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
so-called normal appearing white matter. Dynamic susceptibility-weighted contrast-
enhanced perfusion MR imaging provides haemodynamic information that comple
ments traditional structural MR imaging and is being increasingly used in clinical
practice to diagnose, manage and understand brain tumours in the paediatric patient
group. Clinical studies of today involve multidimensional high-resolution images
containing a substantial amount of structural and functional information. The role of
quantitative imaging and the parameters measured have become more and more
important to evaluate severity of a disease, disease progression and response to
therapy, to mention a few examples. Increasing number of different quantitative
image analysis techniques that can be used both in adult and children have been
described in the recent years. Different imaging analyses like region-of-interest
analysis, intra-individual voxel-based analysis and inter-voxel based analysis are
a few examples all with different limitations and drawbacks as will be discussed in
this lecture. The role of different imaging analyses such as DTI tractography and
perfusion MR and the use of quantitative measures of different parameters and
their application in children will be presented.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the principles of tractography and discuss advantages
and limitations.
2. To appreciate the applications of susceptibility-weighted contrast-enhanced
MRI.
3. To learn about the indications of voxel-based methods and the advantages
over ROI techniques.
Panel discussion:
Paediatric neuroimaging: what should the general radiologist know?17:14
16:00 - 17:30 Room E2
Multidisciplinary Session: Managing Patients with Cancer
MS 3
Pancreatic tumours
A023 16:00
Chairman's introduction
R. Manfredi; Verona/IT (riccardo.manfredi@univr.it)
Pancreatic neoplasms have a very different prognosis and treatment. In order to
illustrate the experiences of a multidisciplinary group at the University of Verona,
the participants (surgeon, pathologist and radiologist) will discuss some of the
issues that are critical in the diagnosis, differential diagnosis and management of
pancreatic cancer patients.
Session Objectives:
1. To understand the role of a multidisciplinary approach.
2. To learn about the goal of each medical specialty in pancreatic tumours.
A024 16:05
What the surgeon needs to know
C. Bassi; Verona/IT (claudio.bassi@univr.it)
The third issue that will be collegially discussed is as to whether there are any liver
metastases. The surgeon will illustrate that the presence of liver metastases will
contraindicate surgical treatment, especially depicting small liver metastases may
avoid unnecessary laparotomies that are always associated with a different level of
morbidity and mortality. The pathologist will show us the criteria to diagnose a liver
metastases and the importance of histological subtyping (i.e. adenocarcinoma vs.
endocrine neoplasm).The radiologist will illustrate the sensitivity of different imaging
modalities in detecting liver metastases and the improvement in sensitivity after
the administration of liver-specific contrast agents. Furthermore, the diagnostic
imaging criteria for the differential diagnosis of focal liver lesions will be illustrated.
The fourth issue that will be collegially discussed is whether there are there posi
tive lymph nodes. The surgeon will illustrate that the lymph nodes are a marginal
surgical problem. The pathologist will illustrate the lymph nodes more frequently
involved in pancreatic cancer and the criteria for a pathological diagnosis. The
radiologist will illustrate the strength and especially the limitation in characterising
lymph nodes. The fifth issue that will be collegially discussed is whether the tumor
is locally advanced. The surgeon will illustrate the criteria that may contraindicate
the surgical procedure, namely which are the vessel of interest in planning a surgi
cal procedure that a radiologist should take care of. The pathologist will illustrate
the criteria for vessel wall infiltration and the pattern of peri-vessel infiltration. The
radiologist will illustrate which are the diagnostic imaging criteria to define vessel
wall infiltration and their relative accuracies.
applications, and the role of different imaging analyses such as DTI tractography
and perfusion MR and the use of quantitative measures of different parameters
and their application in children will be presented.
Session Objectives:
1. To describe the indications of US and MRI: when to use what.
2. To stress the role of DTI and tractography in the more detailed evaluation of
brain pathology.
3. To discuss the role of voxel-based methods in detecting abnormalities that
can be missed by even the most experienced radiological eye.
A020 16:05
What is the potential and role of brain ultrasound in the MRI era?
M.I. Argyropoulou; Ioannina/GR (margyrop@cc.uoi.gr)
Brain ultrasound (US) represents the first line imaging modality for the evaluation of
the neonatal brain. The main advantages of the technique are safety, performance
at bed side, possibility for serial imaging without sedation, real-time information,
coupling with colour Doppler and low cost. Anterior fontanel is the classic acoustic
window but mastoid and posterior fontanel approaches are increasingly being used for
better evaluation of the occipital lobes and the posterior fossa structures. Tranducers
of different frequencies are routinely used to optimise imaging and increase lesion
detectability. Intubated ventilated preterm babies are examined in the incubator and
ischaemic-haemorrhagic brain disease can be detected at very early stages. Early
periventricular leukomalacia (PVL) appearing as periventricular hyperchogenicity with
sharp or hazy speculated margins and early periventricular venous infarct appearing
as fan-shaped paraventricular echogenicity associated with flow disappearance in the
terminal vein are important US and colour Doppler findings appearing before detec
tion of any abnormality on MRI. Infectious haemorrhagic infarcts appearing initially
as punctuate hyperechogenic lesions and progressing into microcystic lesions are
almost never detected by MRI. Increased echogenicity is detected at the early stages
of less common acquired lesions such as gangliothalamic ischaemia and cortical
necrosis. Intraventricular haemorrhage can be easily detected by US. Colour Doppler
by depicting moving echoes in the aqueduct of Sylvius is very helpful in the detection
of haemorrhage at its very early stages and in the differential diagnosis between
intraventricular and subependymal haemmorhage. Brain maturation-myelination and
long-term followup of perinatal lesions should be performed with MRI.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the role of US in diagnosing the encephalopathy of prematurity.
2. To become familiar with US patterns of periventricular leukomalacia and brain
haemorrhagic disease.
3. To understand the role of US in diagnosing hypoxic-ischaemic disease in full
term babies.
A021 16:28
When is MRI of the brain indicated?
P.D. Griffiths; Sheffield/UK (p.griffiths@sheffield.ac.uk)
In this presentation I will concentrate on normal development of the white matter
in the cerebral hemispheres. I will use images of tissue sections and foetal brain
MR examinations to highlight the important changes occurring in the cerebral
hemispheres of the second and third trimester foetus and their relationship with
developmental abnormalities. I will then move onto the normal post-natal develop
ment of the hemispheric myelin detailing the minimum knowledge required in order
to report MR brain examinations of the neonate and infant. A number of potential
interpretive pitfalls will be discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the changes in MR signal characteristics found in the foetal,
neonatal and paediatric brain as myelination progresses.
2. To understand why different approaches need to be made when performing
MR imaging of the brain in those groups.
3. To appreciate the effects that myelination has on the ability to detect the more
common brain malformations.
A022 16:51
What is the role of advanced post-processing of MRI images?
P.C. Maly Sundgren; Lund/SE (Pia.Sundgren@med.lu.se)
Region-of-interest based morphometric diffusion tensor imaging analysis has been
used for the assessment of age-related changes in human brain, and to visualise
eloquent white matter bundles with relationship to brain tumours, cerebral infarc
tions and other lesions. The technique is limited to two dimensions while diffusion
tensor tractography has the possibility to an overall view of individual fibre bundle
in three-dimensional spaces for study brain maturation and reveal abnormalities in
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S9
C D E F G H
A
Thursday
European Congress of Radiology 2012
16:00 - 17:30 Room F1
Organs from A to Z: Lung
MC 322
Technical and anatomical fundamentals for imaging
the lung
Moderator:
F. Molinari; Rome/IT
A028 16:00
A. Examination protocols for imaging the lung: CT and MRI
C.M. SchaeferProkop; Amersfoort/NL (cornelia.schaeferprokop@gmail.com)
CT remains the primary cross-sectional imaging modality in the chest. Recently,
however, MR has established itself as an alternative, even for lung imaging,
whenever radiation dose is a limiting factor. Multidetector CT with at least 16
detector rows is the prerequisite for consistently good image quality: isotropic
data acquisition with < 1 mm sections is possible within scan times of less than 10
seconds, thus allowing for breath-hold imaging even in dyspnoeic patients. Only
in extremely dyspnoeic individuals is continuous shallow breathing to be advised.
Due to the isotropic resolution, every chest CT can now provide HRCT information.
Coronary (and sagittal) MPR should be part of the routine protocol. MIP and mIP
can be added for analysis of nodular parenchymal disease, peripheral vessels and
the airways. This course will briefly discuss current issues of contrast injection,
including timing, Valsalva manoeuvres, pregnancy, ECG synchronisation and "triple
rule-out" protocols. Imaging of the lung parenchyma alone requires less dosage
than imaging of the mediastinal soft tissues. Low-dose techniques are especially
helpful for imaging of infection, cystic fibrosis or followup of pulmonary nodules.
Low-kV techniques should become standard for contrast-enhanced scans. The ef
fective doses range from 1-2mSv for a low-dose protocol to 4-8 mSv for a standard
chest CT. Further dose reduction can be expected with iterative reconstruction
techniques. The most suitable MR techniques for imaging of the lungs, mediastinum
and chest wall will be described, with special emphasis on issues like susceptibility
artefacts and breathing.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the technical and clinical basis for appropriate protocol planning
of thoracic CT and MRI examinations.
2. To learn the characteristics of diagnostically meaningful examination protocols.
3. To become familiar with the tips and tricks for appropriate contrast material
administration.
A029 16:25
B. Radiation dose in lung imaging: issues and practical solutions
D. Tack; Baudour/BE (denis.tack@skynet.be)
The most frequent imaging techniques of the chest are projection radiographs
(CXR) and Computed Tomography (CT). Trends in their respective use show
decrease in CRX and constant increase in CT, addressing the problem of the cor
responding collective radiation dose to the populations. For an average patient,
the range of radiation dose is of 0.02-0.3 mSv for CXR and of 1-10 mSv for CT. For
both techniques, recent technical advances have the potential to minimise these
doses. In CT, optimisation of acquisition and reconstruction parameters is able to
lower the radiation dose to 0.5-1 mSv for volumetric acquisitions and down to 0.2
mSv for sequential acquisitions. There is no doubt that in the near future, chest
CT will be obtained at the dose of CRX, solving at least in part the challenge of
radiation for chest examinations. This presentation aims to review theses evolu
tions and challenges.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the clinical, technical, and epidemiological challenges
of radiation delivery and dose reduction specific to lung imaging.
2. To understand the technical methods currently available for reducing dose
when imaging the lung.
3. To become familiar with tailored approaches to lung imaging according to the
ALARA (as low as reasonably achievable) principle.
A030 16:50
C. Anatomy: the hinterland of normal on HRCT
S.J. Copley; London/UK (suecopley@hotmail.com)
The recognition of pathological disease versus physiological normal variants is
crucial in radiological diagnosis. There are several HRCT features (including ground
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the criteria for resectable and non-resectable pancreatic ad
enocarcinoma.
2. To learn about treatment planning of neuroendocrine tumours.
3. To be aware of surgical indications in cystic pancreatic tumours.
A025 16:25
Complete or incomplete resection: the added value of the pathologist
G. Zamboni; Verona/IT (giuseppe.zamboni@sacrocuore.it)
Although all pancreatic neoplasia, including ductal carcinoma (PDC), may clinically
appear as a cystic lesion due to degenerative changes in a solid tumour, the most
typical cystic neoplasms of the pancreas are cysts lined by different epithelium.
The cystic neoplasms are classified into benign, borderline and malignant. Non
neoplastic mimickers of PDC mostly fall into the category of inflammatory and fibrotic
conditions correlated in various ways with chronic pancreatitis and autoimmune
pancreatitis. PDC must be differentiated from other malignancies such as acinar
or endocrine carcinomas. It is essential to identify mucinous-cystic tumours and
intraductal-papillary tumours because of their incomparably better prognosis. The
`cystic' variant of ductal adenocarcinoma, due either to degeneration changes or
to ectatic changes of the duct system, can mimic the former two neoplasms. The
ideal diagnostic test for liver metastasis should be the tissue diagnosis with a trucut
biopsy, since the tissue can be also used for ancillary studies. The pathological
criteria and the importance of histological subtyping will be presented. The surgically
removed lymph nodes are classified and numbered according to their topography,
considering that part of them are dissected with a radical pancreaticoduodenectomy
and others are dissected by the surgeon and submitted separately. Because the
most frequent site of local recurrence of PDCA involves the retroperitoneal poste
rior bed of the pancreas, the most important tissue to study is the peripancreatic
fibrous and adipose tissue that runs behind the head of the pancreas and dorsally
and laterally to the superior mesenteric artery.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the pathologic features of different pancreatic neoplasms.
2. To learn about distinct histo-pathologic findings that enable tumour charac
terisation.
3. To be aware of histo-pathologic findings that show prognostic relevance.
A026 16:45
Imaging of pancreatic tumours
R. Manfredi; Verona/IT (riccardo.manfredi@univr.it)
The first issue that we will discuss as a group is whether it is a solid or a cystic lesion
of the pancreas that we are dealing with. In this topic the surgeon will underline
the importance in this differential diagnosis, since a solid lesion must be resected,
if possible, where some cystic lesion could be followed up. In this settings, the
pathologist will illustrate us the different pathological patterns of pancreatic neo
plasms, cystic and solid, their immunohistochemistry and the possible progression
from benign to malignant pancreatic tumour.According to the different pathological
patterns, the radiologist will illustrate the appearance on the different pancreatic
tumours on the different diagnostic imaging modalities. The second issue that we
will collegially discuss is whether we are sure that it is a neoplasm. The surgeon
will illustrate the different surgical procedures that he/she is able to perform and
the relative indication and the different questions that each procedure need to be
answered by the pathologist and the radiologist. The pathologist will show the
different pathological patterns that are useful for the differential diagnosis among
different pancreatic tumours and especially the criteria useful for the differential
diagnosis with tumour-like conditions that do not require surgery but medical therapy
instead. The radiologist will illustrate the diagnostic imaging signs that are helpful
to make a differential diagnosis in patients with a mass in the pancreas.
Learning Objectives:
1. To know the diagnostic imaging findings in different pancreatic neoplasms.
2. To learn about the role of imaging in surgical planning.
3. To be familiar with the strengths and weaknesses of imaging in patient man
agement.
A027 17:05
Case presentation and discussion
R. Manfredi; Verona/IT (riccardo.manfredi@univr.it)
The session is aimed to have the experts guide the general radiologists, present in
the Auditorium, in the interpretation of a case in which they are well-known experts
and to show the tricks and the sign to narrow down the differential diagnosis and
to achieve the correct diagnosis.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S10 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the basic principles of elastography.
2. To learn about the difference between strain and shear wave US elastography
and their respective results.
3. To appreciate the additional value of US elastography to B-mode US.
A033 17:00
C. MRI diffusion, perfusion and spectroscopy
P.A.T. Baltzer, M. Dietzel, W.A. Kaiser;
Jena/DE (pascal.baltzer@med.unijena.de)
Dynamic contrast-enhanced MR-mammography is the most sensitive method for
detection of breast cancer. Diagnostic results using this technique may vary due
to reader experience as image interpretation is to some degree a subjective task.
In the past years, further, more or less quantitative MRI techniques have been
investigated. While pharmacokinetic modelling of high temporal resolution dynamic
contrast-enhanced imaging (perfusion imaging) promises further, quantitative
insights into the pathological characteristics of neoplastic vasculature, diffusion-
weighted imaging (DWI) and MR-spectroscopy (MRS) are based on entirely different
concepts. While MRS is a molecular imaging technique able to quantify biochemical
tissue properties, DWI is influenced by microstructural tissue changes. This talk
aims to outline the concepts of perfusion, DWI and MRS, provide knowledge to
implement these techniques into clinical practice and critically discusses the pos
sible diagnostic benefit of doing so.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the diagnostic value of diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) in its
present clinical applications.
2. To learn about the technical basics and potential uses of MRI perfusion in the
breast.
3. To understand the promise and challenges of MR spectroscopy in clinical
practice.
16:00 - 17:30 Room G/H
Genitourinary
RC 307
Imaging the female pelvis
Moderator:
M. Secil; Izmir/TR
A034 16:00
A. Imaging for pelvic pain in pregnancy
G. Masselli; Rome/IT (gabrielemasselli@libero.it)
Acute pelvic pain in pregnant women may be the manifestation of various gynae
cological and non-gynaecological conditions. The correct diagnosis of the causes
of acute pain during pregnancy is critical to minimise maternal-foetal morbidity
and mortality. Although ultrasound (US) is the primary imaging investigation in the
diagnostic evaluation of the pregnant patient, the role of magnetic resonance (MR)
imaging in the evaluation of foetal and maternal diseases in pregnant patients con
tinues to expand. MR imaging offers different potential advantages in comparison
with US for evaluating acute abdominal and pelvic pain; these include multiplanar
imaging capabilities, a higher soft tissue contrast and the ability to detect and
distinguish blood from other fluid collections. When US is equivocal or nondiag
nostic, MR imaging is a valuable complement to determine the exact aetiology of
acute abdominal pain. The intrinsic safety and the accuracy of MRI in diagnosing
abdominal and pelvic diseases make it an excellent choice for triage of pregnant
patients with acute pelvic pain. MRI provides important information that influences
the appropriate management and it is important for the radiologists to recognise
the MR findings of the common causes of acute abdominal and pelvic pain. This
lecture will discuss the use of MR imaging for maternal diseases that cause acute
pelvic pain during pregnancy. Moreover, this lecture will discuss the different MR
imaging techniques to use, and will show how to detect and to differentiate the gy
naecological and non-gynaecological causes of acute pelvic pain during pregnancy.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the most common causes of pelvic pain in pregnancy.
2. To understand how to diagnose non-gynaecological causes of pain in preg
nancy.
glass opacity, air trapping and reticular pattern) which have been recognised in
asymptomatic healthy subjects. The appearances in normal older individuals
(such as large airway abnormalities, a subpleural reticular pattern and cysts) will
be highlighted.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the particular HRCT findings that occupy the gray
area between unequivocal health and definite disease.
2. To become familiar with these findings, with a particular focus on the effects
of cigarette smoking and ageing.
3. To understand the dilemma between the increased sensitivity of HRCT to
detect preclinical disease and the potential risk of overdiagnosis.
Discussion 17:15
16:00 - 17:30 Room F2
Breast
RC 302
Functional imaging of the breast
Moderator:
K. Pinker; Vienna/AT
A031 16:00
A. Contrast-enhanced mammography
C.S. Balleyguier, S. Canale, M.C. Mathieu, C. Dromain; Villejuif/FR
(balleyguier@igr.fr)
Contrast-Enhanced Mammography (CEM) is a new imaging technique combining
Digital Mammography and injection of iodinated contrast. Mammography images
are acquired at two (high and low) energy levels. Based on different attenua
tion characteristics between iodine and soft tissue, parametric images showing
enhancement are reconstructed. There is some mandatory hardware adaptation,
for instance adding a copper filter and a dedicated software is required. However,
interpretation of images is based on morphological criteria. Two sets of images
are acquired (CC and MLO). Obtained images compete with subtraction images
obtained after dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI. Radiation dose is 1.2 that of a
normal Digital Mammogram. Indications for CEM are quite similar to that of MRI.
CEM significantly improves characterisation of breast lesions as compared with
mammography. For breast cancer staging, as compared with MRI, CME carries a
slightly lower sensitivity, but conversely a better specificity, cutting down the number
of false positives. Some false negatives were observed in case of Infiltrative Lobular
carcinoma and DCIS. CEM might become a very practical, cost-saving, alternative
to Breast MRI in specific clinical situations.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn the underlying physical principles of CEM.
2. To understand the different protocols that have been proposed.
3. To appreciate the potential impact of CEM on everyday clinical practice.
A032 16:30
B. Ultrasound elastography
A. Athanasiou; Paris/FR (alex_athanasiou@hotmail.com)
Breast clinical examination provides information of tissue elasticity Young modulus
E = / , where is the compression (stress) and is the deformation (strain) of
the tissue. Cancers tend to be stiffer than benign lesions. Breast ultrasound elas
tography provides a mapping of lesion stiffness, independent of its morphologic
features, displayed in real-time as a color overlay of the lesion and surrounding
tissue. Two techniques are available: 1. Strain imaging, where an external com
pression is gradually applied to the lesion by means of the ultrasound probe, thus
deforming the lesion. Results are qualitative or semi-quantitative. 2. Shear wave
imaging (no external compression applied) where the ultrasound system induces
mechanical vibration by using shear wave imaging. Quantitative values of Young
modulus are provided. Combining elastography with B-mode can improve specifi
city and accuracy for BIRADS four lesions and potentially reduce breast biopsy
rates. For BIRADS 3 lesions, elastography can help identifying complicated cysts
and reduce FNA rates. It can also indicate a biopsy instead of followup in case of
BIRADS 3 lesions with suspicious elastography findings. Elastography can improve
delimitation of iso-echoic lesions such as infiltrating lobular carcinomas. Further
applications include lymph node characterisation and monitoring neoadjuvant
treatment. 3D elastography is actually in progress.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S11
C D E F G H
A
Thursday
European Congress of Radiology 2012
resolution or faster imaging but balancing competing constraints is most important.
Parallel imaging with acquisitions with acceleration factors of 2- to 4-fold accelera
tion for 2D and potentially even higher for 3D applications facilitates faster data
sampling. In some aspects 3 T starts only to overcome SNR limits at 1.5 T (e.g.
myocardial perfusion). Users though have to be aware of potential limitations like
artefacts, noise inhomogeneity or even severe image degradation with inappropri
ate use. Further efforts for even higher data undersampling are underway likely
leading to substantial further speed up of acquisitions. From a clinical workflow
perspective 3 T cardiac MRI is not limited in the clinical environment except from
general contraindications. Advantages, developments and tricks for HQ cardiac
MR at 3 T will be discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the latest technical developments in high-field cardiac MRI.
2. To know about results of clinical application of high-field cardiac MRI.
3. To become familiar with potential advantages and drawbacks of high-field
cardiac MRI.
A038 16:30
B. Cardiac CT: tubes, rows and what else?
K. Nikolaou; Munich/DE (konstantin.nikolaou@med.unimuenchen.de)
In recent years, technical advances and improvements in cardiac computed tom
ography (CT) have provoked increasing interest in the potential clinical role of this
technique in the non-invasive work-up of patients with various cardiac diseases -
most importantly in patients with suspected coronary artery disease (CAD) - and
have initiated discussions on correct patient selection for this emerging imaging
technology.Ahuge number of publications have abounded evaluating the diagnostic
performance of CT coronary angiography in detecting significant coronary artery
disease. With continuous development in CT system generations, the diagnostic
accuracy increased steadily. During the first years of cardiac CT, technical improve
ments focused on the increase of detector rows, enabling faster scans with less
contrast agent volume and improved robustness of the technique. In recent years,
with the introduction of wide detectors with 256 or even 320 detector rows, as well
as with the advent of Dual-Source CT scanners, scanning of the heart within one
or two heart beats became feasible, as well as new options such as dual energy
imaging of the heart or highly radiation dose-efficient protocols, e.g. applying high-
pitch scanning protocols. These options can broaden the clinical applications of
cardiac CT, such as the depiction of myocardial changes, e.g. myocardial infarctions
or perfusion defects, or - due to scanning options with less than 1mSv equivalent
dose - including younger patients, even infants, e.g. with congenital heart disease.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the latest technical developments in cardiac CT.
2. To understand how the technical characteristics of CT scanners influence
results of cardiac CTA.
3. To know about the optimal combination of scanning parameters to get the
most out of CT scanners in cardiac examinations.
A039 17:00
C. Cardiac hybrid imaging
P.A. Kaufmann; Zurich/CH
Recent data using SPECT and CT suggest that hybrid imaging provides added
diagnostic clinical value beyond that of either technique alone or that of side-by-
side analysis. The value of non-invasive hybrid imaging lies far beyond the simple
addition of a further diagnostic test as it allows accurate spatial association of
perfusion defects to their subtending coronary stenoses providing key information
for evidence-driven intervention targeting relevant lesion only. While a negative
coronary computerised tomography angiography (CCTA) has high negative
predictive value to rule out relevant coronary artery disease (CAD), an abnormal
CCTA - like an abnormal conventional angiography study - is a poor predictor of
ischaemia, and further perfusion imaging testing is mandatory for decision-making
towards revascularisation. Conversely, a normal MPI result does not exclude the
presence of subclinical CAD requiring risk modification. The incongruence of CCTA
and MPI is inherent to the duality of morphologic versus functional testing. However,
no matter how accurate CCTA will possibly get with future advances in technology,
the two pieces of information obtained with MPI versus morphology are difficult
to compare, as they are complementary. Hybrid images offer superior diagnostic
information with regard to identification of the culprit vessel with the haemodynamic
relevant lesion providing added diagnostic information not obtained on side-by-side
analysis. However, it remains uncertain at this point whether hybrid scanners offer
advantages over software fusion of data sets obtained from different scanners, as
by either way one can obtain hybrid images.
A035 16:30
B. Imaging gynaecological emergencies
A.G. Rockall; London/UK (andrea.rockall@bartsandthelondon.nhs.uk)
In this lecture, the role of imaging in the evaluation of gynaecological emergencies
will be presented. A combined approach using both clinical findings and imaging
features is necessary.Accurate evaluation is important as failure to make a diagno
sis may lead to serious consequences. Presenting symptoms, such as pelvic pain
or vaginal bleeding or discharge, may overlap with pregnancy-related emergencies
and with non-gynaecological abdominal emergencies. The range of conditions to
be considered includes ovarian cyst emergencies (cyst rupture, haemorrhage or
torsion), infective conditions (Bartholins' or vulval abcess, pelvic inflammatory dis
ease or tubo-ovarian abcess) and acute bleeding (from inflammation, neoplasm, or
trauma). Pain may be related to the menstrual cycle, as in endometriosis or ruptured
corpus luteum, or may be unrelated, such as in fibroid or ovarian torsion or pelvic
inflammatory disease. The imaging features of these acute abnormalities will be
reviewed and discussed in the context of the differential diagnoses.
Learning Objectives:
1. To recognise the causes of common gynaecological emergencies.
2. To understand the diagnostic imaging of common gynaecological emergencies.
A036 17:00
C. Imaging for non-gynaecological emergencies
R.F. El Sayed; Cairo/EG (rania729
@hotmail.com)
Acute pelvic pain in women is a routine situation in an emergency unit. It can be
secondary to a variety of disorders. Clinical setting often indicates an obstetric or
gynaecological origin of acute pelvic pain, but sometimes it is not easy to distinguish
if the primary cause is related to genitourinary system or gastrointestinal tract or
to other unusual conditions. Diagnostic imaging can be very valuable in this situ
ation. Ultrasonography is usually the first choice imaging modality for diagnosis of
acute pelvic pain- and, for the most part, the only one needed for the diagnosis.
MRI is the preferred technique in young women, also in pregnancy in second or
third trimester. CT is more valuable for assessing non-gynaecological disorders
or post-operative infections. The radiologist should know how to investigate the
patient with regards to history and clinical findings as certain contexts can encour
age specific diagnoses. The purpose of this lecture is to highlight the contribution
of different imaging modalities in emergency radiology as a useful diagnostic tool
in management of acute female pelvic disease of non-gynaecological origin and
to describe key radiologic signs to improve differential diagnosis.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the causes and diagnostic findings of common non-
gynaecological emergencies.
2. To know how to investigate patients with reference to history and clinical find
ings.
3. To learn how to approach pelvic pain using multimodality imaging techniques
in different clinical contexts.
16:00 - 17:30 Room I/K
Cardiac
RC 303
Cardiac imaging: the cutting edge
Moderator:
J. Vymazal; Prague/CZ
A037 16:00
A. Cardiac MRI: high fields vs 1.5 T
B.J. Wintersperger; Toronto, ON/CA (Bernd.Wintersperger@uhn.on.ca)
High-field scanning is more commonly used in cardiac MRI. Pushed by physical
principles, B0 increase results in a proportional increase in SNR theoretically be
ing as high as 100% when doubling from 1.5 to 3 T. B0 changes also come along
with changes of tissue properties, increase of RF energy deposit and imaging
artefacts potentially related to changes in resonance frequency/wavelength. The
latter may partly be addressed by proper sequence and hardware design but may
also necessitate specific coil design. Off-resonance artefacts in SSFP techniques
may be addressed by advanced shimming techniques and frequency adjustments
while SAR limitations often result in lower flip angles and therefore may have impact
on CNR. R1 value changes of applied Gd-compounds also may affect protocol
planning. Remaining SNR/CNR gains provide unique opportunity for higher spatial
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S12 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
A042 16:23
Imaging inflammatory bowel disease: the radiology perspective
F. Maccioni; Rome/IT (francesca.maccioni@uniroma1
.it)
Inflammatory Bowel Disease refers both to Crohn's disease (CD) and Ulcerative
colitis (UC). The main feature is a chronic, uncontrolled inflammation of the intes
tinal wall, which affects different segments of the small and large bowel in CD, and
predominantly the colon in UC. Cross-sectional imaging plays a central role in the
diagnosis and characterisation of these diseases, mainly CD. High-Resolution
US (HRUS), with color Doppler or specific intravenous contrast agents (Contrast-
Enhanced-US), allows a detailed morphological evaluation of the affected bowel
wall and the assessment of disease activity. Major limits include strong operator-
dependence and lack of panoramicity. The introduction of multi-detector technol
ogy has significantly increased the diagnostic capabilities of CT. Nowadays, CT
Enterography or Enteroclysis provides an accurate morphological assessment of
CD, comparable to conventional enteroclysis, with the added possibility of evalu
ating mural and mesenteric changes and vascularity. The major drawback is the
relevant radiation dose that allows only an occasional clinical use. MRI links the
major advantages of both US and CT, being a radiation-free modality with multi
planar capability, wide field-of-view and high tissue contrast. MR Enterography or
Enteroclysis has shown high accuracy in evaluating the morphological changes
and complications of CD. Different imaging parameters, T1 and T2-weighted, allow
bowel wall characterisation and assessment of disease activity. MRI limits include
technology dependence, low availability and complexity of imaging parameters. The
main findings of CD and UC will be shown at US, CT and MRI; differential signs
between CD and UC will be described. Diagnostic algorithms will be discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To highlight available imaging methods, imaging techniques and diagnostic
algorithms for the evaluation of inflammatory bowel lesions.
2. To learn more about the specific imaging symptoms related to inflammatory
bowel disease.
3. To understand the role of radiological imaging in the differential diagnosis and
classification of different inflammatory bowel conditions.
A043 16:41
Vascular graft infections and inflammation: the nuclear medicine
perspective
O. Israel; Haifa/IL (o_israel@rambam.health.gov.il)
Vascular grafts replace occluded vessels to maintain patency. Although rare
(1-6%), graft infections are severe surgical complications, with poor prognosis.
Optimal treatment of infected grafts is surgical removal. The challenging question
affecting management is whether the graft or only adjacent soft tissue wound is
infected. False positives lead to unnecessary surgery while false negatives are
associated with high morbidity. SPECT and PET radiopharmaceuticals are used
for diagnosis of vascular graft infection. Labelled leucocytes (Tc-99m, In-111) are
SPECT agents of choice, accumulate by diapedesis, chemotaxis and vascular
permeability. False-negative studies are related to antibiotherapy or duration of
symptoms, and false positives occur with lymphocelle, haematoma, thrombosis,
and physiologic uptake in recent grafts. FDG, the main PET tracer, is taken up by
infections with high cellular metabolism. Advantages of PET over SPECT imaging
include lower background activity, shorter duration of studies and no handling of
blood of potentially infected patients. False positives due to increased uptake in
native vessels, early grafts or healing scars can be differentiated by pattern and
intensity of uptake. Size and proximity of structures and positional changes can
lead to inaccurate localisation of tracer-avid foci and faulty diagnosis. Combining
anatomic CT landmarks with functional SPECT changes or increased metabolism
on PET decrease the false-positive rate. Uptake foci are accurately localised to graft
or soft tissues improving specificity and diagnostic accuracy. SPECT/CT provided
accurate data for diagnosis and localisation in 67% of patients and accuracy of
FDG-PET/CT was above 95% for diagnosis of vascular graft infection.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the potential value of nuclear medicine procedures in suspected
vascular graft infection.
2. To understand the specific incremental role of hybrid imaging in suspected
vascular graft infection.
3. To recognise patterns of true and false positive findings in infected vascular
grafts and to know the referral criteria for the best utilisation of hybrid imaging
in vascular graft infection.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the principles of cardiac hybrid imaging.
2. To learn about the added diagnostic value of hybrid imaging.
3. To know about possible indications for performing hybrid imaging.
16:00 - 17:30 Room L/M
Professional Challenges Session
PC 3
Diagnosis of inflammatory conditions
A040 16:00
Chairmen's introduction
P. Bourguet1
, A. Palko2
; 1
Rennes/FR, 2
Szeged/HU
The session is aimed at clarifying the role of radiological imaging diagnostics and the
contribution of nuclear medicine methods in the diagnosis and differential diagnosis
of inflammatory conditions. Obviously the number of these conditions is endless,
therefore we decided to focus on two areas where both specialties contribute to
the evaluation of the clinical situation: vascular graft infections and inflammation
and inflammatory bowel diseases. Speakers from both disciplines reveal the most
up-to-date information, including the role of hybrid imaging techniques in order to
give a comprehensive overview of the morphological and functional diagnostic
algorithm and define the most appropriate examination protocols. The panel dis
cussion following the presentations will provide the opportunity to further deepen
consensual knowledge leading to an integrated diagnostic approach to these
clinically challenging conditions.
Session Objectives:
1. To understand the importance of functional and morphological imaging evalu
ation of inflammatory conditions in certain inflammatory conditions.
2. To evaluate the specific role and the proper diagnostic algorithm of nuclear
medicine and radiological techniques.
3. To highlight potential avenues of future development for functional and mor
phological imaging in the diagnostics of these conditions.
A041 16:05
Imaging inflammatory bowel disease: the nuclear medicine perspective
A. Signore; Rome/IT (alberto.signore@uniroma1
.it)
Nuclear Medicine offers several possibilities for the imaging of inflammatory bowel
diseases (IBD). Most data available in the literature concern the use of radiolabelled
autologous white blood cells (WBC). With this method it is possible to evaluate
with a single scan the whole body and, therefore, depict the extent of pathological
gut wall infiltration by leucocytes: a sign of disease activity. The method of WBC
has been criticised for its long preparation time and lack of anatomical accuracy.
However, there are now available several kits for easy labelling of WBC with 99mTc
and the possibility to use hybrid SPECT/CT cameras that improve accuracy and
anatomical localisation of lesions. These kits can also use 18 F and 64Cu for WBC
labelling, two positron-emitting isotopes, that allow PET/CT imaging with further
improvement of image detail and possibility to quantify uptake in lesions for early
therapy followup. But the availability of new SPECT and PET radiopharmaceutical
for molecular imaging and for in vivo histological characterisation of lesions has
recently opened a new indication for IBD that is therapy decision making. We can
quantify the presence of activated T-cells or lymphokines (such as TNFa) in gut
wall lesions, thus providing the clinician with important information for starting the
appropriate treatment and to early assess (within weeks) the efficacy of the treat
ment. Since MRI and Nuclear Medicine are complementary for the study of IBD,
we aim at clarifying what is the role of both methods and how to integrate them in
the diagnostic flow-chart of patients. The future will probably be a single scan with
PET/MRI hybrid cameras, recently available.
Learning Objectives:
1. To highlight available imaging methods, imaging techniques and diagnostic
algorithms for the evaluation of inflammatory bowel lesions.
2. To learn more about the specificity of nuclear medicine techniques and their
clinical role.
3. To understand the role of nuclear medicine imaging in the evaluation of disease
activity and extent, therapy decision making and early therapy followup.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S13
C D E F G H
A
Thursday
European Congress of Radiology 2012
diagnosis of major injuries in all body areas and it seems likely that this influences
outcome. The information allows damage control treatment to be targeted to the
most severe injuries and also allows management strategy to be decided. Key signs
for interventional radiologists to recognise are the presence of blood/haematoma in
the chest abdomen and pelvis; sentinel clot indicating the likely site of bleed; active
contrast extravasation from vessels/solid organs; acute aortic injury/transection.
Optimal care requires diagnostic and interventional radiology to be integrated into
trauma teams and to be able to react in a timely fashion 24 hours a day.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the appropriate triage of trauma patients to imaging.
2. To learn about the most appropriate imaging techniques.
3. To be familiar with imaging findings.
A047 16:28
B. Management of arterial trauma
J. Urbano; Madrid/ES (jurbano@fjd.es)
The arterial trauma occurs in different scenarios such as politrauma, stab and
gunshot wounds and iatrogenic. Surgical vessels ligation was the common method
of bleeding control in World War II with an amputation rate of 50%. Surgical vessels
reconstruction is currently considered the first option; however, this is no longer
necessary in many cases. There are different mechanisms of arterial injury ranging
between intimal flap and spasm toAV fistula and complete transection with or without
arterial destruction. The amount and speed of bleeding after arterial trauma are the
main factors to decide if an invasive treatment is necessary and when and how to
treat it. Embolisation is a smarter, less invasive and safer method of ligation with
similar results than surgery in terms of bleeding control. Vessel reconstruction is
now also possible with endovascular devices. In general we will choose embolisa
tion for small and peripheral arteries and vessel reconstruction with stent grafts for
injuries in central and large arteries. In pseudoaneurysm and AV fistula there is no
active bleeding and endovascular treatment can be done either by embolisation
or stent graft. Coils are widespread as embolisation material but sometimes do not
achieve a complete bleeding control mainly if patients suffer coagulopathy. Liquid
embolics like cyanoacrylate and onix are less used but have some advantages
over the coils. Many aortic injuries can be treated with stent graft and with less
morbidity and mortality than surgery. The followup is mainly clinic with Doppler
ultrasound and CTA as ancillary tools.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand potential treatment options and when to treat and when not to
treat.
2. To be familiar with different embolisations and other treatments.
3. To learn about the results and appropriate followup strategies.
A048 16:51
C. Solid organ trauma
L. Lonn; Copenhagen/DK (lonn.lars@gmail.com)
Trauma is a serious global health problem, accounting for approximately one in ten
deaths worldwide. Injuries of CNS and great vessels are responsible for death at the
site of accident while visceral haemorrhage is the principal cause of mortality during
the first following hours after a trauma. The role of the interventional radiologist (IR)
has changed dramatically during the past decades. It is now possible to temporise
or definitively treat polytrauma with endovascular techniques. Imaging in the evalu
ation of patients with blunt abdominal trauma is fundamental in order to "Control
the Uncontrollable bleedings" which is the main role of interventional radiology in
damage control. Based on the spectrum of injury, interventional techniques are a
solid alternative not only in spleen, liver, kidneys, pancreas and adrenal injuries,
but also in pelvic fractures. Patient selection for treatment and followup is mainly
governed by vascular imaging focused on MDCT, especially 3-D CT reconstructions.
CT is a good predictor of the need for endovascular management or conservative
treatment, based on key findings. Key images that may alter management will be
discussed. The role of IR depends on local practice and carries broad applications
where getting the patient to IR-angiosuite/hybrid-room is the first challenge. Finally,
IR can control most haemorrhages and this is done in a multidisciplinary approach
with proactive management to reduce haemorrhage and allow appropriate surgery.
Various angiographic techniques have the potential of definite treatment even in
case of marginal haemodynamic instability.
Learning Objectives:
1. To know about the causes and the imaging appearances of solid organ trauma.
2. To understand various methods of IR treatment.
3. To learn about the results and appropriate followup strategies.
Panel discussion:
Do we need IR in the ER? 17:14
A044 16:59
Vascular graft infections and inflammation: the radiology perspective
A. Romero Jaramillo; Barcelona/ES
Vascular graft infection (VGI) is a serious complication, prognosis and treatment
depend on early diagnosis. Current imaging methods have different applications and
value in VGI. Plain film does not have a major role for diagnosis of VGI. It is sus
pected when perigraft gas is present. Ultrasound (US) is used for basic diagnostic
due to availability, costs and rapid use. Evaluates graft morphology, anastomosis,
native vessels, surrounding tissues and fluid collections. DopplerUS determines flow
disturbances. Computed Tomography (CT) is currently the choice imaging method.
Examines all anatomic regions. Grafts are visualised to full extension. Detects
perigraft fluid, perigraft soft-tissue attenuation, ectopic gas and pseudoaneurysms.
In low-grade infection, sensitivity decreases as morphological changes are difficult
to distinguish from postoperatory changes. CT examines vascular and perivascular
masses, ectopic gas and fluid collections, native adjacent arteries, arterial grafts
and their lumen, venous system and other pathologies that can explain graft infec
tion. CT detects aortoenteric fistulas, can distinguish between enteric loops and
interenteric abscess and bleeding after graft infection. Provides image guidance
for aspiration of fluid collections and percutaneous drainage placement. Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI) has proven accuracy in diagnosis of aortic VGI. Some
disadvantages compared with CT are higher costs, less availability and more time
spending procedure. It Is superior to CT for detection of perivascular inflammatory
changes and small amounts of periprosthetic fluid MRI evaluation.Angiography has
limited value for VGI diagnosis but is used for complications of VGI as pseudoan
eurysms, rupture or graft thrombosis in order to perform endovascular treatment.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the importance and role of radiological imaging in the detection,
evaluation and therapy planning of vascular graft infections and inflammations.
2. To know more about available imaging methods, imaging techniques and
diagnostic algorithms for the evaluation of vascular graft complications.
3. To learn more about the specific imaging symptoms and differential diagnostic
considerations in vascular graft infections and inflammation.
Panel discussion:
What is seen in the crystal ball: the future role of nuclear medicine
and radiology in the evaluation of inflammatory conditions 17:17
16:00 - 17:30 Room N/O
Interventional Radiology
RC 309
The trauma patient
A045 16:00
Chairman's introduction
A. Watkinson1
, D.O. Kessel2
; 1
Exeter/UK, 2
Leeds/UK
The management of trauma in a modern hospital setting has changed significantly
with increased access to fast, modern dynamic imaging and the increasing array and
availability of interventional techniques to treat vascular and solid organ injury. The
key to successful outcome and saving lives is speed of diagnosis and access to best
treatments with high-quality clinical care throughout. This workshop focuses on how
to effectively deliver this care and will end with a discussion focusing on whether
in order to achieve this IR techniques should be available in an ER department.
A046 16:05
A. Imaging modalities and logistics
D.O. Kessel; Leeds/UK (David.Kessel@leedsth.nhs.uk)
Immediate care focuses on treatment of life-threatening injuries. The advent of fast
multislice CT scanners has revolutionised how these injuries should be diagnosed.
Some patients are so unstable that they require immediate surgery to control
haemorrhage. In this group anything which delays imaging is inappropriate. All
other severely injured patients and those with appropriate mechanisms of injury
should have a trauma protocol CT. In a well-integrated service all but the most
unstable patients can be scanned with a total body scan taking less than 10 minutes
to acquire. The patient can be resuscitated throughout. A trauma CT scan cover
ing brain, spine, thorax, abdomen and pelvis extending to mid thigh replaces the
majority of other imaging studies. Imaging of the appendicular skeleton is not an
immediate priority and can wait until life-threatening injuries have been treated.
What is becoming universally accepted is that early CT scanning allows rapid
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S14 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about structured reporting in peripheral arterial obstructive diseases.
2. To understand the importance of quantitative analysis of peripheral arterial
obstructions and how to report these analyses.
3. To be able to answer specific clinical questions in peripheral arterial diseases.
16:00 - 17:30 Room Q
Computer Applications
RC 305
Image processing and computer-aided diagnosis
(CAD)
A052 16:00
Chairman's introduction
O. Ratib; Geneva/CH (osman.ratib@hcuge.ch)
The constant evolution of functional imaging techniques is leading towards an
increasing demand for quantitative analysis tools and computer-assisted diagnosis
(CAD). Most imaging modalities provide specific parameters that can be used for
feature extraction that can assist radiologist's interpretation beyond morphological
and anatomical considerations. Optimal use of this additional information requires
adequate training and understanding of these new analysis and data extraction
techniques. Also, additional analysis and processing tasks will significantly impact
the workflow and performance of image interpretation and reporting. The goal of this
special refresher course is to review some of the basic concepts of image processing
and CAD and how they are applicable in clinical routine: from basic understanding
of the process itself and its requirement to the impact of performing some specific
analysis tasks as part of routine image interpretation. Technical specifications of
clinical protocols as well as practical examples will help better understand these
new tasks of diagnostic radiology.
Session Objectives:
1. To discuss what the radiologist should know about image processing and CAD.
2. To understand the intrinsic of digital image reconstruction techniques.
3. To present some basic concepts of quantitative image analysis.
4. To discuss the impact on radiological practice.
A053 16:05
A. The link between image reconstruction and image analysis
A. ToddPokropek; London/UK
Learning Objectives:
1. To review the basics and updates on tomographic image reconstruction tech
niques.
2. To become familiar with some basic quantitative image analysis techniques.
3. To understand the link between quantitative analysis and CAD.
4. To learn about potential future applications of quantitative analysis in clinical
practice.
A054 16:28
B. Semantic web technologies for sharing and reuse of imaging-
related information
B. Gibaud; Rennes/FR (bernard.gibaud@univ-rennes1.fr)
Generally, using precise semantics is fundamental to guarantee the reliability of
automated data processing, as well as the consistency of information recorded in
databases, and their meaningful statistical exploitation. In medicine, this issue has
been addressed for many years using standard terminologies such as MeSH or
SNOMED. In medical imaging, and especially in the field of ComputerAssisted De
tection (CAD), information semantics is defined through DICOM Structured Reports
that organise relevant information in reference to terminological resources specified
in the DICOM standard (DICOM Part 16). This course explains the limitations of
this approach, as well as the added value that could be brought in the future by
semantic web technologies and especially ontologies. This added value concerns
primarily: (1) more effective decision support, thanks to the more precise definition
of involved information, e.g. the quantitative markers extracted from the images, (2)
enhanced possibilities regarding integration of data from various institutions, e.g. in
the context of large clinical trials, or for data mining in the context of translational
research and (3) enhanced possibilities in terms of database querying, thanks
to the use of the knowledge embedded in referred ontologies (e.g. properties of
is-a" and part-of" relationships). The presentation will introduce the basic ideas
16:00 - 17:30 Room P
Vascular
RC 315
How I report
Moderator:
C. Loewe; Vienna/AT
A049 16:00
A. CTA and MRA of supra-aortic arteries
J.H. Gillard; Cambridge/UK (jhg21
@cam.ac.uk)
There have been considerable advances in the imaging tools available for imaging
the supra aortic vessels, specifically the carotid arteries. Developments ranging
from rotational DSA (allowing for accurate delineation of vascular disease) to
improvements in CTA and MRA (particularly Gadolinium enhanced studies) have
greatly improved our diagnostic armamentarium. In addition there is increased
understanding that atheromatous disease localised to the carotid bifurcation is
only part of the problem with cerebrovascular disease. Increased coverage of
the arch and intracranial circulation are becoming increasingly important requir
ing greater spatial coverage. In the future imaging of the wall components may
become important. For the moment, however, management remains dependent
on the accurate assessment of luminal stenosis. The greatest evidence suggests
that contrast-enhanced MRA is the investigation of choice. However, CTA is ex
tremely popular especially with clinicians, particularly as it allows algorithms for
including or excluding calcification. There is a lesser evidence base, although the
relentless progress of technology such as dual beam techniques makes it difficult
to provide timely evidence. There are pros and cons for all methodologies, which
will be addressed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about structured reporting in angiographic studies of supra-aortic
arteries.
2. To understand the role of post-processing techniques and quantitative analysis
of arterial stenosis.
3. To be able to answer specific clinical questions in supra-aortic arterial occlusive
diseases.
A050 16:30
B. CTA and MRA of thoracic and abdominal aorta
H.J. Michaely; Mannheim/DE (henrik.michaely@umm.de)
This presentation focuses on technical backgrounds and requirements for suc
cessful acquisiton of angiographic MR and CT data to a minor extent. Apart from
conventional techniques also functional imaging approaches for quantifying disease
severity will be presented such as MR-flow measurements and time-resolved
phase-contrast MRA. The main focus of this presentation is the display of typical
disease entities that can be encountered in the thoracic and abdominal aorta.
The topics covered will include atherosclerosis, congenital vessel diseases and
inflammatory vessel diseases such as Takaysu's diseaes or pseudoaneursyms.
Special emphasis will be put on the implications for therapy that can be deducted
from the MRA and CTA data. Finally, MRA and CTA will be compared with regard
to their diagnostic capabilities and their optimal applications.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about structured reporting of aneurysmal and obstructive diseases.
2. To learn classifications for aneurysmatic aortic diseases.
3. To understand the role of postprocessing techniques in aortic diseases.
4. To be able to answer specific clinical questions in aortic diseases.
A051 17:00
C. CTA and MRA of peripheral arteries
T. Leiner; Utrecht/NL (t.leiner@umcutrecht.nl)
This part of the refresher course will focus on: 1) the role of CTA and MRA in the
diagnostic and interventional pathway of patients with suspected peripheral arte
rial occlusive disease, i.e. indications for imaging. 2) The most commonly used
imaging protocols. 3) The role of advanced postprocessing techniques to visualize
relevant features. 4) How to report findings in a coherent and structured fashion
for the referring clinician.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S15
C D E F G H
A
Thursday
European Congress of Radiology 2012
the most stunning kind of new natural artefact. In 1562, Arcimboldo left Milan for
Vienna to become court painter to Maximilian II, who like his father, Ferdinand I,
was particularly interested in medicine and the natural sciences and had made his
court a major centre of scientific exchange. The renowned physician Pietro Andrea
Mattioli from Siena had already worked for the court of Ferdinand I, and both of his
sons, Maximilian II and Ferdinand II, and had earned fame for his commentaries
on the materia medica of Dioscurides, which were published in many languages.
Arcimboldo became engaged in the illustration of various species of plants and
animals, which the Emperor housed in his botanical and zoological gardens, most
of which were particularly rare or came from the New World. As a result of his
interaction with Italian physicians at royal courts in both Vienna and Bohemia his
drawings were sent to a renowned natural scientist in Bologna, Ulisse Aldrovandi.
He had Arcimboldo's drawings carved into wooden blocks in order to use them
as illustrations in his books on quadrupeds and birds. Thus, Arcimboldo's artistic
drawings came to be used as scientific illustrations.
underlying the representation of conceptual knowledge in ontologies and illustrate
their added value in the context of medical imaging and CAD. The issue of the
development of ontologies and of their adoption by the medical imaging community
will also be briefly discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn new concepts in distributed image management.
2. To become familiar with perspectives in translational medicine.
3. To learn about semantics of imaging data.
4. To understand new concepts of medical ontology.
A055 16:51
C. Image processing and CAD: workflow in clinical practice
E. Neri; Pisa/IT (emanuele.neri@med.unipi.it)
The radiological workflow transits through advanced workstations for review and
reporting, where many image processing tools are available. Radiologists should
be aware about the availability of these tools and make the best use of them in the
diagnostic workflow. In many cases these tools are customised for clinical problems
such as cancer detection and characterisation, quantification of abdominal aortic
aneurysm, etc. In other situations image processing is used occasionally. However
in all cases, to make the best use of image processing, adequately trained radiolo
gists or technicians are required, and in reality there is still a gap from availability
of advanced tools to the diagnostic application. The aim of the lecture is to review
the current advanced tools for image viewing and processing and describe the
evidence-based clinical applications. Among image processing/analysis tools
also CAD (Computer Aided Diagnosis) is nowadays available on most worksta
tions for detection of colon, lung and breast cancer. However, even if CAD is at an
advanced stage of the technical development, its definitive clinical implementation
is still far from reality. In most clinical studies available in the literature it is clear
that CAD improves sensitivity of readers but in the meantime produces false posi
tives that increase the recall rate and have an impact on patient's management
and healthcare costs.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the new concepts in image processing (3D, virtual navigation,
image-guided interventions etc).
2. To review the principles of current CAD systems in the detection of lung, breast
and colon cancer.
3. To learn the impact of these new processing tasks in clinical practice.
4. To understand the future role of radiologists in supporting tasks beyond image
interpretation.
Panel discussion:
How do image processing and CAD impact radiological daily
practice? 17:14
1. The increasing role of quantitative analysis in diagnostic tasks.
2. Rapid changes in image processing technology and workstations.
3. Role of radiologists in image post-processing and analysis.
4. Cost effectiveness and economic impact of image processing in clinical routine.
18:30 - 18:50 Room A
Plenary Session
OL
Presiding:
L. Bonomo; Rome/IT
A056 18:30
Arcimboldo in the service of natural sciences
S. FerinoPagden; Vienna/AT (Sylvia.Ferino@khm.at)
Arcimboldo, a late Renaissance Lombard artist, who lived from 1526 to 1593,
is best known for his composite heads, which were based on fruits, vegetables,
fish and other objects from nature, depending on what they were supposed to
represent: the elements, the seasons, individual personalities, allegories etc. In
the 1930s, he was rediscovered by the Surrealists, who appreciated his `surrealist'
construction of a human head out of inhuman objects. Only recently, the study of
the individual parts of plants, fruits and vegetables as well as mammals and fish,
which took place in Arcimboldo's time, was linked to the widespread interest in
the natural sciences, which became popular throughout the courts of Europe as
a result of the new species brought back from the New World. The news of these
unknown species revolutionised the study of plants and herbs and led to fierce
competition between the ruling courts of Europe to acquire the first, the best and
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S16 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S17
C D E F G H
A
Friday, March 2
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S18 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
advanced segmentation tools, every tissue may be highlighted or displayed in
the background, thus providing additional information and helping to analyse liver
anatomy. Virtual models can be ideally used in interventional procedures. Radiolo
gists have to know the size and volume of the lesion to treat, as well as its precise
location and relationship with the surrounding tissues. For a percutaneous approach
such as radiofrequency ablation, the intervention can be planned and simulated by
introducing, on screen, a "virtual" needle in the liver to reduce potential damage
to the vessels and other organs when the "real" procedure will take place. These
models may help not only interventional radiologists but also surgeons, who need
to know the size and precise location of the lesion before operating on a patient.
Laparoscopy is a typical example of how imaging can help to guide surgery. With
this approach, the problem is that the field of view surgeons have is very limited
because of the small size of the laparoscopic camera. A very good solution is to
have a combination of both the live laparoscopic view and the preoperative or
intraoperative processed images and models.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be informed about advanced presentation of imaging information.
2. To review segmentation and classification.
3. To become familiar with a model-based approach to describing liver pathology.
A060 09:09
Planning and simulation
O. Ratib; Geneva/CH (osman.ratib@hcuge.ch)
Hepatic surgery requires detailed pre-operative evaluation of anatomical and struc
tural analysis of each patient anatomical variation and topological distribution of
anomalous structures and tumours. This includes a three-dimensional assessment
of the liver segments based on vascular and biliary tree distribution. Furthermore,
endoscopic and robotic surgeries rely on pre-operative planning and modelling
of minimally invasive procedures that do not provide visual navigation that open
surgery provides.Advanced image rendering and visualisation techniques are now
available for surgeons to prepare their surgical interventions by extracting appropri
ate anatomical features from cross-section imaging techniques such as CT and
MRI. These software programs that were initially expensive and only accessible
to computer-savvy experts are becoming more widely accessible on personal
computers and portable devices. Example of such software distributed for free
under Open-Source licensing is the OsiriX software that allows 3D and 4D image
manipulation and visualisation on standard personal computers. This software will
be used to demonstrate the feasibility and practical usefulness of 3D rendering tech
niques for planning and modelling of surgical interventions. In addition to illustrating
the different segmentation techniques, we will also review the different technical
solutions available for accessing and manipulating three-dimensional images in
the operating rooms. Different settings are applicable for different types of surgical
interventions from endoscopic imaging to virtual reality rendering of images that
can be used in the OR to the latest generation of "augmented-reality" techniques
allowing real-time fusion of 3D rendered images with patient's physical anatomy.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn how to provide the interventionalist and the surgeon with necessary
information before the procedure.
2. To learn how to implement environments for training interventionalists and
surgeons.
A061 09:27
Intraoperative functional imaging: visualisation and navigation for
liver surgery
N. Navab, T. Wendler; Munich/DE (navab@cs.tum.edu)
In the past decades x-ray fluoroscopy, ultrasound and endoscopic/laparoscopic
imaging systems have been successfully used for intra-operative 2D and rarely
3D anatomical imaging. However, in the functional field only gamma probes were
used as 1D" tools within surgical suites. In this presentation, the focus is on a
novel imaging approach which allows the surgeon to acquire required functional
3D imaging information within the operating room with minimum interruption of
the surgical workflow. We present the first success of this approach in terms of 3D
intra-operative imaging using navigated low-energy gamma probes called freehand
SPECT. We provide many examples of its successful deployment for different clinical
applications based on diverse SPECT tracers. We will then discuss the possible
application of similar technologies for intra-operative liver imaging. In this case,
higher energy probes are needed as most liver tracers are PET tracers. We present
the challenges that need to be overcome to finalise such solutions and discuss a
few possible solutions. We will also demonstrate the possibility of then complement
ing such functional information with real-time 2D or 3D ultrasound imaging, and
intra-operative 4D ultrasound-driven models of liver. In conjunction with advance
08:30 - 10:00 Room A
New Horizons Session
NH 4
Liver imaging: reality and virtuality
A057 08:30
Chairman's introduction
C. Bartolozzi; Pisa/IT (carlo.bartolozzi@med.unipi.it)
As imaging modalities and computers have reached unmatched levels of preci
sion, radiologists can now acquire very detailed information that they can use in
3D models within minutes after the examination, speeding up treatment planning.
The co-called virtual imaging is proving to improve therapy outcome manifold, and
its role might only increase in the future. This session will review all the progresses
made from the detection and characterisation of liver disease to treatment planning.
Knowing the latest advances in detecting and characterising liver disease has thus
become mandatory to all radiologists, since an increasing number of molecular tools
are currently being developed, and contrast media products targeting specific cells
are multiplying. Biomarkers to assess liver functions or tumour activity/response
have also become available. These spectacular computer science contributions
to medicine will not require that the radiologist or the surgeon will eventually have
to become computer experts themselves. The future will rather be based on a
multidisciplinary integration which will allow surgery to be increasingly assisted by
advanced imaging and computer technology.
Session Objectives:
1. To learn how to image and display the real liver.
2. To learn how to create virtual models.
3. To learn how to exploit these data in clinical practice.
A058 08:33
Acquisition and display of liver `reality'
L. MartiBonmati; Valencia/ES (marti_lui@gva.es)
To develop virtual models of the liver that can serve as clinically useful imaging
biomarkers, both the magnitude and the spatial distribution of the different objective
measurements must be displayed. To be properly done, it is necessary to validate
the relationship of the biomarkers with the reality of the organ and to check its tech
nical and clinical usefulness. This process includes defining tests for the concepts
and mechanisms; obtaining standardised and optimised anatomical, functional,
and molecular images; analysing the data with computer models; displaying data
appropriately; obtaining the appropriate statistic measures; and conducting tests
on the principle, efficacy, and effectiveness. The development, standardisation,
and optimisation of the different imaging acquisition protocols (for US, CT, MR
and PET) and data analyses (physiological and biochemical computing, fusion of
modalities, adequate measurements) will change some clinical research and patient
care scenarios. In multimodality imaging, the need to combine morphofunctional
and biological information can be approached by either acquiring images at dif
ferent times (asynchronous) and fusing them through digital image manipulation
techniques or simultaneously acquiring or computing images (synchronous) and
merging them automatically. MR diffusion-weighted, MR and US contrast-enhanced
pharmacokinetic imaging, cellular imaging, chemical quantitative imaging and PET
tracers will be co-registered and merged to further increase molecular and func
tional imaging as a relevant medical discipline in hepatology. Multimodality imaging
models will be displayed as parametric or multiparametric graphs of the liver reality
associated with the DICOM Structured Reporting initiative as the standardisation of
structured data and clinical observations in the liver imaging environment.
Learning Objectives:
1. To review new multimodality imaging strategies.
2. To become familiar with new contrast-enhanced studies of the liver.
3. To learn about liver biomarkers.
A059 08:51
Postprocessing and modelling
D. Caramella; Pisa/IT (davide.caramella@med.unipi.it)
Imaging the liver can still be a complex exercise, starting with the difficulty of
isolating this organ from surrounding structures. On the other hand, liver imaging
has never been that accessible to all radiologists, as every modality can be use
fully employed for diagnostic and interventional purposes. Once the imaging data
have been collected during the examination, post processing can begin. Using
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S19
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Friday
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the most common conditions and infectious agents that cause
non-pulmonary thoracic infections.
2. To understand the relative role of ultrasound, CT and MRI for the assessment
of infections of the chest wall, pleura or mediastinum.
3. To learn imaging features helpful for the differential diagnosis of non-pulmonary
chest infections.
08:30 - 10:00 Room C
Contrast Media
RC 406
Contrast media and tracers: always as safe as we
wish?
A064 08:30
Chairman's introduction
S.K. Morcos; Sheffield/UK (morcsk2
@aol.com)
Extracellular water-soluble contrast media (CM) are either iodine (I) or gadolinium
(Gd) based. They have similar pharmacokinetics and excreted mainly by the kidneys
with biological half-life around 90 minutes. They do not cross intact blood brain
barrier, minimal cell penetration and are not metabolised inside the body. Iodinated
CM are classified into high-osmolar, low-osmolar and iso-osmolar contrast agents.
Osmolality, iconicity and viscosity are important physicochemical factors which influ
ence the safety of these agents. Gd-CM are either linear or macrocyclic and avail
able as ionic or non-ionic preparations. The stability of the Gd-CA is an important
safety feature of these agents particularly in patients with reduced renal function.
The macrocyclic agents have high kinetic stability, whereas the non-ionic linear
preparations have low kinetic and thermodynamic stability. Contrast media adverse
effects can be divided into acute and delayed reactions.Acute reactions are allergic
like and usually develop within one hour of CM administration. Delayed reactions
develop after an hour and within a week of CM administration. Acute reduction
in renal function referred to as contrast-induced nephropathy (CIN) may develop
after contrast administration in patients with pre-existing risk factors. Patients with
advanced reduction in renal function may develop the complication of nephrogenic
systemic fibrosis (NSF) after administration of low-stability Gd-CM. In this session
contrast-induced nephropathy and nephrogenic systemic fibrosis will be discussed.
Measures to reduce the incidence these adverse effects will also be presented.
Session Objectives:
1. To provide an understanding of the bio-distribution of extra cellular water
soluble contrast agents after intravenous administration.
2. To highlight the physico-chemical properties that influence the safety of iodine-
based and gadolinium-based contrast agents.
3. To provide a summary of the different adverse effects that might occur with the
use of contrast agents including an approach to minimising the risk of these
adverse events.
A065 08:35
A. Iodinated CM: whether CIN is a SIN, and how to avoid it
R.W.F. Geenen; Alkmaar/NL (r.w.f.geenen@mca.nl)
The pharmacokinetics of iodinated contrast media are quite simple. They distribute
evenly in the extravascular space and are excreted by glomerular filtration. No me
tabolisation occurs. The pathophysiology of CIN is complex and not well understood.
Basically, a misbalance between vasodilatation and vasoconstriction takes place
inside the kidney after intra arterial or intravenous CM administration. Furthermore,
increased oxygen demand of tubular cells due to increased reabsorbtion of sodium
and water is a second mechanism, leading to transient medullar ischaemia. The third
mechanism is the increased production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) due to the
developed ischaemia. ROS lead to more cellular injury and increased misbalance
between vasodilatative and vasoconstrictive mediators. Identifying the patient at risk
is the first step in prevention. Knowledge of the patient`s medical record and a recent
basic kidney function are mandatory. High-risk patients should receive prevention.
Two major topics in CIN prevention are the questions whether iso-osmolar CM
cause significantly less CIN than low-osmolar CM and whether hydration schedules
with NaHCO3 give significantly less CIN than hydration schedules with NaCl 0.9%.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the pharmacokinetics of iodinated contrast media.
2. To understand CIN mechanisms.
3. To learn about pertinent safety issues.
CT-US registration methods we also present such solutions could smoothly integrate
pre-operative planning data. Throughout presentation, concepts and solutions are
illustrated with many images and videos of phantom experiments, ex-vivo as well
as patient validation. We also present a detailed study of the use of VR and AR for
acquiring and analysing 3D functional images within the surgical suites.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn how to provide the interventionalist and the surgeon with necessary
information during the procedure.
2. To learn how to implement intraoperative assistance.
Panel discussion:
The ultimate challenge: virtual technology for real medicine 09:45
08:30 - 10:00 Room B
Interactive Teaching Session
E 420a
Thoracic infections: what the radiologist must
report
A062 08:30
A. Pulmonary infections
L.R. Goodman; Milwaukee, WI/US (lgoodman@mcw.edu)
The radiologist has three roles in the evaluation of pulmonary infection: 1) detec
tion and description; 2) differential diagnosis; and 3) evaluation of complications.
We will approach these through unknown cases and audience participation.
Detection and description: In everyday practice, if the chest X-ray is nega
tive, it is assumed, clinically, that the patient has no pneumonia. Unfortunately,
this is not the case for immunocompromised patients, such as AIDS patients,
bone marrow patients, etc. If there is strong clinical suspicion of pneumo
nia, a CT is often revealing when the chest X-ray was negative. Descriptors
of pneumonia patterns are often confusing, because some descriptors are
clinical, some are pathological, and many are based on early X-ray descriptions.
These confusing, and often conflicting terminology issues will be addressed.
Differential diagnosis: Imaging is not a substitute for microbiology. However, certain
patterns are characteristic of certain types of infection and are often helpful in the
initial clinical management of patients until cultures are available. The imaging ap
pearance, combined with basic clinical information (white blood count, fever, and
duration of illness) can often lead to the correct or narrowed differential diagnosis.
Complications: The majority of pneumonias show imaging and clinical improvement
within several days and complete resolution within four to six weeks. Deviation
from this pattern suggests a complication, such as abscess, empyema, resistant
organisms, a structural problem in the lung, or noninfectious diagnosis. These
complications and the role of CT will be emphasised.
Learning Objective:
1. To learn how to recognise pulmonary infections in immunocompetent and
immunodepressed patients.
A063 09:15
B. Non-pulmonary chest infections
C.M. SchaeferProkop; Amersfoort/NL (cornelia.schaeferprokop@gmail.com)
Non-pulmonary infections may involve mediastinum, heart and vessels, chest wall
and pleura. This course will focus on mediastinal, pleural and chest wall disease.
Acute mediastinitis is a potentially life-threatening condition that is rare but requires
prompt diagnosis and treatment. Spontaneous or iatrogenic esophageal rupture is
the by far most common cause. Other causes include post-surgical mediastinitis
and extension of infection from adjacent spaces (neck, pharynx, pleura or retroperi
toneum). This course uses typical cases to discuss important differential diagnoses
and the sensitivity and specificity of various radiologic findings for diagnosis of
acute mediastinitis. The distinction between a parapneumonic pleural effusion
and an empyema based on radiologic findings may be impossible. Features will
be discussed hat suggest a "complicated" course that may requires interventional
or even surgical treatment. Features that differentiate empyema from lung abscess
at CT will be presented. An empyema necessitatis describes a chronic empyema
that attempts to decompress through the chest wall. Underlying infectious agents
include tuberculosis, actinomyces, staphylococcus and various types of fungi. It
has to be differentiated from other mostly neoplastic diseases that tend to cross
fascial planes such as lymphoma or Pancoast tumor.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S20 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
08:30 - 10:00 Room D1
Controversies in Abdominal Imaging
MC 424
Small bowel examination: CT vs MRI
Moderator:
B. Marincek; Cleveland, OH/US
Teaser:
B. Gallix; Montpellier/FR
A068 08:30
A. Why I prefer CT
G.A. Rollandi, E. Biscaldi; Genoa/IT (gianandrea.rollandi@galliera.it)
Multislice CT (MSCT) is a well-established technique to evaluate vascular, neo
plastic and inflammatory diseases of the gastrointestinal tract. MSCT-enteroclysis,
particularly, is a validated tool in small bowel investigations. The intestinal distension
can be performed using either a positive or a neutral contrast material. The whole
abdominal cavity can be explored evaluating both intestinal and extraintestinal
findings. CT-enterography may be performed without using a nasojejunal tube: the
radiation dose must be reduced. New detector technologies and new softwares
cooperate to reduce x-ray dose: today MSCT is less invasive and more competi
tive with MRI. The greater availability of the scanner increases MSCT use as a
main tool in abdominal and thoracic pathology investigation. Essential principles of
MSCT examination technique are established: thin collimation, tight gap in image
reconstruction to obtain an hysotropic voxel and high-quality processed views.
Spatial resolution in multiplanar images and in post processed reconstructions
is extraordinary; physicians are more confident with CT images than with MRI.
Actually high-field magnets are not so diffused and MR examination's availability is
inferior to MSCT. In emergency, in doubtful abdominal situations and in oncological
followup the MSCT is performed as a main evaluation, the MRI is a `second-level'
technique in diagnostic process. In clinical strategy the MSCT is an important tool in
the lack of established diagnosis, whereas the MRI is allowed during the followup
of diseases, in young patients' evaluation and in case of reiterative examinations.
A069 08:55
B. Why MRI is the best
S. Gourtsoyianni; Athens/GR (sgty76@gmail.com)
Advances in MRI hardware and software have rendered rapid acquisition of high-
resolution images of the GI tract possible, thus upgrading the diagnostic role of MRI
for imaging evaluation of patients with small bowel (SB) disease, when adequate
luminal distension is achieved. Major advantages of MRI are absence of radia
tion exposure, ability for both morphological and functional imaging, 3D imaging
capabilities and rich soft tissue contrast. Combination of ultrafast MR sequences
with duodenal intubation is referred to as MR Enteroclysis, while when contrast is
administered per os, is called MREnterography. MR Enteroclysis allows for better
consistency of imaging findings, accurate wall thickness measurements and de
piction of subtle bowel mucosa changes. Monitoring of distension of SB provides
superior results in proximal bowel assessment, thus suited for identification of
polyposis syndromes and neoplasms, and in absence of stenotic lesions. MR
Enteroclysis tends to be used for comprehensive baseline assessment of Crohn's
disease (CD), detailed preoperative mapping required in cases of SB neoplasms,
while MREnterography for followup imaging of patients with inflammatory bowel
disease. Various MR- related tools such as multiple contrast mechanisms and cine
true FISP sequences, also used for identification of adhesions, allow for accurate CD
subtype classification based on morphology and motility imaging features. Stenotic
lesions may be further characterized since differentiation between oedema and
fibrosis is feasible with T2 weighted images. In addition CD disease activity may
be assessed based on different enhancement patterns after gadolinium administra
tion. MRI examination allows also for identification of intraperitoneal extension of
disease or extaintestinal manifestations.
A070 09:20
Discussion
B. Marincek1
, B. Gallix2
; 1
Cleveland, OH/US, 2
Montpellier/FR
The discussion will address the following issues:
1. Technique: enteroclysis or no enteroclysis?
2. Can we define a strategy according to the clinical situation?
3. What is the optimal examination in case of intestinal bleeding (chronic/acute)?
A066 08:58
B. MR contrast agents: rumble in the jungle
G. HeinzPeer; Vienna/AT (gertraud.heinz@meduniwien.ac.at)
Currently, up to 50% of all MRI examinations worldwide are performed using contrast
agents, either an extracellular agent or an organ-specific agent. The extracellular
MRI contrast agents are chelates that contain the paramagnetic ion gadolinium
which strongly affects the relaxation properties of water protons, leading to changes
in tissue contrast. Gd-DTPA was the first extracellular agent to be introduced in
clinical practice. Since the introduction of Gd-DTPA in 1988, various gadolinium
chelates with different chemical properties became available for clinical use. For
many years, it was believed that gadolinium-based contrast agents (GBCA) were
nearly a 100% safe which led to a liberal and off label use of these agents. The
condition that came to be known as nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF) was first
identified in 1997, but reported in the peer-reviewed literature in 2000. Since then,
NSF has been the subject of a wide-ranging multidisciplinary medical investigation
that has proven an indisputable link to renal disease and a compelling associa
tion with the increasing use of GBCA in the renally impaired. NSF is a severely
disabling complication of renal disease with some features that overlap with those
of other conditions. Accurate diagnosis of NSF requires careful clinicopathologi
cal correlation. US- and European authorities have confirmed the categorisation
of GBCAs in three risk categories in view of NSF. The number of new NSF cases
has been dramatically reduced since the introduction of these risk categories. In
this talk also an update of NSF reports will be given.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the spectrum and mechanisms of MR contrast agents.
2. To understand the pathophysiology behind NSF.
3. To learn about clinical safety issues to consider beyond NSF.
A067 09:21
C. PET tracers: established tracers and those on the horizon
B. Tavitian; Orsay/FR (bertrand.tavitian@cea.fr)
Wider access to cameras, practitioners' demand and awareness and distribution
networks are rapidly increasing the portfolio of clinically available PET radiophar
maceuticals. Imaging of the dopaminergic terminals in basal ganglia with [18F]
FDOPA is a robust indicator of Parkinson's disease. PET tracers are also available
for benzodiazepine, serotonin, acetylcholine (nicotinic and muscarinic), TSPO, a
hallmark of microglial activation during neuroinflammation and the cannabinoid
receptor CB1. The detection of amyloid plaques, a hallmark ofAlzheimer's disease,
with [11C]PIB was a recent success story. Combined PET-MRI may allow anatomical
and molecular imaging of arterial diseases. Oncology is the main application of clini
cal PET tracers addressing tumour metabolism using the glucose analogue [18F]
Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG); DNA synthesis using nucleotide analogues; hypoxia
using imidazole derivatives; angiogenesis using peptides based on the RGD motif;
apoptosis using substrates of caspases; bone metastases with [18F]FNa, etc1/4
More recently, tracers specific for cancer locations, i.e. prostate, brain, melanoma,
neuroendocrine and others, based on the metabolic characteristics of the tissue
of origin, have been proposed. Also in high demand and rapid development are
tracers that identify the expression and/or the drug occupancy of molecular drug
targets such as isoforms of tyrosine kinases or carbonic anhydrases. PET shows
how basic research in specialised centres delivers clinically useful diagnostic
tools, several decades later. The recent launching of "universal" labelling kits for
macromolecules, as well as the new prototypes of miniaturised cyclotrons may
push the use of PET tracers even further towards a popular imaging method for
the general hospital practitioner.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the working mechanism and radiation of current clinical tracers.
2. To become familiar with the potential clinical indications and applications.
3. To learn about potential new tracers.
Panel discussion:
What specific precautions are mandatory in order to guarantee
contrast media safety to patients and healthcare professionals? 09:44
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S21
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Friday
A073 08:51
What are the real risks of US and MRI to the foetus?
M. Wozniak; Lublin/PL (mwozniak@hoga.pl)
Both ultrasound (US) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are recognised as
generally safe imaging modalities and thus appropriate for use in the diagnostics
of pregnant females and foetuses. However, to some extent both techniques may
carry some risks when used during pregnancy which every radiologist must be
aware of. Ultrasound may induce adverse effects by either thermal or non-thermal
means. The risk of inducing thermal effects is greater in the second and third
trimesters, when foetal bone is intercepted by the ultrasound beam. Non-thermal
mechanisms include acoustic cavitation, radiation force and acoustic streaming
and may be more significant in early gestation, when the relatively loosely tethered
embryonic tissues are exposed to an ultrasound beam in a liquid path. The likeli
hood of producing cavitation-type non-thermal effects is enhanced by the presence
in the sound field of gas-encapsulated echo-contrast media. There is no scientific
evidence in humans to suggest that the risk to the foetus from a routine MRI imaging
examination is significantly increased during pregnancy. The radiofrequency radia
tion pulses used in MRI imaging although nonionizing, result in energy deposition
and can potentially lead to tissue heating. However, the use of single-shot echo
train spin-echo sequences is commonplace in foetal imaging and unlikely to result
in significant temperature changes. Another potential risk of MRI to the foetus is
connected to intravenous application of gadolinium-based contrast agents, which
are not recommended during pregnancy. Yet, available evidence suggests it is
unlikely that these compounds have an adverse effect on the developing foetus.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the risks of US and MRI.
2. To become familiar with the underlying mechanisms.
3. To learn how to avoid or minimise the potential risks to the foetus.
A074 09:09
Polytrauma
A. Palko; Szeged/HU (palkoand@gmail.com)
Patients suffering polytrauma require to be handled with a special approach and
attitude of the medical personnel from the on-site primary care through the emer
gency room, diagnostic and life support measures to the operation theatre and the
intensive care unit, because of the complexity and the life-threatening nature of
the multiple injuries causing unique clinical consequences. The survival of these
patients is greatly dependent on the duration of time elapsing between the injury
and the start of definitive therapy. The role of imaging diagnostics is, on the one
hand, essential to explore the lesions of key importance and, on the other hand,
is limited by time constraint and urgency. A clear understanding of the task and
an ability to work under pressure are required of the imaging diagnostic team.
Suffering polytrauma in pregnancy is a very uncommon situation, which typically
may occur as a result of motor vehicle accident or interpersonal (usually domestic)
violence. In these cases, the absolute priority is the preservation of the life of the
mother; therefore, the usual concerns regarding the use of ionising radiation and
contrast media are of less importance. At the same time, the radiologist has to be
aware of the special risks caused by potential injuries and their consequences on
the pregnant uterus, placenta and foetus. The altered anatomical situation may
also hinder the proper imaging evaluation of the situation.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the indications, technical requirements and risks of the applica
tion of imaging modalities in the evaluation of pregnant polytrauma patients.
2. To learn more about the types of injuries and their clinical consequences
prevalent in pregnancy.
3. To explore the typical imaging findings and role of specific expertise in their
evaluation in this unusual clinical setting.
A075 09:27
Pulmonary embolism
A.R. Larici; Rome/IT (anna.larici@rm.unicatt.it)
The risk for venous thromboembolism is increased by a factor of four during
pregnancy. In developed countries, pulmonary embolism (PE) is the leading
cause of maternal death. Currently, there is no specific diagnostic algorithm for
PE suspected in pregnancy. Clinical probability scores have not been validated in
pregnant patients and D-dimer values are often elevated during pregnancy. Lower
limb ultrasonography (US) has been proposed as the first-line imaging modality,
because the finding of proximal deep venous thrombosis validates the diagnosis of
venous thromboembolism. However, because only a small proportion of US stud
ies are positive, it has been recommended to perform US as first-line exam only if
4. Can we reliably assess activity in IBD?
5. Will the capsule preclude the need for imaging?
6. Have we forgotten ultrasound?
08:30 - 10:00 Room D2
State of the Art Symposium
SA 4
Imaging during pregnancy
A071 08:30
Chairman's introduction
M. BekiesinskaFigatowska; Warsaw/PL (m.figatowska@mp.pl)
Pregnancy is a specific time during which special care must be taken of a mother
and foetus whenever diagnostic imaging is necessary. Ultrasonography (US) and
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are the safest imaging methods as they do not
involve ionising radiation. They are not completely adverse effect free, i.e. both
can cause tissue heating, which is potentially harmful to the foetus. Nevertheless,
they should be considered as the methods of choice when maternal problems
require diagnostic imaging, both preferentially without the use of contrast media.
There are however clinical problems which cannot be solved without the use of
ionising radiation. Two main clinical settings will be discussed during this session:
polytrauma and pulmonary embolism (PE), both requiring computed tomography
(CT) in most cases. In cases of polytrauma, saving the mother's life is a priority,
and radiation protection of the foetus is a secondary problem. When CT angiog
raphy is performed to confirm or rule out PE, the protocols are optimised as far as
the radiation dose and contrast medium volume are concerned (i.e. 100 or even
80 kV instead of 140 kV). The use of CT is considered to be quite safe in terms of
foetus safety if the examination covers the region of the head, neck and thorax of
the mother. However even with the use of CT in the region of the abdomen and
pelvis, the threshold of 100 mGy is rarely exceeded.
Session Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the risk of using radiological modalities in pregnant
woman.
2. To consolidate knowledge of the pros and cons of the different imaging tech
niques.
3. To learn about the indications requiring the use of imaging in pregnancy.
A072 08:33
What are the real risks of radiation and contrast media to the mother
and the foetus?
D. Prayer; Vienna/AT (daniela.prayer@meduniwien.ac.at)
Contrast media (CM) that might be considered for use during pregnancy comprise
mainly iodinated CM and gadolinium derivates. Iodinated contrast media should be
avoided during pregnancy, as the iodine will be stored in the foetal thyroid gland,
but a single dosage is unlikely to have a negative effect. Systemic cystic fibrosis
has not been described in pregnant women or foetuses; however, no human data
proving the safety of gadolinium during pregnancy are available. Gadolinium may
be used in maternal conditions unrelated to pregnancy, such as suspect appendicitis
or pregnancy-related problems of the placenta, and foetal indications. The latter
ones have not been studied yet in larger groups. The greatest risk for radiation-
associated damage of developing tissues lies in the embryonic period: at a dosage of
> 100 mSV, an embryo might die during the preimplantation phase, and the threshold
dose that puts the embryo at risk for malformations or mental retardation lies from
100 mSV onwards. CT may be used during pregnancy for diagnosis of skeletal
malformations. Low-dose fast protocols, for instance using a dual source system,
are currently under investigation. In conclusion, MRI without contrast administration
should be the first choice in case of insufficient ultrasound information. Gadolinium.
compounds may provide additional information in selected indications. Low-dose
CT may be helpful in the management of skeletal malformations.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand indications for CM administration during pregnancy.
2. To learn about the potential use of CT.
3. To be informed about potential risks of radiation and CM for mother and fetus.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S22 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
additional radiographs are performed.According toATLS(R) and contrary to literature
evidence, CT plays a minor role in the evaluation of trauma victims and indicated
CT scans should be done in the secondary survey. Although improved in the most
recent edition, the ATLS(R) is neither evidence-based nor up-to -date concerning
imaging in trauma settings. However, surgeons use the ATLS(R) recommendations
routinely to support indications for diagnostic imaging. In addition, surgeons refer
to ATLS(R) in error with indications for imaging that are not supported by the present
ATLS(R) guideline or radiological literature. In this refresher course the rationale and
indications of imaging will be assessed where it pertains to the ATLS(R) protocol.
The principles of ATLS(R) and discrepancies between the radiological literature,
ATLS(R) and day-to-day practice will be addressed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the relationship between advanced trauma life support and
emergency radiology.
2. To know more about the rational use of x-rays, US and MDCT according to
patient priorities in the emergency settings.
3. To become familiar with the most important findings to report.
A078 09:30
C. Mechanism of injury and MDCT protocols: choosing the right
protocol for the patient
M. Stajgis; Poznan/PL (stajgis@o2
.pl)
The extent of patient's injuries depends mostly on the mechanisms of injury and
magnitude of energy which is absorbed by human body. Knowledge of Mechanism's
details provides valuable information for appropriate management of patients.
Although there is still controversy on direct whole-body multi detector computed
tomography versus stepwise imaging starting with plain x-rays of the cervical spine
and chest, followed by FAST Ultrasound and regional CT, MDCT is an accepted
routine method in evaluation of trauma patients. However, there is no existing one
and the only standard trauma protocol of examination. A lot of factors must be
taken into account by choosing the optimal way of conducting CT examination:
patient's state of consciousness, penetrating wounds, stable/unstable haemody
namics, presence of visible instabilities, general medical condition, etc. One of
the first "Musts" is to clear the emergency head and cervical spine injuries; MDCT
protocols without contrast media are sufficient in such cases. Thoracic injuries like
tension pneumothorax, open pneumothorax, flail chest or massive haemothorax
must be excluded/confirm almost immediately. Intra-thoracic and intra-abdominal
bleeding must be considered in every hypotensive patient; this requires the use of
contrast media MDCT protocol. In evaluation of liver and spleen injuries, 5-minute
delay in scanning after contrast media administration can be very helpful. Arterial
and late venous phases are of extreme importance in appropriate diagnosis of the
extent pelvic injuries. One must not forget about the possible fatal consequences
of undiagnosed injuries of extremities, resulting in huge loss of blood.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the mechanism of traumatic injuries in trauma patients.
2. To be familiar with the MDCT protocols according to the mechanisms.
3. To know the impact of MDCT findings on patient management.
08:30 - 10:00 Room E2
Foundation Course: More About Ultrasound
E 420b
Understand recent issues in US technology
Moderator:
M. Bachmann Nielsen; Copenhagen/DK
A079 08:30
A. Recent advances in US technology
M. Claudon; VandoeuvrelesNancy/FR (m.claudon@chunancy.fr)
Ultrasound (US) remains an essential part of clinical imaging with the advantage
of the lack of irradiation and the wide availability of the method. Imaging organs
and dealing with specific physiologic processes required development of better
US probes and adaptation of imaging protocols, leading to a more successful
contribution to the management of patients. The objectives of this lecture are to
review the main technical advances that have been recently introduced, to discuss
their advantages and limits and to present future perspectives to be considered by
the radiological community. In the past decade, new techniques and modes have
brought a further contribution to the ever-expanding applications of US in a ever
wider spectrum of diseases and allow to improve the 2D greyscale image quality,
symptoms of deep venous thrombosis are present. The use of lung scintigraphy and
pulmonary angiography with computed tomography (CTA) as second-line imaging
modality is still debated. Lung scintigraphy and CTAhave comparable performances
in terms of positive, negative and indeterminate results for the diagnosis of PE in
pregnancy. Nevertheless, both modalities have drawbacks. Maternal radiation dose
is higher with CTA, but CTAhas advantages over lung scintigraphy in terms of better
interobserver agreement and identification of alternative diagnoses unsuspected
at chest radiography. Moreover, lung scintigraphy is less available than CTA in
emergency. Several physiologic changes during pregnancy may account for inde
terminate CTA results, such as the increase in blood volume that may determine
poor arterial opacification. Radiologists should be aware that protocols have to be
optimized in terms of contrast medium injection and radiation dose, when CTA is
performed for suspected PE in pregnancy.
Learning Objectives:
1. To appreciate the accuracy of various testing options in the diagnosis of PE
in pregnancy.
2. To learn how to adapt CT protocols in pregnant patients to adequately rule
out PE.
3. To become familiar with a diagnostic imaging algorithm for the evaluation of
pregnant patients with suspected PE.
Panel discussion:
Pregnant women and imaging - how far can we go? 09:45
08:30 - 10:00 Room E1
Emergency Radiology
RC 417
ER: basic principles
Moderator:
O. Chan; London/UK
A076 08:30
A. Logistics, ergonomics and organisation of an emergency
radiology department
I. Arkhipova; Moscow/RU (iarkhipova77
@mail.ru)
A radiology department (RD) providing emergency services remains a core part of
hospital emergency care. Modern imaging has become the key diagnostic tool that
determines whether a patient will be discharged home or will have to be admitted
for further treatment from the accident and emergency department (ED). The most
important factor remains the professionalism of the medical and nursing staff in the
radiology department. Prompt image interpretation of any imaging can be achieved
by the use of Teleradiology. The interpretation of images used outside receiving
hospitals in emergency transfers can be very useful. It can help bridge the gap
in communication between transferring and receiving institutions and to reduce
interpretational discrepancies. The next important issue is the location of the RD.
The RD should be built adjacent to or within the ED. It is worthwhile to mention
that the benefit-risk ratio of each individual procedure should be considered; the
responsibility of this decision lies not only with the radiologist but on the medical
community as a whole. Organisation of radiology department in the ED is most
important issue. Last but no means the least, we should always remember that
one day we might find ourselves having an accident - what kind of service would
we like to get?
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand how an emergency radiology department should be built.
2. To be familiar with the logistics of the whole organisation, from the technology
to 24-hour staffing.
A077 09:00
B. Advanced trauma life support: ABCDE from a radiological point of view
D.R. Kool; Nijmegen/NL
Advanced trauma life support(R) (ATLS(R)) is an established systematic approach
assessing trauma patients prioritising the most life-threatening injuries. The term
`golden hour' is used to emphasise a sense of urgency, not to define a time frame.
The assessment is divided in a primary and a secondary survey. In the primary
survey the mnemonic ABCDE (Airway, Breathing, Circulation, Disability, Exposure
and Environment) is used to guide the order of assessment. Although imaging
should not postpone treatment, chest and pelvis radiographs and abdominal US
can influence treatment decisions and should be performed in the primary survey.
In the secondary survey the patient is examined from head to toe and appropriate
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S23
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Friday
08:30 - 10:00 Room F1
Organs from A to Z: Lung
MC 422
Anatomy-based imaging review of lung disease
Moderator:
N. Sverzellati; Parma/IT
A082 08:30
A. Around and between the lungs: pleura, mediastinum, and hila
A. Oikonomou; Alexandroupolis/GR (aoikonom@med.duth.gr)
The main manifestations of disease in the pleura include pneumothorax, pleural
effusion including haemothorax and chylothorax, benign pleural thickening with
or without calcifications and benign and malignant pleural neoplasms. Pleura is
the most common site of a solitary fibrous tumour and mesothelioma is the most
common primary malignant pleural tumour. However, metastastic pleural disease
is the most common malignant neoplasm of the pleura. In general most pleural
diseases are secondary menifestations to disease processes in other organs or
systemic diseases. A wide spectrum of focal and diffuse abnormalities occurs in
the mediastinum including pneumomediastinum, acute and chronic mediastinitis,
mediastinal abscesses and haemomediastinum. To reach a confident and narrow
differential diagnosis in interpreting a mediastinal mass one should detect and
describe the abnormality based on its internal characteristics and specific CT
features and place it into the appropriate anatomic division (anterior, middle and
posterior or paravertebral). The diseases affecting pulmonary hila are directly
related to the hilar anatomic components: lymph nodes, bronchi, pulmonary and
systemic arteries and veins and autonomic nerves. Enlarged hila may either
represent lymphadenopathy due to chronic granulomatous disease, lymphoma
or metastatic disease, or primary central bronchogenic carcinoma, endobronchial
carcinoid, pulmonary aneurysm or congenital vascular anomalies. Very rarely an
enlarged hilum will have a neurogenic aetiology.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the imaging spectrum of pleural diseases.
2. To be aware of the imaging spectrum of mediastinal diseases.
3. To get more information about the imaging spectrum of hilar diseases.
A083 08:55
B. Large airways, small airways, and alveoli
M. Zompatori; Bologna/IT (maurizio.zompatori@unibo.it)
Familiarity with the normal anatomic appearance of the airways is the essential
pre-condition to fully exploit the potential of modern technology and especially of
volumetric CT. Besides, the importance of correctly phenotyping the chronic obstruc
tive pulmonary disease (COPD), both from a prognostic and therapeutic viewpoint,
is now well established. From the trachea to the alveolar spaces, derangement of
normal anatomy can give us the explanation of a large number of CT signs and
patterns commonly found in the different phenotypes and sub-phenotypes of COPD,
such as saber sheath trachea, tracheo-bronchial dynamic instability (tracheo-
bronchomalacia) and bronchial outpouchings diverticula. Moving further along
the bronchial tree towards the periphery, a sound knowledge of the borderlands
between normal and abnormal anatomy is also of paramount importance to detect
early bronchiectasis, bronchial remodelling and the signs of infectious bronchiolitis
(centrilobular nodules, tree in bud opacities), more rare inflammatory conditions
(Respiratory bronchiolitis, for example), areas of mosaic oligoemia with expiratory
air trapping (another possible manifestation of small airways disease), and, finally,
the irreversible destruction of the respiratory spaces (particularly, centrilobular em
physema). COPD is a very heterogeneous disease. Different patterns can overlap
and the same patient can present with a number of different findings, co-morbidities
and complications. A little stroll through the airway anatomy, from the trachea to
the alveolar sacs, can help us to understand and remind what COPD is, what we
know and the large amount of things that remain to be discovered and clarified.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the imaging characteristics of large airways, small airways, and
alveoli.
2. To understand the imaging characteristics of the pathological entities contribut
ing to the development of the clinical COPD.
3. To be able to describe the potential continuum between these components, as
clinically manifested in the spectrum of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD).
to move to 3D and 4D imaging, to deal with contrast-enhanced techniques and to
consider ultrafast imaging, high-resolution imaging technology and elastographic
imaging, The integration of ultrasound in a multimodality approach, with modalities
such as fusion, will be exposed mainly for interventional applications. Questions
regarding safety in these new developments will finally be discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand basic technical principles of sonography.
2. To appreciate advantages and limitations of diagnostic US.
3. To present the most significant advances in key fields of diagnostic US.
A080 09:00
B. Portable machines: the future of US?
G.H. Mostbeck; Vienna/AT (gerhard.mostbeck@wienkav.at)
Portable ultrasound (US) machines arrived in the 1980s and battery-supported
machines in the late 1990s. Today, portable machines from many vendors are
available and range in size from laptop-like units to pocket-sized machines. With
the latest technical developments, these machines offer very good real-time image
quality, color Doppler capabilities and soft-ware applications for echocardiography,
gynecology/obstetrics, et al and support various US-heads. Basically developed
for military and combat medical purposes, these units are used outside a radiol
ogy department from many medical subspecialities in cases where mobility of the
patient is limited or in the pre-hospital trauma setting. Applications of these units in
the field, in remote areas and on expeditions (Mt. Everest) have been reported. Ac
cordingly, focused US in the pre-hospital trauma setting (pneumothorax, fractures,
free abdominal fluid), indications for US at the ICU and in emergency medicine,
vascular access under US-guidance and interventional procedures (e.g. lumbar
puncture, thoracocentesis et al) have been successfully performed using portable
US machines. In addition, screening for abdominal aneurysms in an out-hospital
setting has been reported. For radiologists performing US, these machines (which
can be integrated in the RIS/PACS environment) are important for interventional
procedures on the ward and on the ICU and in the emergency room and allow on-
site US information after unclear findings on XR, CT and MR. It has to be expected
that further technical developments will provide portable "US stethoscopes", prob
ably having the same distribution as stethoscopes and used for focused, fast and
first-line US imaging in many clinical situations.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the technical aspects of portable machines compared to stan
dard US equipment.
2. To consider US performed with portable machines as a problem-solving tool
in cases of unclear CT and MR findings.
3. To learn about bedside applications of portable US in the ICU/IMC and trauma/
emergency patient.
A081 09:30
C. How to choose your equipment
J.M. Correas; Paris/FR (jeanmichel.correas@nck.aphp.fr)
The choice of the US equipment is always a dilemma. The precise definition of the
true needs is a difficult task, including ergonomics, cleaning, B-mode, basic func
tions, Doppler imaging, overall imaging quality, networking, advanced capabilities
and general and specific transducers. None of the existing system provides an
optimal image quality for all applications, so it is necessary to prioritise the most
important ones. The ideal situation is to evaluate the candidate systems in your
routine practice and eventually compare the systems with each other with side by
side evaluations. Of course, the price of the acquisition is playing an important role,
but it is necessary to take into account the additional cost of the set of transducers,
the advanced imaging options and the maintenance (that can include the transduc
ers and the delay of intervention). It is necessary to distinguish the truly portable
systems and the transportable systems (for dedicated applications, general-purpose
applications or high-end imaging) from the larger and heavier systems.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn how radiologists and sonographers should select a US system.
2. To recognise the main technical features that affect the choice of a US system.
3. To become familiar with the non-technical issues in the selection of a US
system.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S24 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
(relative risk (RR) 0.81 [95% CI 0.71-0.93] p < 0.01). Furthermore, when the RCTs
included were grouped according to their mean time interval between mammo
grams, there was a definite increase of statistical significance in favour of those
RCTs with shorter interval times (RR 0.76 [95% CI 0.64-0.89] p < 0.01). Both the
Malmo and the Gothenberg trials demonstrated a statistically significant mortality
reduction in women in this age group (RR 0.64 [0.45-0.89]; p = 0.009 and RR 0.56
[0.32-0.98]; p = 0.035 respectively); both studies incorporated short screening
intervals and multiple screening rounds. Critics of mammographic screening have
commented that many of the women in these RCTs aged 40 to 49 years at the
time of randomisation received many of their screening episodes after the age of
50 years. The UK Age Trial was the only RCT to perform all screening episodes
before age of 50 years. The RR of breast cancer death in this study group was
0.83 (0.66-1.04). Several problems are encountered during screening of women
younger than 50, including relatively high numbers of false-positive screening results
and screening-provoked benign surgical biopsies. There is a modest reduction in
mammographic sensitivity when comparing women in their 40s with women in
their 50s; however, the widespread introduction of digital mammography should
ameliorate this problem, according to the results of the DMIST study.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the evidence for screening women under 50.
2. To understand the benefits to the population of screening under 50.
3. To appreciate the risks to individual women of offering screening to women
under 50.
A087 08:58
How to image the dense breast
C. Van Ongeval; Leuven/BE (chantal.vanongeval@uz.kuleuven.ac.be)
The mammographic image of the breast reflects the tissue composition of the breast,
i.e. epithelial, connective and adipose tissue. Different methods are used to assess
the mammographic density: Wolfe (1976) described four densities (N1, P1, P2, DY)
and the Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System described four categories. As
risk calculation is related with the percentage of mammographic density (PMD)
rather than with "density", more adequate measurements are necessary. Attempts
on computer-assisted methods based on interactive thresholding were developed.
Due to the introduction of digital mammography, information of the digital data can
be used for the quantification of the density of the breast. Several studies concluded
that PMD is associated with a higher risk of breast cancer: 6 to 8 times higher than
for women with primarily adipose breasts. This association was stronger in studies
in the general population than in symptomatic patients and stronger for quantitative
measurements than for qualitative measurements.Although high density is associ
ated with an increased risk of breast cancer, it also makes the detection of breast
cancer with mammography more difficult. The DIMST trial already showed a higher
accuracy of digital mammography for dense breasts. Additional breast ultrasound
in women with mammographically dense breasts permits detection of small, oc
cult breast cancers, but is also correlated with a significantly higher biopsy rate.
Recent reports on tomosynthesis showed improved lesion conspicuity of masses
and stellate lesions, which are often masked in dense breasts. Implementation of
newer techniques such as dual energy mammography has just started.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the methods of calculation of breast density and the cancer
risks associated with dense breasts.
2. To understand problems related to the interpretation of dense breasts.
3. To learn about the advantages and disadvantages of other current and new
imaging techniques.
A088 09:21
What to do with false positive MR imaging
L. Martincich; Candiolo/IT (laura.martincich@ircc.it)
Breast MRI represents the most sensitive modality in the identification of breast
cancer. Even if its use is increasing, the main concern on a wider use of this
examination in clinical practice still remains its sub-optimal specificity and false-
positive rate. Several systematic reviews evaluating the diagnostic performance of
contrast-enhanced MR imaging in patients with breast lesions showed a specificity
ranging between 67% and 72%. The reported false-positive rate of the examination
ranged, in Literature, between 3.5% and 7%. However, any parameter of diagnostic
performance should consider the clinical context. For example, the specificity of
breast MRI in the identification of cancer in high-risk population resulted in different
multicentre trials > 90% while its positive predictive value in characterising occult
malignant lesions in the local staging of breast cancer reached 66%. Besides,
the false-positive findings of preoperative MRI have been showed to reach 24%.
Clinical indications, technical requirements, contrast agents and expertise of the
A084 09:20
C. Pulmonary vessels
M. RemyJardin; Lille/FR (martine.remy@chrulille.fr)
Radiologists need to have a basic knowledge of the radiological anatomy of the
organs imaged within the thorax, among which the pulmonary circulation plays an
important role as it can provide morphologic but also functional information useful
for the management of numerous thoracic disorders. This new trends in evaluating
the pulmonary circulation is driven by the technological developments of multide
tector-row CT (MDCT) technology which offers the possibility not only to search
for morphological abnormalities at the level of central and peripheral pulmonary
vessels with single-source MDCT but also to integrate the evaluation of the capillary
level by means of dual-energy CT. Detection of morphological abnormalities at the
level of central and peripheral pulmonary vessels in congenital and acquired chest
disorders requires the knowledge of the prevailing arterial and venous patterns
whose analysis can now benefit from the development of computer-aided-diagnosis
tools. The analysis of the most distal portion of the pulmonary circulation, sometime
referred to as "pulmonary perfusion", is now available in routine clinical practice and
requires, for proper interpretation of images, a basic knowledge of the anatomical
relationships between the pulmonary and systemic circulations of the chest. CT
can also participate in the noninvasive approach of pulmonary hypertension by
means of the analysis of the degree of distensibility of central pulmonary arteries.
All these pieces of information are accessible to radiologists providing the selection
of the adequate scanning protocol. The purpose of this lecture is to review these
anatomical and physiological perspectives offered by MDCT in 2012.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be able to interpret pulmonary vascular imaging studies.
2. To become familiar with the current approach to pulmonary embolic disease
according to the latest guidelines and recommendations.
3. To understand the involvement of the pulmonary vasculature in non-embolic
disease, including diseases of the heart.
Discussion 09:45
08:30 - 10:00 Room F2
Special Focus Session
SF 4a
Controversies in breast imaging
A085 08:30
Chairman's introduction
M.G. Wallis; Cambridge/UK (matthewwallis492
@btinternet.com)
While the three controversies covered in this session are apparently disparate they
do have a clear common theme relating to the risks (in particular the false-positive
test) and benefits of breast imaging and our perceptions of these. Perceptions of
risk (and benefits) are complex and are determined by an interaction of our personal
past experience, information provided and our current point of observation.Awoman
with a newly diagnosed breast cancer will have a very different perspective to a
public health doctor, or for that matter a politician, commissioning a service for their
population in financially difficult times. This is compounded by the general popula
tion's woefully inadequate grasp of statistics used to provide evidence which is not
helped by our own presentation of the facts which some claim is based entirely
on vested interest. In our drive to find every cancer (or perhaps our anxiety not to
miss any) regardless of its biological potential it is easy to forget the need for spe
cificity. The false-positive result (abnormal test in a normal patient) can have both
short- and long-term physical and psycho-social consequences for the individual
and definitely has significant financial costs to the health economy. The three talks
start with populations, move seamlessly to individuals and finally provide help and
advice on reducing the number of false-positive results.
Session Objectives:
1. To appreciate that there are risks and benefits to breast imaging.
2. To learn the magnitude of these risks and benefits.
3. To become familiar with the methods to manage these risks.
A086 08:35
Should we screen women under 50?
A. Evans; Dundee/UK (a.z.evans@dundee.ac.uk)
A recent meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials (RCT) of mammographic
screening of women aged 40-49 has indicated a reduction in breast-cancer mortality
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S25
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Friday
for detection of the cause of a given haemorrhage. It is recommended to develop
such a protocol and to embed it in the diagnostic workup of every patient with a
haemorrhagic stroke.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the MR imaging features of brain haemorrhage in the different
haemorrhage stages and different sequences.
2. To be able to identify and make the differential diagnosis of the most common
causes of microbleeds.
3. To be able to identify and make the differential diagnosis of the most common
causes of parenchymal haemorrhage.
A091 09:30
C. Differential diagnosis of multiple brain lesions: tumour and
tumour-like lesions
A. RoviraCanellas; Barcelona/ES (alex.rovira@idicat.org)
Conventional MR imaging (T2-weighted and contrast-enhanced T1-weighted se
quences) is the standard modality for the initial visualisation and characterisation of
CNS lesions, with superior sensitivity compared with alternative imaging modalities.
However, advanced MR techniques such as perfusion-weighted imaging (PWI),
diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) and MR spectroscopy (MRS) are increasingly
incorporated into imaging protocols to provide not only better specificity, but also
physiological information that complements the morphological detail of conventional
MR studies. DWI provides useful information for providing an accurate differential
diagnosis between pyogenic abscesses and necrotic tumoural lesions (both metas
tasis and high- grade gliomas), although it cannot distinguish between necrotic CNS
tumours from inflammatory pseudotumoural cystic lesions. Data on the literature
regarding the diagnostic value of MRS for differentiating pseudotumoural lesions
from brain tumours have yielded conflicting results. Some authors have shown that
there are not enough spectral differences that allow a precise diagnosis in individual
cases, while others demonstrated that this discrimination can be achieved based
on metabolite ratios obtained at short TE and long TE. PWI can also be helpful in
differentiating pseudotumoural inflammatory lesions and high-grade gliomas, as
only the latter show a significantly increase in cerebral blood volume. Accurate
characterisation of brain lesions with conventional and advanced MRI techniques is
feasible in clinical practice and might be helpful in distinguishing between tumoural
from pseudotumoural lesions. This will have a clear impact on patient management
as unnecessary aggressive diagnostic or therapeutic procedures could be avoided.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the most common causes of multiple brain lesions
caused by primary and secondary brain tumours.
2. To learn about the most common causes of multiple non-neoplastic brain
lesions that mimic tumours.
3. To learn the characteristic neuroimaging findings that may be useful in estab
lishing differential diagnoses.
4. To be aware of the importance of advanced neuroimaging techniques for
evaluation of multiple brain lesions.
08:30 - 10:00 Room I/K
Joint Course of ESR and RSNA (Radiological Society of North
America)
MC 428
Essentials in oncologic imaging: what radiologists
need to know (part 1)
Moderator:
D.M. Panicek; New York, NY/US
A092 08:30
A. Principles of oncologic imaging and reporting
D.M. Panicek; New York, NY/US (panicekd@mskcc.org)
Oncologic imaging examinations are often complex, and specialised knowledge is
required to interpret them in a clinically relevant manner. The radiologist needs to be
aware of the details of the staging system and pattern of spread for a given tumour;
the strengths and limitations of available imaging modalities in specific oncologic
applications, especially in assessing tumour response to different conventional and
newer therapies; and various pitfalls in the overall approach to interpretation and
reporting of oncologic imaging examinations. Because a radiologic study is only a
"snapshot" taken during a brief moment of a patient's medical timeline, meaning
ful interpretation (the radiologist's "added value") requires integration of current
readers play a key role in the definition of the diagnostic performance of breast
MRI. The correct management of potential false-positive cases, including correlation
with mammography findings, ultrasound second look and MR-guided biopsy, are
mandatory in the work up of MR additional lesions that might modify the already
planned treatment. New MR techniques, such as diffusion-weighted imaging, are
showing potentials in improving both specificity and positive predictive value of
breast MRI. However, this approach even if promising requires further evaluation
for the routine application in clinical setting.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the magnitude of the risks of false positive MRI.
2. To become familiar with more common findings of false positives.
3. To learn about the techniques to reduce the false positive rate and to manage
the `false positive' lesion.
Panel discussion:
How do we manage/minimise the consequences of our
uncertainties? 09:44
08:30 - 10:00 Room G/H
Neuro
RC 411
General neuroradiology: introduction to the brain
Moderator:
E.M.B. Larsson; Uppsala/SE
A089 08:30
A. Brain anatomy made easy: the language system
T.A. Yousry; London/UK (t.yousry@ion.ucl.ac.uk)
The anatomy of the brain is often perceived as being complicated. Especially the
cortex is seen as an irregular arrangement of variable structures, which are difficult
to differentiate and to identify. We will review the overall subdivision of the brain
into lobes and describe their boundaries and their major gyri and sulci. We will
then describe the location of areas specific to language in terms of their cortical
anatomy as well as their cytoarchitectonic structure: 1. areas of speech production,
most importantly Broca's area, which is centred on the pars opercularis of the 3rd
frontal convolution; we will discuss the identification of this area and its variability;
2. areas of language comprehension, with special attention to Wernicke's area,
its definition and variability; and 3. areas related to hearing, mainly the primary
auditory cortex (A1), centred on the postero-medial part of Heschl's gyrus (HG),
we will present simple landmarks in each of the three planes: a) axial: adhaesio
interthalamica, b) sagittal: omega/heart shape of HG and c) coronal: omega shape
of HG. We will discuss the most important tracts connecting these areas, mainly
the uncinate and the arcuate fascicles. At the end of this lecture, you will know
the general subdivision of the cortex and will have a basic understanding of the
functional anatomy of language.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the general brain cortical anatomy.
2. To be able to identify the most important cortical anatomy involved in the
language system and its imaging representation.
3. To be able to recognise the most import white matter tracts involved in the
language system and its imaging representation.
4. To get a glimpse into the relevant anatomical and clinical insights coming from
MR microscopy.
A090 09:00
B. Brain haemorrhage: from microbleeds to lobar haematomas
M.A. van Buchem; Leiden/NL (m.a.van_buchem@lumc.nl)
MRI is an imaging technique that is particularly sensitive to haemorrhages in the
brain. Apart from large haematomas and recent subarachnoid haemorrhages, that
are also visible on CT, using MRI minute haemorrhages (microbleeds) can be de
tected within the brain and subtle remote haemorrhages in the subarachnoid space
(superficial siderosis) can be detected. In addition, MRI allows for assessment of
the age of cerebral haemorrhages, based on signal characteristics. The location
of cerebral haemorrhages allows for an estimation of the underlying pathology. For
example, haematomas with a lobar distribution are suggestive of cerebral amyloid
angiopathy, those located in the basal ganglia in a patient with hypertension are
suggestive of hypertensive microangiopathy, and blood in the subarachnoid space
is suggestive of a ruptured aneurysm. A comprehensive MRI protocol (comprising
T2*-weighted images, post-gadolinium images, and MRA techniques) also allows
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S26 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
08:30 - 10:00 Room L/M
Multidisciplinary Session: Managing Patients with Cancer
MS 4
Lymphoma
A095 08:30
Chairman's introduction
E. de Kerviler; Paris/FR (eric.dekerviler@sls.aphp.fr)
Major progresses have been made in the past decade in the management of
lymphomas. The subclassification and categorisation of the most common lym
phoma subtypes were altered over time to enhance diagnostic accuracy and aid in
clinical management. Image-guided biopsies have dramatically changed patients'
management, providing accurate subtyping at diagnosis and relapse according to
the new 2008 classification. Also, new tools such as molecular analyses and early
assessment using integrated PET-CT predict response and patients' outcome. This
session will highlight the results of the successful partnership among pathologists,
biologists, clinicians and radiologists.
Session Objectives:
1. To understand to what extent an optimal subtyping of lymphoma is necessary
at diagnosis and relapse.
2. To become familiar with molecular analyses, beyond morphology and immu
nochemistry.
3. To understand why, when and how therapy efficacy should be monitored.
4. To understand why a multidisciplinary approach is mandatory in lymphomas.
A096 08:35
The pathologist's view point on lymphomas
J. Briere; Paris/FR (josette.briere@sls.aphp.fr)
Complexity and heterogeneity of the lymphomas and especially the DLBCL (Diffuse
large B- cell lymphoma) have been demonstrated over the past 10 years, first by the
most recent WHO classification that includes no less than 50 different subentities, and
second by the gene expression profiling analyses leading to a molecular classification
in the most common form of adult non Hodgkin's lymphoma, the DLBCL entity. The
prognosis has been demonstrated to be variable according to the morphological,
immunophenotypic and molecular classification. The therapeutic approach is dif
ferent according to the classification. So the importance of the material obtained by
different techniques is crucial: excisional lymph node biopsy or core needle biopsy
(which is increasingly replacing chirurgical techniques) must be properly used in order
to obtain a good morphology and frozen material dedicated to molecular analysis.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the evolution of the successive classifications of lymphomas
according to new molecular prognostic markers.
2. To understand the limitations of image-guided biopsies in some peculiar entities.
3. To appreciate to what extent molecular analyses can predict outcome.
A097 08:55
What the haematologist needs to know
P. Brice; Paris/FR (pauline.brice@sls.aphp.fr)
Lymphomas are a heterogenous group of malignant disease ranging from very
aggressive clinical course like Burkitt lymphoma to indolent diseases which do not
need to be treated. Histological diagnosis is crucial to define treatment and to target it
(Rituximab is only given to B-cell lymphoma expressing CD20 antigen). Unless refrac
tory or very early relapses, patients with recurrent disease should have a radiological
non-invasive biopsy to detect histological modifications: a) histological transformation
from low- to high-grade B-cell lymphoma, b) Hodgkin lymphoma recurring with non-
Hodgkin lymphomas (NHL), c) loss of CD20 antigen expression in relapsing B-cell
lymphoma and d) second solid tumour. Before treatment radiological evaluation must
be planned with CT or PET-CT and criteria of response must be defined if PET-Ct
is used as an interim response and not only at the end of treatment (Juweid JCO
2007). Physicians must define their therapeutic goals: a) complete remission leading
to long-term cure, b) prolongation of survival and c) quality of life in elderly or incurable
disease. Response with radiological evaluation may guide therapeutic options. 1.
good responders: limit the treatment and avoid long-term toxicities (mostly for Hodgkin
lymphoma), 2. slow responders: give the optimal amount of treatment and radiation
therapy in some localised cases and 3. bad responders: increase the treatment and
proceed to high-dose therapy. In conclusion, the management of lymphoma patients
needs non-invasive biopsies and multiple (PET)-CT evaluation for optimal care.
imaging findings with results from various prior radiologic studies and pertinent
clinical information. The frequently numerous findings visible on an imaging study
need to be distilled into a focused, clinically relevant report; otherwise, the radiolo
gist functions simply as a "film reader" (rather than as a true consultant), and the
resultant radiology report may be technically accurate but clinically unhelpful---or
even misleading. Better reports can be produced by using standardised report
templates, integrated imaging summaries and consistent lexicons.
Learning Objectives:
1. To review general principles of oncologic imaging.
2. To understand the critical importance of clinical context during interpretation
of oncologic exams.
3. To evaluate ways to ensure that our reports provide added value and reflect
the radiologist's role as consultant.
A093 08:55
B. Lung cancers (primary, metastases)
C.J. Herold; Vienna/AT (Christian.Herold@meduniwien.ac.at)
Lung cancer is among the most common malignancies worldwide, and accounts for
up to 30% of all lung cancer death annually. In the US, approximately 220.000 new
cases are diagnosed every year. Accurate staging of non small cell lung cancers
(NSCLC) and small cell lung cancers (SCLC) is of utmost importance for selecting
those patients, who benefit from attempted curative surgery versus those who may
undergo palliative treatment. Recently, a new TNM staging system (7th edition)
for lung cancer was introduced by the International Union against cancer and the
American Joint Committee on Cancer and should now be uniformly used for lung
cancer staging worldwide. This staging classification was based on the analysis
of a large data base of approximately 70.000 cases of NSCLC and 13.000 cases
of SCLC sampled in a multi institutional effort containing detailed information from
46 institutions in 19 countries. The most important parameter for the developing
of the subgroups was overall survival based on disease stage. The major changes
involve the T and M categories, resulting in subgroups that would more accurately
be associated with prognosis of a patient with defined descriptors. In this course,
the new TNM staging classification will be demonstrated, and case examples will
be used to interactively enhance the learning experience of attendees. Also, the
role of imaging methods in evaluating standard and innovative therapy regimen
will be discussed, and typical findings and pitfalls will be presented.
Learning Objectives:
1. To review the strengths and limitations of radiologic techniques suitable for
detecting and characterising primary and metastatic lesions in the lungs.
2. To understand the imaging findings relevant for lung cancer T, N and M staging,
and appraise the implications of the new IASLC lung cancer staging system.
3. To evaluate the imaging findings used to assess response to conventional and
new therapies for lung cancers.
A094 09:25
C. Colon cancer
R.M. Gore; Evanston, IL/US (rgore@uchicago.edu)
Over the past decade, the treatment of colorectal cancer has become increas
ingly individualised with therapeutic options ranging from neoadjuvant therapy
with FOLFOX and radiation therapy, to transanal mucosal resection, to robotic
surgery with low anterior resection and surgical extirpation including APR. This
lecture reviews the role of CT, MR, transrectal ultrasound and PET-CT in guiding
the increasingly sophisticated process of staging and managing patients with
colorectal cancer. Guidelines concerning the most efficacious use of the DWI MR
imaging and perfusion and diffusion CT and MR with a view towards optimising
patient management are also presented.
Learning Objectives:
1. To get an overview of current recommendations for the diagnosis of colorectal
cancer.
2. To understand the specific role of MDCT, MR imaging, endoscopic ultrasound,
and PET/CT in the staging of colorectal cancer in optimising patient manage
ment.
3. To learn the utility of imaging in assessing tumour response to therapy and in
the general followup of patients with colorectal cancer.
Questions 09:50
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S27
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Friday
A101 09:00
B. Coronary CTA
H. Alkadhi; Zurich/CH (hatem.alkadhi@usz.ch)
Over the past years, the number of coronary CTA studies performed has been
steadily growing. To perform a coronary CTA study using appropriate protocols
in a correct manner is mandatory in order to obtain a diagnostic image quality.
Beyond that, there is a lot more to a coronary CTA study than acquiring the data.
Correct interpretation required knowledge of the advantages and disadvantages of
various post-processing methods in order to avoid false-positive and false-negative
findings regarding coronary artery disease. In addition, a standardised approach
for interpreting the CT data and for reporting the imaging findings to the referring
clinician is reasonable. The presentation illustrates a practical approach to the
post-processing and interpretation of data acquired during a coronary CTA study,
including the reporting of the relevant imaging findings to the referring clinician.
Learning Objectives:
1. To know the scope of information needed by a referring physician from a
coronary CTA examination.
2. To be familiar with possible sources of mistakes in the interpretation of cardiac
CT.
3. To learn how to write a report on coronary CTA.
A102 09:30
C. Cardiac MRI in ischaemic heart disease
J. Bogaert; Leuven/BE (Jan.Bogaert@uz.kuleuven.ac.be)
The reporting part is probably the most important step in a radiological exam
because the radiologist's expertise comes into play. Radiologists in training learn
the pecularities of reporting during their training. For novel domains in medical
imaging, such cardiac MRI (eg in patients of with ischemic heart disease), experi
ence is often limited. Moreover, reporting of these exams differs from `traditional'
radiological exams, since it necessitates (extensive) image analysis (eg, contouring
of endo- and epicardial myocardial contours), interpretation of dynamic sequences
(myocardial contractility, myocardial perfusion), and multisequence imaging (e.g.
imaging of acute myocardial infarct patients). All the information needs to be inter
preted together, to achieve an idea about the status of the heart. In some patients
these studies are (or need to be) performed during stress conditions to evaluate the
impact on stress on myocardial perfusion and function. To streamline the interpreta
tion of MRI study results with other information obtained with other modalities (eg
echocardiography, nuclear medicine), standardized reporting is required, otherwise
the referring clinician risks to get lost in the abundance of information. In this lecture,
the focus is how to practically approach and report a cardiac MRI exam in ischemic
heart disease patients starting from several clinical cases.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the major indications for performing cardiac MRI in ischaemic
heart disease.
2. To be familiar with protocols of cardiac MRI and image processing.
3. To learn how to write a report on cardiac MRI.
08:30 - 10:00 Room Q
Special Focus Session
SF 4b
Diagnosis and management of acute vascular
abdominal problems
A103 08:30
Chairman's introduction
A. Nicholson; Leeds/UK (tonynick@tonynick.karoo.co.uk)
Mesenteric vascular disease is often the last diagnosis thought of by clinicians
and few have any idea about treatment options. Interventional and diagnostic
radiologists are best placed to manage and diagnose the various pathologies that
lead to mesenteric ischaemia. These talks will provide a valuable reminder to all
radiologists of their role and responsibilities in this interesting area.
Session Objectives:
1. To understand the development of minimally invasive damage control.
2. To understand the requirement for 24/7 IR service.
3. To consider other options.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand why histological modifications during relapses of lymphomas
justify re-biopsy.
2. To become familiar with the integrated PET-CT criteria for evaluating thera
peutic response.
3. To appreciate how response can guide future therapeutics.
A098 09:15
How modern imaging can influence therapy in lymphomas
E. de Kerviler; Paris/FR (eric.dekerviler@sls.aphp.fr)
Imaging plays now a major role at every step in the management of lymphomas:
initial staging, response assessment, followup and investigation of suspected
relapse. Beyond conventional cross-sectional imaging, molecular imaging has
changed dramatically the management of routinely FDG-avid lymphomas in the past
decade. Recommendations for the use of PET-CT have been published in 2007 for
standardisation of the technique, optimal timing and a better understanding of false
positives and negatives, providing uniform endpoints for clinical trials. Depending
on the type and course of lymphoma, and on protocol inclusion, CT, PET of both
will be done at any step in the course of the disease. This exhaustive workup better
assesses therapeutic response but raises new questions. Occult lesions or new
events are early detected, prompting image-guided biopsy for histological confirma
tion. The aim of this presentation is to consolidate knowledge of the imaging workup
in lymphoma and illustrate how imaging strongly influences patients' management.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the relevant points in the imaging workup at diagnosis
in lymphoma patients.
2. To consolidate knowledge of the use of PET and CT for patient re-evaluation.
3. To learn about the technique of biopsy when lymphoma is suspected.
A099 09:35
Case presentation and discussion
E. de Kerviler; Paris/FR (eric.dekerviler@sls.aphp.fr)
08:30 - 10:00 Room P
Cardiac
RC 403
How I report
Moderator:
E. Mershina; Moscow/RU
A100 08:30
A. Chest x-ray in cardiac disease
L. Natale; Sesto Fiorentino/IT (luigi.natale@lacittadellasalute.it)
Chest x-ray still remains a first line examination in almost every patient with cardiac
diseases. It can give many morphologic information, especially if echocardiography
is not immediately available. Cardiac anatomy at postero-anterior and lateral views
is based, respectively, on right and left and anterior and posterior heart contour
segmentation. For this reason, cardiac anatomy changes detectable by chest x-ray
indirectly reflect functional status of the heart, both chambers and myocardium. These
changes cause cardiac rotation along chest long axis, with consequent modification
of the above-mentioned cardiac contours. Finally, chest x-ray is still unique in as
sessment of pathophysiology of pulmonary circulation; as well known, pulmonary
capillary and vein pressures reflect Left Atrial Pressure that equals Left Ventricle
End-Diastolic Pressure. Consequently, any change in LVEDP causes vessel size and
vessel distribution modifications in the lung, up to cause pulmonary oedema. There
is a strong correlation between left ventricular end diastolic pressure value and pat
tern of pulmonary vasculature that allows its non-invasive quantitative assessment.
Furthermore, chest x-ray can show non cardiac signs of any disease simulating
cardiac symptoms (medastinal, pulmonary, pleural and chest wall diseases).Acorrect
and complete radiological report should include cardiac morphology modifications,
pulmonary vasculature assessment and finally extra-cardiac findings.
Learning Objectives:
1. To know about major indications for performing chest x-ray in cardiac patients.
2. To be familiar with the most important chest x-ray findings that are relevant
for diagnosis and treatment of cardiac diseases.
3. To learn how to write a chest x-ray report for cardiac patients.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S28 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
A106 09:21
Management of abdominal haemorrhage in the severely injured
trauma patient
O.M. van Delden, J.A. Reekers; Amsterdam/NL
Proper imaging strategies are of paramount importance for selecting patients for
interventional radiological treatment in the setting of abdominal trauma. Contrast-
enhanced CT should be performed whenever possible in the severely injured
trauma patient as it accurately grades injury to parenchymal abdominal organs,
identifies active bleeding or the presence of other vascular injuries that require
treatment and also assesses the presence of concomitant injuries such as pelvic
fracture with bleeding. Angiography and embolisation is performed to treat ongo
ing bleeding or to prevent delayed bleeding from false aneurysms or traumatically
dissected vessels, thus rendering non-operative management safer. Depending
on the location and the nature of the vascular abnormalities coils and /or gelfoam
are the most commonly used embolisation materials. The most frequently involved
organs / vessels amenable to embolisation are the spleen, the liver, the internal
iliac arteries due to pelvic fracture and the kidneys. Rarely a covered stent can be
used to treat the vascular injury while maintaining patency of the treated vessel.
Results are good with haemostasis being obtained in more than 90% of cases and
non-operative management succeeding in more than 80-90% of cases treated with
embolisation. Embolisation may also be used as an adjunct to operative treatment.
Complications include contrast-enhanced nefropathy, splenic infarct, renal infarct,
liver abscess and buttock claudication (after bilateral internal iliac artery occlusion).
A proper trauma management infrastructure with rapid access to CT-scanning and
a 24/7 interventional radiology service should be present in all centres dealing with
severely injured trauma patients.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand imaging algorithms and strategies for patients with abdominal
trauma.
2. To learn about indications for endovascular treatment for traumatic abdominal
haemorrhage.
3. To become familiar with basic techniques for endovascular treatment of trau
matic abdominal haemorrhage.
4. To learn about results and complications of endovascular treatment of traumatic
abdominal haemorrhage.
Panel discussion:
Is there sufficient evidence to favour image-guided intervention
over open surgery in abdominal vascular emergencies and other
questions? 09:44
10:30 - 12:00 Room A
ESR meets Italy
EM 1
From morphology to function
Presiding:
L. Bonomo; Rome/IT
A. Rotondo; Naples/IT
A107 10:30
Introduction: Italian Society of Radiology (SIRM) in the third millennium
A. Rotondo; Naples/IT (antonio.rotondo@unina2
.it)
It is a great honour for me to open this session with the ECR President Prof. L.
Bonomo. Prof. Bonomo, SIRM past President, is the third Italian President of
ECR after Prof. Passariello (1999) and Prof.Chiesa (2005). The SIRM was born
in 1913 and is the seventh Radiologic society founded in the world. Currently is
the largest medical society in Italy with over nine thousand members and provides
the main framework for presenting and exchanging the scientific experience of
different hospital- and university-based working group. At present SIRM is the
national member of the European Society of Radiology with the largest number
of both institutional and individual affiliated radiologist. Our Society manages its
activity through two organising structures: study sections and regional groups that
work together, representing the real scientific and professional core of the society.
Each section has one president and four councillors and its aim is to promote the
radiological advancement and also to organise the Continual Medical Education
(ECM) for our members. Regional groups are based on the geographical division
of our Country. The Society has two main seats: the first one, the Headquarters
in Milan, and the other one House of Radiologic Area in Rome where E-learning,
research and development take place. This venue hosts also inter-society meetings
A104 08:35
Acute arterial and venous ischaemia-presentation, management and
outcome
L. Boyer; ClermontFerrand/FR (lboyer@chuclermontferrand.fr)
Acute mesenteric ischemia (AMI) is a life threatening diagnosis and a therapeutic
emergency with high mortality rates (50-95%). Its diagnosis and management are
challenging issues. It is due to arterial thrombosis in 20-30% of cases, emboli in
40-50%, and venous obstruction in 5-20%; non occlusive mesenteric ischemia
accounts for 20-30% of cases. Clinical presentation includes severe abdominal
pain which contrasts with poor clinical findings, and depends also on the cause.
Quick AngioMDCT is the cornerstone of diagnosis, with a reliability of 95.6%: it
detects vascular obstruction as well as signs of intestinal ischemia (reduced wall
enhancement) or necrosis (pneumatosis intestinalis and/or portal gas) and perito
neal irritation signs. There are no randomized or controlled trials of AMI therapy.
Therapeutic options include surgery, with an important morbi-mortality, but also
increasingly endovascular procedures such as: - administration of vasodilatators to
treat NOMI, - local thromboaspiration and thrombolysis for arterial emboli, - balloon
angioplasty stenting thrombolysis to treat arterial thrombosis and mesenteric
complications of aortic dissection, - in situ thrombolysis mechanical disoblitera
tion of mesenteric venous thrombosis. Percutaneous endovascular techniques
may be valuable alternatives to surgery in selected patients, and can be helpful
in limiting bowel resection.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be aware of the main etiologies, the severe prognosis, and emergency
case selection.
2. To learn about presentation, the imaging findings, and the key role of CT.
3. To become familiar with the role of endovascular procedures, their results and
their place in the treatment algorithms.
A105 08:58
Acute non variceal upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage: the
evidence base for and role of intervention
S. McPherson; Leeds/UK (Simon.McPherson@leedsth.nhs.uk)
Endoscopy is the primary diagnostic and treatment modality in non-variceal upper
gastrointestinal haemorrhage (NVUGH). When endoscopy fails to control bleeding
embolisation or surgery are the haemostatic options. Placing endoscopic clips at
the site of endoscopically uncontrollable haemorrhage facilitates successful em
bolisation. CT angiography sensitivity in acute bleeding is 90% but this depends
on careful case selection. CT is particularly useful when endoscopy fails to identify
the site haemorrhage or there is a history of aortic reconstruction or pancreatico-
biliary procedure or disease (ACRAppropriateness Criteria 2010). In transpapillary
(bile or pancreatic duct) haemorrhage embolisation is the first line intervention. In
known site life-threatening post-surgical haemorrhage (e.g. surgical drain bleeding)
proceeding directly to angiography expedites haemostasis. The decision making
process when endoscopy fails to control NVUGH depends on the available evidence
but also on the 24/7 availability of services and/or the speed of response. A recent
systematic analysis of embolisation in NVGUH reported pooled mean technical and
clinical success rates in primary UGI haemorrhage only, trans-papillary haemor
rhage only, and mixed studies were 84% and 67%, 93% and 89%, and 93% and
64%, respectively. The evidence comparing surgery and embolisation is limited
to six single-centre cohort studies. Despite decision making bias, with more eld
erly patients, coagulopathy and other adverse co-morbidities in the embolisation
group: mortality, clinical success and re-bleeding were equivalent. Large-volume
resuscitation, particularly when clotting derangement or multi-organ failure results,
is associated with increased mortality. This reinforces the need for rapid control
haemorrhage and has implications for service organisation and delivery.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be aware of the integration of endoscopy and radiological intervention in
non-variceal upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage.
2. To appreciate the different diagnostic and management pathways for primary
upper gastrointestinal tract, transpapillary and post-surgical haemorrhage.
3. To understand the available evidence comparing surgical and radiological
intervention when endoscopy fails to control UGI haemorrhage.
4. To learn about the patient factors that affect clinical success and mortality after
embolisation.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S29
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Friday
A110 11:00
Experimental study with 7T-micro MRI: in vivo rat model of intestinal
infarction
R. Grassi; Naples/IT (roberto.grassi@unina2
.it)
Acute Mesenteric ischaemia (AMI) is a life-threatening vascular emergency due
to acute decrease of small bowel blood supply that may present occlusive (arte
rial/venous) or non-occlusive ethiopathogenesis. It has been estimated that the
majority of cases (65%) are caused by arterial embolism or thrombosis, 25% by
non-occlusive aetiology and the remaining 10% from venous thrombotic aetiology.
Despite the advances in imaging techniques and, consequently, in therapeutic ap
proaches, the overall mortality rate of this condition still ranges from 60 to 100%.An
early diagnosis is important for a correct therapeutic approach able to reduce the
mortality. Till now the best imaging method in diagnosis of mesenteric ischaemia/
infarction is enhanced CT even if some authors are considering a role for MRI in
the evaluation of these disorders. Moreover, in available literature, there exists no
systematic evaluation of the radiological findings related to different ethiopatho
genesis of AMI and their chronological evolution. The aim of our studies was to
identify the macroscopic, microscopic and -MRI findings of each aetiology of AMI
and to document their chronological evolution in rat models. The progression of
the ischaemic disease, observed in these experimental models, appears in line
with the human pathology and so it could represent a useful tool to evaluate the
role of MRI as an alternative technique in the diagnosis of intestinal infarction.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the chronological evolution of findings in mesenteric ischemia
and infarction studying the damage either with a 7T-micro MR or by macro-
microscopic observation.
2. To be able to attribute each finding to one or more of the three etiological types
of mesenteric ischaemia (arterial, venous, ischaemia/reperfusion).
3. To appreciate the efficacy of MRI, as an alternative tool in the early detection
of this pathology.
A111 11:20
Interlude: Reasons to come to the 45th SIRM National Congress
C. Faletti; Turin/IT (carlo.faletti@cto.to.it)
From 1st to 5th June, 2012, Torino, will be the venue for the 45th National Congress
of the "Societa italiana di Radiologia Medica" (Italian Society for Medical Radiol
ogy). The society will unite 12,000 Radiologists. In fact, all those involved in the
field of diagnostic imaging consider the radiologist a protagonist in the numerous
pathological fields. This congress will offer not only the possibility of aggregation, but
also the chance to compare oneself with others and the state-of-the-art-technology
at our disposal nowadays both as to research and technological aspects, all of
which enriched with numerous dedicated workshops, symposiums and monothe
matic courses. Although this year's congress will have a central theme of vascular
alterations, no pathological field will be left out. The venue is one of International
prestige, i.e. the "Centro Congressi Lingotto", a multi-complex of easy reach with
all facilities which include an underground railway, surface buses and taxis as well
as the most comfortable and modern of hotels. It is easily reached by road through
a network of motorways and by airport. Torino is a city rich in history and culture,
with monuments that include the MoleAntonelliana (housing the Cinema Museum),
The Royal Palace and The Palace in Venaria, the famous Egyptian Museum and
the automobile museum. Torino is at the foot of the mountains (Piedmont), situated
between two hills, rich in enogastronomic culture, surrounded by some of the most
famous wine countries in Italy, adding a "taste" for tourism to that of scientific culture.
A112 11:25
MR contrast agents for liver imaging
A. Giovagnoni; Ancona/IT (a.giovagnoni@univpm.it)
Hepatobiliary-specific Gd-based contrast agents (Gadobenate dimeglumine :
Gd-BOPTA and Gadoxetic acid: Gd-EOB-DTPA) are one of several classes of
contrast agents presently available for MRI of the liver. These agents are taken
up by functioning hepatocytes and excreted in the bile, and their paramagnetic
properties cause a selected enhancement of the liver and biliary tree. This results
in an increased contrast-to-noise ratio for nonhepatocellular lesions compared with
that of the background liver, thereby increasing lesion conspicuity on delayed T1-
weighted images. However, due to their pharmaco-dynamic properties, Gd-BOPTA
and Gd-EOB-DTPA are sometimes described as "combination agents" because of
their dual capability for imaging in the dynamic and delayed hepatocyte-specific
phases of enhancement. These two agents potentially allow comprehensive non
invasive imaging assessment of the liver parenchyma, intrahepatic lesions, hepatic
vessels, and the biliary tree in one examination. These MR contrast agents vary
as Italian Association of Neuroradiology (AINR), Italian Association of Oncologic
Radiotherapy (AIRO) and National Radiological Union (SNR). The great scientific
activity of SIRM is proved by the Official Scientific Journal, "La Radiologia Medica",
with an impact factor of 1.698.
Session Objectives:
1. To review the current MRI and MDCT possibilities in functional imaging.
2. To consolidate knowledge of clinicians expectations of functional information.
3. To learn about the most recent MRI and MDCT applications enabling integra
tion of morphology and function from the same examination.
A108 10:35
Outlook and clinical perspectives of MDCT coronary angiography
M. Galia; Palermo/IT (mgalia@yahoo.com)
In the past decade Multislice CT Coronary Angiography (MSCT-CA) achieved
excellent results in the diagnosis of coronary artery disease (CAD) with improving
spatial and temporal resolution. High sensitivity and negative predictive value were
elicited for the detection/exclusion of coronary artery stenoses in patients with sus
pected CAD. MSCT-CA may be employed in the emergency setting to perform the
work-up of acute chest pain, including a one-stop-shop imaging of main thoracic
killers: coronary syndrome without ST elevation at the ECG, pulmonary embolism
and aorta dissection. Another relevant application is coronary plaque imaging
which provides findings and clues of plaque vulnerability (i.e. composition and
wall remodeling). MSCT-CA may address a paradigm shift from demonstration of
ischaemia to the assessment of pure atherosclerosis. Recent studies pointed out the
excellent prognostic value of the technique. Other potential applications of MSCT-
CA are the assessment of revascularised patients (with stenting or coronary artery
by-pass grafts), and the depiction of coronary anomalies. Radiation dose concerns
triggered technical innovations such as higher spatial resolution with larger and
novel detectors, faster data acquisition, modulation dose systems, and prospectively
ECG-triggered high-pitch acquisition. New scanners may provide excellent image
quality at a dose below 1 mSv, to levels lower than conventional angiography.
MSCT-CA may also provide useful information of cardiac functional assessment
(left and right ventricular function, evaluation of valves). In this context, the fusion
imaging of hybrid scanners (CT and SPECT/PET) could represent a promising
technological solution able to assess morphology and function at the same time.
Learning Objectives:
1. To review the performance of MDCT for diagnosis of coronary artery disease.
2. To highlight the importance of non-invasive imaging of coronary plaques.
3. To define the current and future role of MDCT for coronary artery disease and
cardiac functional assessment.
A109 10:55
Interlude: Imaging of the skeletal muscle pathology after the 2006
Winter Olympic Games
C. Faletti; Turin/IT (carlo.faletti@cto.to.it)
The winter Olympic Games held in Torino in 2006 were testimonial a very hard chal
lenge which took on the form of the following motto: Passion Lives Here. This was
also held dear in the organisation and set up of the diagnostic imaging, which was
developed in three separate sites, at varying altitudes, reaching 2,000 metres high
up in the Alps, in Sestriere. The most complete of diagnostic equipment was to be
found there, including Ultrasound Diagnostic Equipment, C.T. Scans and Magnetic
Resonance. Moreover, for the first time, all of these diagnostic techniques were
pooled into a network that allowed for real-time visualisation/consultation between
one site and another. The results gave credit to the organisational efforts, allowing
for examinations and diagnosis to be made in the shortest possible time lapses.
The pathologies diagnosed in the field of musculoskeletal imaging enabled the
most suitable of surgical and/or therapeutic solutions to be chosen, as well as the
possibility to programme the athletes' participation in the forthcoming competitions.
Ultrasound examinations were carried out "on the field" for real-time interventions
and the CT scans were done in dedicated containers at an altitude of 2,000 metres.
It was for the first time that high field resolution Magnetic Resonance, both total
body and those dedicated to new concepts, were executed at such an altitude,
but, above all, the technology available was applied to this specific sports sector.
Thanks to the excellent results obtained, satisfaction rates ran high for the athlete
and medical teams alike.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S30 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
considered to exclude extra-luminal contrast. Mesenteric injury presents with a
mesenteric haematoma with or without contrast extravasation.Associated traumatic
or ischaemic bowel injury should be looked for. Bowel injury is often difficult to di
agnose. Thickening or discontinuity of the bowel wall and extraluminal air or bowel
content are the signs to look for. However, haemodynamic shock and extensive
fluid resuscitation can also result in bowel wall changes, which may complicate
interpretation. Multiple examples of each of the above will be discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the imaging features of liver and splenic trauma.
2. To be familiar with the imaging features of urological trauma.
3. To be familiar with the imaging features of intestinal and mesenteric trauma.
10:30 - 12:00 Room E2
Foundation Course: More About Ultrasound
E 520b
Vascular imaging: Doppler and contrast-enhanced
US
Moderator:
L. Steyaert; Bruges/BE
A115 10:30
A. Imaging superficial vessels
P. Landwehr; Hannover/DE (peter.landwehr@ddhgruppe.de)
Greyscale and colour duplex ultrasound are the first main imaging tools in non-
invasive diagnostic work-up of superficial arteries and veins. Combined demon
stration of morphology and haemodynamics leads to therapeutic decision in many
cases without the further need of MRA, CTA or DSA. In extracranial carotid artery
disease, colour duplex helps to identify early disease as well as relevant stenoses.
Quantification of carotid stenoses is done by colour duplex with a high degree of
confidence. Followup during conservative management, after stenting or open
surgery of carotid artery obstructions can be achieved as well. In peripheral arterial
occlusive disease (PAOD), ankle-brachial Doppler index (ABI) is the basis for setting
diagnosis. In addition, ABI is an excellent marker for the individual cardiovascular
risk. Colour duplex helps to stratify PAOD patients to further imaging (e.g. MRA),
arterial DSA with immediate intervention or conservative treatment. Results of
invasive treatment like PTA or bypass surgery can be demonstrated quite well by
colour duplex ultrasound. Ultrasound can guide minimally invasive interventions
like image-guided thrombin injection or compression repair of postpuncture pseu
donaneurysms. Deep and superficial venous thrombosis can be demonstrated
with a high accuracy by greyscale compression ultrasound. Colour duplex is an
adjunct for the detection of thrombosis, but not an essential tool. From the iliac
veins down to the knee, ultrasound is sufficient in most patients to decide on the
presence of acute deep vein thrombosis. If a recurrent thrombosis is suspected in
a post thrombotic situation, ultrasound has significant limitations.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the main indications and US signs in pathology of the
carotids, peripheral arterial occlusive disease and venous thrombosis.
2. To learn how to set your US system properly in superficial vessel US and to
optimise your examination protocols and imaging strategy.
3. To learn about the clinical role of vascular US as a part of diagnostic work-up
of vascular disease.
A116 11:00
B. Imaging deep vessels
D.K. Tsetis; Iraklion/GR (tsetis@med.uoc.gr)
The evolution of ultrasound technology has allowed the wide application of colour-
flow duplex scanning (CFDS) in the imaging of abdominal arteries. Duplex criteria
have been set to identify renal artery stenoses (RAS) that are haemodynamically
significant. Threshold values for PSV consistent with a 60% or greater diameter
reduction of the renal artery obtained in most studies are 180 to 190 cm/sec. In
some cases it is useful to use the ratio between the velocity of the renal artery
and the aorta. Threshold values of this ratio diagnostic of a 60% or greater RAS
vary in different studies from 3 to 3.5. Renal hilar duplex scanning from a flank or
translumbar approach has been suggested as a simplified alternative for screening,
especially in those patients in whom conventional renal duplex examination is dif
ficult to perform. Contrast-enhanced US (CEUS) seems promising in diminishing the
rate of technically inadequate renal artery examinations. Regarding the mesenteric
arteries, with adequate patient preparation, the CA and SMA can be identified and
in mode of administration and dose, mechanism of cellular up-take, degree of
excretion through the biliary pathway, and imaging characteristics. In the liver,
hepatobiliary-specific agents can be used to improve lesion detection, to character
ise lesions as hepatocellular or nonhepatocellular, and to specifically characterise
some hepatocellular lesions, notably focal nodular hyperplasia. Biliary excretion of
these agents can be used to evaluate the anatomic structure and function of the
biliary tree. Hepatobiliary-specific contrast agents may have wider applications,
such as grading of cirrhosis and quantification of liver function in patients with liver
trasplantation. Clinical applications, advantages, pitfalls, and problems with different
contrast agents will be described and discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the functional aspect of hepatobiliary-specific contrast agents
currently in clinical use in MRI evaluation of hepatocarcinogenesis.
2. To understand the functional aspect of hepatobiliary-specific contrast agents
in MRI pre-surgical planning of liver malignancy.
3. To consolidate knowledge of use of hepatobiliary-specific contrast agents in
characterisation of FLL.
Panel discussion 11:45
10:30 - 12:00 Room C
Interactive Teaching Session
E 520a
Abdominal emergencies
A113 10:30
A. Non-traumatic (acute abdomen)
R. Basilico; Chieti/IT (r.basilico@radiol.unich.it)
Acute abdomen refers to any clinical condition characterised by severe abdominal
pain that develops over a period of hours. This is a great challenge to the radiolo
gist because differential diagnoses of acute abdomen include a wide spectrum of
disorders, ranging from life-threatening diseases to benign self-limiting conditions.
Rapid, accurate diagnosis is essential if morbidity and mortality have to be signifi
cantly decreased. The diagnostic work-up of patients admitted with acute abdomen
is based on various imaging modalities such as abdominal plain film, ultrasound,
CT and MRI: the topographic classification of acute abdominal pain (pain in one
of the four abdominal quadrants, diffuse abdominal pain, flank or epigastric pain)
facilitates the choice of the imaging technique and allows to narrow the range of
possible diagnoses. A practical approach to acute abdomen is to confirm or to
exclude the most common disease and to look for general signs of pathology such
as inflamed fat, bowel wall thickening, ileus, free fluid, free air, etc: the role of US,
CT and MRI in achieving these goals will be discussed. The common and more
unusual causes of acute abdomen, with reference to the site of pain, will be also
discussed in an interactive fashion. Findings useful for differential diagnoses will be
presented in order to obtain the correct diagnosis beginning from the imaging sign.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the role of US, CT and MRI in acute abdomen.
2. To be familiar with the main differential diagnoses in acute abdomen, with
reference to the site of abdominal pain.
3. To be able to recognise common and unusual findings in acute abdominal
disorders.
A114 11:15
B. Traumatic
D.R. Kool; Nijmegen/NL
In imaging of abdominal trauma ultrasound and CT are used, but in this interac
tive session we will especially focus on CT findings of abdominal injury. For an
accurate interpretation of abdominal CT findings it is important to use a systematic
approach. Different grading systems for organ injury are used that can facilitate their
communication. When a haemoperitoneum is present a `sentinel clot' can help to
locate the bleeding site. However, in a third of patients with intra-abdominal injury
free intraperitoneal fluid is absent. In hepatic, splenic and renal injury subcapsular
and parenchymal haematomas, lacerations, contusions and infarcts may occur.
In addition, extravasation of intra-vascular contrast and other signs of vascular
injury (pseudo-aneurysm, arterio-venous fistulae, cut-off arteries and occlusion)
should be looked for. When renal or ureter injury is suspected in the portal venous
phase an additional delayed phase (more than 5 minutes) should be performed to
exclude urinary contrast extravasation. In suspected bladder injury a retrograde
(CT) cystography and for urethral injury a retrograde urethrogram should be
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S31
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Friday
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand current pathologic concepts for the classification of pancreatic
tumours.
2. To learn about imaging findings used for tumour detection, staging, and restag
ing after adjuvant therapy.
3. To understand the role of functional and molecular information provided by
PET/CT, DWI and perfusion imaging when assessing pancreatic tumours.
A119 10:55
B. Kidney cancer
E.K. Fishman; Baltimore, MD/US
58,240 Americans were diagnosed with renal cancer in 2010 and an estimated
13,040 will die from renal carcinoma in 2010. Deaths worldwide are over 100,000
annually making renal cancer one of the leading causes of cancer death. With
the advent of cross sectional imaging modalities like CT and ultrasound over two
thirds of cases of renal cell carcinoma are detected as incidental findings. Classic
presentations like hematuria only occur in up to 40% of cases and so many of these
patients are diagnosed with larger tumors. In this presentation we will focus on the
role of state of the art CT for the detection, staging and management of the patient
with known or suspected renal carcinoma. We will look at some of the challenges in
diagnosis focusing on optimising scan protocols as well as the role of 3D mapping
in staging and pre-operative planning. The role of imaging in patient management
be it partial nephrectomy, ablation therapy or nephrectomy will be discussed. Po
tential pitfalls and limitations of study technique will be addressed. Finally we will
also focus on some of the newer discoveries showing that enhancement patterns
on CT can not only differentiate in most cases between papillary and clear cell
RCC but enhancement patterns can also predict genetic errors which may impact
on therapy for drug selection. Trends for future innovation will also be discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the diagnostic implications of minimally invasive treatments of
renal cancer.
2. To review the genetic causes of renal cancer and the radiologic appearances
of specific histologic subtypes.
3. To review the potential role of molecular imaging in the management of ad
vanced renal cancer.
A120 11:20
C. Ovarian cancer
H. Hricak; New York, NY/US
Global epidemiological statistics demonstrate that mortality from ovarian cancer
has not changed in half a century. Advances in molecular medicine and biomedi
cal imaging are poised to make a difference. Early ovarian cancer is treated with
comprehensive staging laparotomy. For advanced disease deemed nonresectable,
neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by surgical debulking is recommended. In
the management of ovarian cancer, cross-sectional imaging is now essential in
(1) tumour detection and characterisation; (2) treatment selection and planning
(identifying difficult-to-reach tumour deposits or inoperable disease for which neoad
juvant chemotherapy is indicated); (3) monitoring treatment response; (4) detecting
recurrent disease, and, depending on tumour size and location, choosing between
secondary cytoreduction and chemotherapy. Ultrasound is the primary modality
for detecting and characterising adnexal masses. MRI is useful for characterising
sonographically indeterminate adnexal masses, and contrast-enhanced CT is the
modality of choice for preoperative staging. FDG PET-CT is valuable for detecting
recurrent disease, particularly in the mesentery, bowel serosa and normal-sized
lymph nodes. We are witnessing a paradigm shift in cancer care, as imaging per
meates all facets of cancer diagnosis, treatment and followup. The opportunities
for biomedical imaging have never been greater. Our role is to understand the key
clinical questions and, using imaging, serve as essential physician consultants.
Learning Objectives:
1. To get an overview of the essential imaging findings in characterisation and
staging of ovarian cancer.
2. To learn the key imaging findings that affect management of ovarian cancer.
3. To understand the changes in imaging armamentarium in ovarian cancer, and
learn the best practice in proper image utilisation.
Questions 11:50
the bloodflow velocity within these vessels measured. CA PSVs of 200 cm/sec
and SMA PSVs of 275 cm/sec or greater are suggestive of high-grade stenoses
within these vessels. CFDS with the advantages of low cost and risk can accurately
monitor abdominal aortic aneurysm size, detect endoleak, and provide dynamic
and haemodynamic information not available with other imaging methods. As far
as detection of endoleaks is concerned, recent meta-analyses show a sensitivity
of 66-77% for CFDS and 81-98% for CEUS.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about haemodynamic considerations and correlation with spectral
analysis in abdominal arteries.
2. To learn about US features of normal and abnormal abdominal aorta.
3. To learn about US features of normal and abnormal renal arteries, celiac trunk
and mesenteric arteries.
A117 11:30
C. The role of contrast US
D. Clevert; Munich/DE (Dirk.Clevert@med.unimuenchen.de)
Abnormalities of the abdominal aorta and the visceral vessels may represent
a diagnostic challenge in patients with acute or chronic clinical symptoms. In
addition to the primary diagnosis in b-scan, colour-coded duplex ultrasound,
contrast-enhanced ultrasound (CEUS) with low mechanical index (low MI) is a
new promising method in the diagnosis and followup of pathological aortic le
sions. These pathology findings were compared with b-scan, colour-coded duplex
ultrasound, CEUS and multislice computed tomography angiography (MS-CTA).
Pathologies of the abdominal aorta will be often treated with an endovascular an
eurysm repair (EVAR). Endoleaks following endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR)
are common and present a diagnostic challenge in the followup after EVAR. CEUS
with SonoVue(R) allows a more rapid and noninvasive diagnosis in the followup
after EVAR. This course will describe the aetiology, classification and importance
of pathologies of the abdominal aorta and the different types of endoleaks allow
ing the participants to appreciate the usefulness of CEUS in this clinical situation.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the use of contrast-enhanced ultrasound in abdominal
aortic disorders.
2. To understand the pros and cons of different diagnostic modalities with regard
to cost effectiveness.
3. To learn about risks and contraindications for EVAR and to discuss optimised
imaging strategies in followup after EVAR.
10:30 - 12:00 Room I/K
Joint Course of ESR and RSNA (Radiological Society of North
America)
MC 528
Essentials in oncologic imaging: what radiologists
need to know (part 2)
Moderator:
D.M. Panicek; New York, NY/US
A118 10:30
A. Pancreatic cancer
F. CaseiroAlves; Coimbra/PT (caseiroalves@gmail.com)
Despite advances in cross-sectional techniques imaging still has difficulties on as
sessing pancreatic tumours and in particular adenocarcinoma. The main problems
remain the early detection of small tumours and the clearcut definition of patients
that are amenable to curative surgery. After reviewing current concepts in the
classification of pancreatic tumours including the role of molecular biomarkers, the
lecture will address the strategies that may be used to maximise tumour conspicuity
in a multi modality perspective that also encompasses uprising techniques such
as dual energy CT, perfusion CT/MR and diffusion-weighted MRI. The concept of
borderline resectable pancreatic cancer will be explained as well the key points
for image interpretation in the setting of clinical decisions for patient management.
Also, the current role of adjuvant or neoadjuvant therapy will be shortly addressed
especially concerning its imaging implications, as well as the new concepts on
pancreatic adenocarcinoma oncogenesis and possible imaging strategies that
may be used for earlier detection.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S32 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
A123 13:10
C. Potential of optical imaging in vivo
V. Ntziachristos; Munich/DE
Optical imaging is unequivocally the most versatile and widespread visualisation
modality in the life sciences. Yet it is significantly limited by photon scattering,
which complicates imaging beyond a few hundred microns. Recently, however,
there has been an emergence of powerful new optical imaging methods that offer
high-resolution imaging beyond the penetration limits of microscopic procedures. Of
particular importance is the development of multi-spectral opto-acoustic tomography
(MSOT) methods that bring unprecedented imaging performance in visualising
anatomical, physiological and molecular imaging biomarkers through several mil
limetres to centimetres of tissue. Its attractive features include the ability to offer
10-100 micron resolution and real-time imaging. In parallel, we have achieved the
first in-human clinical translation of targeted fluorescent probes which opens the way
for advanced surgical and endoscopy procedures and personalised theranostics and
screening. MSOT can enable exceptional insights to cellular and sub-cellular proc
esses through entire small animals, embryos, fish and insects. This talk describes
current progress with instruments, methods and applications for in-vivo optical- and
opto-acoustic tomography of whole intact animals and model biological organisms.
We show how new opto-acoustic and fluorescence imaging concepts are necessary
for accurate and quantitative molecular investigations in tissues and why it could
be a valuable tool for accelerated research of therapeutic efficacy and outcome.
We further demonstrate that cellular functions and bio-chemical changes can be
detected in-vivo, through intact tissues at high sensitivity and molecular specificity.
Pre-clinical and clinical results are presented and advantages and limitations of
these methods along with future directions are discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about benefits and limitations of optical and fluorescence imaging.
2. To appreciate potent biological and clinical applications.
3. To become familiar with future direction for clinical photonic imaging.
12:40 - 13:10 Room A
Plenary Session
HL 1
Josef Lissner Honorary Lecture
Presiding:
L. Bonomo; Rome/IT
A124 12:40
The pulmonary nodule: old and new challenges
C.M. SchaeferProkop; Amersfoort/NL (cornelia.schaeferprokop@gmail.com)
Pulmonary nodules are one of the classic challenges in radiology: detection and le
sion characterisation are constant sources of trouble, be it in the form of unnecessary
workup or missed lesions and ensuing lawsuits. This presentation will review the
progress that has been made on these issues and also discuss current limitations of
radiological techniques. Human observers are notoriously inaccurate when it comes
to detection and characterisation of nodules. Like the development in chess comput
ers, computer programs (computer-aided diagnosis, CAD) now start to outperform
humans. Rib suppression or temporal subtraction techniques on chest radiographs aid
in lesion detection. New CAD techniques combine algorithms and can detect, quantify
and characterise pulmonary lesions. However, while radiologists are still able to detect
lesions missed by CAD, they also dismiss true-positive and accept false-positive CAD
markers. CAD development has been stimulated by the large image databases from
lung cancer screening trials.These trials provide new information about prevalence and
prognosis of various nodule phenotypes: small solid nodules are extremely common
but have a low cancer risk, persistent part solid and ground glass nodules (GGN) have
a high malignancy rate and GNN grow slowly. Volume and mass doubling times are
more accurate measures than nodule diameter. Form and location allow for identify
ing benign perifissural nodules. Dynamic-contrast-enhanced imaging with CT or MR
as well as PET so far only plays a role in larger lesions. Still, however, the role of CT
screeningisnotfullydefined:falsepositivesandradiationdoseremainimportantissues.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand options but also limitations of new computer supported tools
to detect and characterise nodules in radiographs and CT.
2. To learn about study results so far and ongoing research to overcome these
limitations.
3. To learn about the potential of low dose chest CT to move from nodule screen
ing to thoracic disease screening.
12:30 - 13:30 Room Z
Molecular Imaging
MC 23B
Basics in molecular imaging (2)
Moderator:
J. Dijkstra; Leiden/NL
A121 12:30
A. MR contrast agents for targeted MR imaging
S. Aime; Turin/IT (silvio.aime@unito.it)
The possibility of carrying out Molecular Imaging protocols by means of MRI is very
attractive for the superb anatomical resolution that is attainable by this technique.
However, MRI suffers from an intrinsic insensitivity with respect to the competing
imaging modalities that has to be overcome by designing suitable amplification
procedures based on the development of reporting units endowed with an enhanced
sensitivity and on the identification of efficient routes of accumulation of the imag
ing probes at the sites of interest. Now, the need of targeting molecules that are
present at very low concentrations requires the development of novel classes of
contrast agents characterised by enhanced contrasting ability and improved tar
geting capabilities. The possibility of delivering a high number of imaging agents
at the target of interest appears the solution of choice to overcome the drawback
associated with the low sensitivity of the MRI approach. Currently much attention
is devoted to the design and use of self-assembled systems based on lipophilic
molecules, where the imaging reporters are represented by highly stable paramag
netic Gd (III) complexes. Moreover, nano-sized carriers for Gd-complexes based
on naturally occurring systems (e.g. lipoproteins) have also been considered for
targeting specific epitopes on diseased cells. Besides paramagnetic agents much
attention is currently devoted to the new class of frequency-encoding probes,
the CEST agents (CEST= Chemical Exchange Saturation Transfer). The use of
frequency-encoding agents opens the interesting perspective of detecting more
than one agent in the same anatomical region.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn how to tackle the sensitivity issues of MRI probes.
2. To learn about available strategies for visualising cellular targets with MRI
probes.
3. To be introduced to the use of nano-sized carriers for MR imaging-guided
therapies.
A122 12:50
B. Sonographic and photo acoustic techniques for MI
F.M.A. Kiessling; Aachen/DE (fkiessling@ukaachen.de)
Ultrasound is one of the workhorses in clinical diagnosis. In this context, the
diagnostic power of ultrasound can be increased when using microbubbles as
contrast agents providing information about tissue vascularisation and perfusion.
By conjugating biomolecules to the microbubble surface even intravascular mo
lecular ultrasound imaging becomes feasible. In this context, for the discrimination
of low- and high-aggressive breast cancers it has been shown that the assessment
of the VEGFR2-expression by molecular ultrasound is superior to the functional
information about tumour vascularisation. First targeted ultrasound contrast agents
are currently evaluated in clinical trials. Potential clinical indications are characteri
sation of tumours, improvement of ultrasound guided biopsy, personalised tumour
therapy, the characterisation of atherosclerotic plaques and the diagnosis of other
diseases that go along with vascular remodelling and inflammation. Unfortunately,
microbubble-based imaging is restricted to the endovascular compartment. Here,
photoacoustic imaging may be helpful, which bases on the ultrasound acquisition
of the thermoelastic expansion of nanoparticles after laser excitation. Haemoglobin,
gold nanoparticles, dyes, fluorescent proteins and other light-absorbing materials
can sensitively be imaged by this technique. In this talk, the composition of molecular
ultrasound contrast agents and their measurement techniques will be explained
and illustrated. In addition, the mechanistic principle of photoacoustic imaging will
be explained intending to exemplify both emerging diagnostic technologies to the
clinical radiologists.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the principles of photo acoustic imaging.
2. To learn about the most common quantitative detection techniques for targeted
US contrast agents.
3. To be informed about applications of functional and molecular ultrasound and
photo acoustic imaging in preclinical and clinical research.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S3
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Friday
and long-term assessment of therapeutic result is usually achieved by contrast-
enhanced CT (CECT) or MRI (CEMRI) which can be performed only at the end of
the treatment session. In addition, the possibility of achieving local tumour control
with percutaneous ablation is largely related to tumour size. Consequently, there is
an increased need to detect and treat small tumours that are often clearly visualised
on CT or MRI, but not on US. Contrast-enhanced sonography (CEUS) is helpful
for guiding electrode insertions into targets hardly visible with US. However, the
most important role of CEUS is the immediate post-ablation control. The sensitivity
of CEUS for the detection of residual tumour is almost equivalent to that of CECT
and CEMRI. Cost-effectiveness and reduction of patients' discomfort related to
the need of re-treatment are the two main advantages of CEUS in RFA of liver
malignancies. The use of CEUS during liver surgical resections is gaining more
and more importance since it can allow to detect small additional neoplastic lesions
not visualised in the pre-surgical staging with imaging modalities and to depict
with great accuracy liver vascularity, thus allowing to perform precise liver-sparing
anatomical resections.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the potential and advantages of US in intraoperative and
therapeutic applications.
2. To learn how to use US to guide therapeutic procedures.
3. To learn useful tricks for planning and performing treatments.
14:00 - 15:30 Room I/K
Joint Course of ESR and RSNA (Radiological Society of North
America)
MC 628
Essentials in oncologic imaging: what radiologists
need to know (part 3)
Moderator:
H.U. Kauczor; Heidelberg/DE
A128 14:00
A. Oncologic imaging: terminology, definitions and buzzwords
Y. Menu; Paris/FR (yves.menu@sat.aphp.fr)
The routine practice of oncologic imaging requires standardisation, which means
that we need to harmonise technical protocols and agree on the meaning of selected
words for the radiological report. The words "Response, "Progression" and "Stable
disease" are precisely defined according to internationally accepted thresholds and
criteria. Although the rules are quite simple and rather easy to apply, they are very
efficient in the classification of the response to treatment, and therefore for the medi
cal decisions. However, the role of the radiologist is not limited to measurements
and calculation. The detection of new lesions may be challenging and requires
experience. The differential between cancer progression and complications of the
treatment might be very difficult and requires an adequate communication with the
referring clinician. Overall, most of the decisions taken by the clinician will be related
to imaging results, stressing the importance of adequate protocols and reports.
Learning Objectives:
1. To get an overview and precise explanation of current cancer-related terminol
ogy, definitions and "buzz" words used in everyday practice.
2. To understand why and how this terminology should ensure and simplify
communication with all specialists involved in cancer management, including
clinicians, researchers as well as other radiologists.
3. To learn common tricks and traps in providing a radiology report, illustrated
with clinical cases.
A129 14:20
B. Liver cancers (primary, metastases)
R.L. Baron; Chicago, IL/US (rbaron@uchicago.edu)
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common primary tumour (approximately
90% of primary tumours), with cholangiocarcinoma comprising 5--10% and rare
other primary tumours. HCC is most commonly associated with chronic liver disease
(alcohol or hepatitis B or C). Nodular changes inherent in cirrhosis simulate tumours
and obscures tumour when present, emphasising the key role of contrast enhance
ment characteristics and MR signal intensity changes. Proper evaluation of contrast
enhancement characteristics has resulted in the nonbiopsy imaging criteria for HCC
diagnosis that is the standard of care for patient management. Staging and treatment
decisions are then based on lesion size and number as in the TNM tumour staging
system. False-positive diagnoses in cirrhosis will be discussed. Cholangiocarcinoma
14:00 - 15:30 Room E2
Foundation Course: More About Ultrasound
E 620
US and contrast-enhanced US for focal lesions
Moderator:
D.O. Cosgrove; London/UK
A125 14:00
A. Evaluation of focal liver lesions
T. Albrecht; Berlin/DE (thomas.albrecht@vivantes.de)
In the past decade, contrast-enhanced ultrasound (CEUS) of the liver has been
firmly established as an excellent imaging modality for focal lesions. Its strong
points include high spatial and contrast resolution as well as its unparalleled
temporal resolution, enabling dynamic imaging after contrast injection in real time.
Disadvantages are poor sonographic access in some patients (mainly obese) and
operator dependence. All common liver lesions display characteristic dynamic
enhancement patterns on CEUS in the arterial, portal venous and delayed phase.
This is used for lesion classification and characterisation. Furthermore, the fact that
the vast majority of malignant lesions appear hypoenhancing on delayed phase
imaging is exploited to improve detection of malignant lesions. Typical features of
common benign and malignant lesions as well as clinical indications for CEUS of
the liver will be discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn the contrast enhancement patterns of common benign and malignant
focal liver lesions.
2. To realise the importance of delayed phase imaging for differentiation of benign
vs malignant lesions and detection of metastases.
3. To understand the clinical role of CEUS of the liver including strengths and
limitations as defined by the EFSUMB guidelines.
A126 14:30
B. Evaluation of kidney lesions
C. Nicolau; Barcelona/ES (cnicolau@clinic.ub.es)
Detection of focal renal lesions is very common in the clinical practice. Most renal
lesions are non specific on baseline ultrasound (US) and require further examination
with imaging modalities after the intravenous administration of a contrast agent. US
contrast agents are strictly intravascular and unlike CT and MR contrast agents,
US contrast agents are not eliminated by the urinary system and can be used in
patients with renal failure. The main indication of contrast-enhanced ultrasound
(CEUS) in the kidney is the characterisation of complex cysts. The detection of
enhancing thickened irregular wall or septa or the presence of soft-tissue enhanc
ing mass independent of the wall is the most specific sign suggesting malignancy.
Characterisation of complex cysts with CEUS is also very useful when complex
masses do not show a conclusive CT/MR diagnosis. CEUS may also help in the
characterisation of pseudotumours such as prominent Bertin columns and drom
edary hungs. Regarding solid renal tumours, there is an overlap of the enhance
ment pattern between benign and malignant lesions. For this reason, CEUS is not
routinely recommended to detect and characterise solid masses. However, it can
help in the differentiation of subtypes of renal cell carcinomas based on tumour
vascularity since non clear-cell carcinomas, such as the papillary type, are usually
more hypovascular than clear-cell carcinomas. CEUS has also a role in the evalua
tion of renal perfusion including ischaemia, trauma and complicated pyelonephritis
that may in some cases show a focal appearance that mimics a renal tumour.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the physiology and features of the US contrast uptake
of the kidneys.
2. To discuss the role of US and CEUS in the diagnosis and characterisation of
focal solid and cystic renal lesions.
3. To describe the role of CEUS in the differential diagnosis of true renal tumours
with pseudotumours and other renal diseases.
A127 15:00
C. Intraoperative and therapeutic applications
L. Solbiati; Busto Arsizio/IT (lusolbia@tin.it)
Sonography (US) is the most commonly used imaging modality for the guidance
of percutaneous ablative treatments, but both US and color Doppler cannot dif
ferentiate coagulative necrosis from viable tumour. Accordingly, both immediate
3
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S34 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
A132 14:30
Vascular ultrasound: technique and clinical applications
B. Brkljacic; Zagreb/HR
Ultrasound is used for visualisation of vascular pathology in various areas. It is
used to evaluate peripheral arterial disease, carotid and vertebral arteries disease,
diseases of aorta and its visceral branches and pathology of deep and superficial
veins. Although ultrasound is often neglected in imaging of blood vessels accu
racy of ultrasound in most areas is comparable with CTA and MRA. Ultrasound
has numerous advantages to CTA and MRA, since it is cheap, widely and easily
available, non-invasive, safe, with no exposure to ionising radiation, mostly does
not require administration of contrast media and can be performed at the patient's
bedside. It demonstrates not only morphology of the vessel but also provides
important haemodynamic information in real-time. Role of vascular ultrasound is
very important in planning of surgical and/or endovascular therapy, in evaluation
of immediate success and long-term followup after the treatment. Ultrasound is
very useful in angio-suite during endovascular procedures, and several cases will
be presented to demonstrate usefulness of ultrasound in vascular interventions.
Thorough understanding of haemodynamic changes and Doppler physics is needed
for adequate interpretation of Doppler findings. Basic technique of vascular US
exam will be presented in the lecture, as well as factors that influence morphology
of Doppler spectra. Doppler artefacts will be discussed. Various types of normal and
pathological Doppler waveforms will be presented. Criteria to establish the diagnosis
of stenosis in various arteries will be discussed. Use of ultrasound to diagnose
deep venous thrombosis and alternative findings that mimic DVT will be presented.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the technique of vascular ultrasound.
2. To know how to structurally assess vascular structures.
A133 15:00
Chest x-ray in children
S. Ryan; Dublin/IE (stephanie.ryan@cuh.ie)
Interpretation of the chest radiograph in children is quite different to the adult CXR.
It requires knowledge of the normal appearance of the paediatric CXR and an
understanding of the diseases that affect children. I shall first present the normal
appearance with an emphasis on the appearance of the thymus in the paediatric
CXR. Four patterns of disease will be described: airway obstruction, interstitial pat
tern, cardiomegaly and atelectasis. I shall then present two main diagnoses in each
of four categories: neonatal medical chest disease, congenital lung abnormalities,
cyanotic and non-cyanotic heart disease, and common and less common respira
tory infection in children. Four miscellaneous conditions, diaphragmatic hernias,
cystic fibrosis, non-accidental injury and foreign body aspiration will complete this
whirlwind review of a vast and very important topic.
Learning Objectives:
1. To comprehend the differences between paediatric and adult chest x-rays.
2. To learn the characteristics of the most important paediatric chest x-rays
diagnoses.
14:30 - 15:30 Room Z
The Beauty of Basic Knowledge: Interpretation of the Chest
Radiograph
MC 27B
The heart
A134 14:30
The heart
J. Caceres; Barcelona/ES (josecac@gmail.com)
PA and lateral chest radiographs are the initial step in evaluating cardiac diseases.
Although its importance has diminished, it can still be useful, especially in cases in
which cardiac pathology is simulated, avoiding unnecessary additional examina
tions. Findings easily interpreted in the CXR are the increased size of the cardiac
silhouette, analysing cardiac calcifications and evaluating the displaced heart.
Learning Objectives:
1. To review the causes of an enlarged cardiac silhouette.
2. To recognise the different causes of dextrocardia.
3. To learn the significance of cardiac calcifications.
has a varied imaging appearance based on the underlying histologic stroma (from
glandular mucin producing to dense fibrous).The contrast enhancement characteristics
that vary with the stroma are key to detecting and characterising these lesions. There
is no effective chemotherapy or interventional cure, and treatment options are limited
to aggressive surgical approaches and the imaging assessment of extent of disease
is critical in planning. Metastatic liver disease most often has very nonspecific imaging
features that preclude diagnosis on imaging characteristics alone. Certain contrast
enhancement characteristics, however, allow for characterisation and more importantly,
assessment of response to treatment, particularly in vascular metastatic lesions such
as GIST tumours. Detection of small lesions that can be critical for staging can be
optimised with MR liver-specific imaging agents and with diffusion-weighted imaging.
Learning Objectives:
1. To get an overview of the AASLD/EASL imaging criteria for noninvasive diag
nosis of hepatocellular carcinoma.
2. To learn about best practice CT/MR/US imaging techniques that optimise
characterisation, detection and staging of primary and metastatic liver tumours.
3. To understand the key role specific findings reported by radiologists have in
determining patient treatment options for hepatocellular carcinoma.
A130 14:55
C. Prostate cancer
J.O. Barentsz; Nijmegen/NL (J.Barentsz@rad.umcn.nl)
This presentation provides guidelines for how to be successful in prostate MRI and
convince urologists to use MRI. It is important that radiologists performing prostate MRI
speak the same language as their referring physicians.They should know as to what is
important for the patient. Therefore, this presentation provides guidelines for prostate
MRI, assessed by prostate MRI experts from the European Society of Urogenital Ra
diology (ESUR). The proposed MRI protocols for "detection", "staging" and "node and
bone" will be shown. The use of endorectal coil versus pelvic phased array coil and 1.5
versus 3 T will be discussed. And most importantly, clinical indications are provided.
Finally, the ESUR PiRADS classification and a reporting system will be presented.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn the key clinical indications for MR imaging in prostate cancer.
2. To get an overview of essential MR imaging techniques in detection, charac
terisation, localisation and staging of prostate cancer.
3. To understand how MR imaging influences therapeutic decisions and how
best to provide a value added MR report.
Questions 15:20
14:00 - 15:30 Room Q
RTF - Radiology Trainees Forum
TF 1
Highlighted Lectures
Moderators:
D. Bulja; Sarajevo/BA
M. EdjlaliGoujon; Paris/FR
A131 14:00
Molecular imaging: principles and potential applications
N. Grenier; Bordeaux/FR (nicolas.grenier@chubordeaux.fr)
Molecular imaging (MI) appears as a great challenge for the future of imaging,
because it is able to characterise cellular and molecular processes and will serve
as a guide for new targeted or personalised therapies. MI is already part of clini
cal practice using PET and targeted probes, due to the very low doses of tracers
used. Introduction of MI into radiological techniques will take more time because
our techniques are lacking sensitivity. The main issues of MI are targeting of cells,
receptors and gene expression. Cell targeting has already been used in patients
using MRI and iron oxide particles: these are phagocytized by macrophages in
deep tissues making it possible to target inflammation into brain, bone, kidney
and arterial wall. Ex vivo labelling of cell progenitors is also promising to monitor
cell therapies with imaging. Targeting receptors has a great potential to identify
molecular processes involved during cancer development, inflammation, apoptosis,
extracellular matrix changes1/4 but it requires to validate the specificity of targets,
the stability of the agent and to obtain enough sensitivity with our clinical imaging
techniques. Imaging gene expression is more challenging.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the basic principles of molecular imaging.
2. To become aware of it's future possibilities.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S35
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Friday
CT is the technique of choice because of its accessibility and excellent diagnostic
results. The aim of this presentation is to show the key radiological features for an
adequate diagnosis and staging of pancreatic cancer. In addition specific guidelines
for the radiological report in these patients will be discussed in order to convey all
the necessary information to the referring physician. Unresectability criteria with
CT include liver metastases, distant locoregional lymph nodes, peritoneal carci
nomatosis or tumour invasion of superior mesenteric artery, celiac axis or hepatic
artery. The presence of direct contiguity between the tumour and arterial vessel,
regardless of the degree of contact between them is a sign of tumour invasion.
In general arterial invasion is always considered a criterion of unresectability and
no patients with arterial involvement should be operated on. Venous invasion is
generally not considered a contraindication for radical resection. Recently a small
subgroup of patients with marginally resectable adenocarcinoma of the pancreas
has been described. These are patients with arterial tumoural infiltration less than
50% who respond to aggressive neoadjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with a simple classification of the causes of a solid pan
creatic mass, with emphasis on malignancy.
2. To understand CT acquisition protocols tailored to the assessment of a pan
creatic mass.
3. To learn about the diagnostic performance of the various CT observations in
assessing a solid pancreatic mass, focusing on characterisation and subse
quent assessment of resectability if appropriate.
4. To learn a final structured approach to the reporting of CT in a patient with a
solid mass of the pancreas.
16:00 - 17:30 Room B
Interactive Teaching Session
E 720a
Neurological emergencies
A138 16:00 
A. Non-traumatic
C. Ozdoba; Berne/CH (christoph.ozdoba@insel.ch)
Neurological emergencies, i.e., the sudden loss of motor, sensory, or cognitive func
tions up to coma, have numerous causes. The probably most important neurological
emergency, both in absolute number of affected patients as in socio-economic
impact, is stroke. With recent advances in devices and techniques for interventional
neuroradiology, such as microcatheters and 3D DSA, neuroendovascular surgery
is playing an increasing role in the treatment of acute stroke. Early diagnosis with a
complete imaging work-up, either by CT or MRI, is mandatory before these therapies
can be applied, and although the time span for a successful therapy has increased
to 4.5 hours for i.v.-thrombolysis and up to eight hours for intraarterial therapy, an
efficient time-saving algorithm in the management of stroke patients remains crucial.
Other causes besides stroke, however, must not be forgotten. This talk focuses on
CNS pathology; conditions like coma due to metabolic causes or intoxication will
not be covered. A wide range of possible etiologies remains, ranging from vascular
pathology (e.g., cervical artery dissection or venous sinus thrombosis) to epilepsy,
metastatic disease, and inflammation. As in stroke, imaging studies today are an
essential component of early diagnosis. MRI is the method of choice for nearly all
of the above mentioned conditions; at least in tertiary care centers, indications for
MR in a neurological emergency should be seen generously - around the clock
(24/7). In an emergency situation, structural imaging should routinely be comple
mented by special techniques like diffusion- and susceptibility-weighted imaging
and perfusion studies. Examples will be shown and recommendations for optimized
emergency study protocols are given.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn which imaging modality and which imaging protocols to use.
2. To understand how to identify early ischemia.
3. To be able to select candidates for endovascular stroke treatment.
A139 16:45
B. Traumatic
M. Stajgis; Poznan/PL (stajgis@o2
.pl)
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) encompasses a wide, heterogeneous group of intrac
ranial injuries that includes acute primary insults that occurred at the time of impact
and secondary ones such as cerebral swelling or herniation. Imaging is critical for
diagnosis and proper management in all patients with TBI. Noncontrast CT is still the
"gold standard" imaging modality in acute setting, because it identifies extravasa
tion immediately. Epidural, subdural and subarachnoid haemorrhage (extra-axial)
16:00 - 17:30 Room A
GI Tract
RC 701
How I report
Moderator:
M.M. Maher; Cork/IE
A135 16:00
A. MRI in a patient with rectal cancer
D.J.M. Tolan; Leeds/UK (djmtolan@doctors.org.uk)
MRI provides critical information for preoperative decision making in rectal cancer.
High-resolution T2 sequences covering the whole tumour, inclined to the tumour
axis are required in axial, coronal and sagittal planes. An accurate assessment al
lows the surgical and oncology team to decide whether the patients should proceed
straight to surgery or if they require neoadjuvant radiotherapy alone (short course)
or chemoradiotherapy (long course). The radiologist must therefore report the fol
lowing tumour features that predict adverse outcome or suitability for radiotherapy:
precise tumour location in the rectum and relationship to the peritoneal reflection;
presence and extent of tumour penetration thorough the rectal wall (T3 or more);
presence of tumour within 1 mm of the Circumferential Resection Margin (CRM)
(corresponding to the mesorectal fascia); invasion of the peritoneum; invasion of
the anal sphincters; presence of vascular invasion; malignant lymphadenopathy;
mucinous differentiation. The role of diffusion-weighted imaging is yet to be defined
in clinical practice in terms of initial tumour assessment and predicting response to
therapy. In addition to MRI, accurate staging requires MDCT evaluation for distant
metastasis to liver, lung, retroperitoneal nodes and peritoneum. The optimal imaging
report provides a comprehensive radiological staging to compare with final histology
(Tumour, Nodes, Vascular Invasion, Involvement of CRM and distant Metastasis).
This is essential for audit of clinical practice and service development. There is a
potential role for structured clinical reports to ensure that all of this information is
provided in a reproducible way to facilitate multidisciplinary team decision making.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about MRI protocols for staging rectal cancer.
2. To become familiar with TMN staging of rectal cancer and its relevance to
imaging.
3. To learn a structured approach to the reporting of rectal cancer MRI.
A136 16:30
B. CT in a patient with bowel obstruction
P. Taourel; Montpellier/FR (ptaourel@chumontpellier.fr)
The questions regarding the CT diagnosis of bowel obstructions are as follows:
is there an obstruction? What is the level and the cause? Are there findings of
closed loop obstruction and of strangulation? What is the treatment recommended:
surgery or followup, laparoscopy or laporotomy? To answer these questions, the
CT semiology is based on findings validated in the literature that will be described
in this lecture, by underlining the potential pitfalls in interpretating a CT exam in
bowel obstruction. The technical modalities of the CT will be detailed: thickness of
the slices, role of acquisition without contrast and reformatting
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand a simple classification for the causes of bowel obstruction.
2. To become familiar with CT protocols used in the diagnosis of suspected bowel
obstruction.
3. To learn a structured approach to the reporting of CT with suspected bowel
obstruction, including relevant positive and negative findings.
4. To understand the accuracy of the various radiological signs of bowel obstruc
tion and how the radiologist may formulate a level of diagnostic confidence in
their report.
A137 17:00
C. CT in a patient with a solid mass of the pancreas
C. Valls; Barcelona/ES (carlosvalls@csub.scs.es)
Radiological staging of adenocarcinoma of the pancreas is critical for adequate
management of these patients because treatment depends on the stage of the dis
ease. If pancreatic cancer is limited radical surgery can be performed whereas only
palliative treatment with chemotherapy and radiotherapy can be offered in patients
with locoregional or distant extension of the disease. There are many diagnostic
techniques for studying the pancreas, but most authors agree that multidetector
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S36 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
ence or absence of specific features predicts the risks for local recurrence, distant
metastatic disease or both. This information thus determines the best of use of the
many preoperative treatment strategies available. The initial preoperative assess
ment enables selection of patients for local therapies including non surgical and less
radical therapy options when appropriate and identification of patients that require
preoperative downsizing and downstaging in order to achieve the best results.
Defining a robust preoperative strategy for patients with rectal cancer relies on
consistent and reliable definitions of the risk factors by detailed imaging assessment
that incorporates an understanding of surgical and oncological therapeutic limits.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand precise definitions of a resection margin at risk.
2. To learn about the prognostic relevance of nodal stage, vascular invasion and
depth of extramural spread, and pelvic sidewall lymphadenopathy.
3. To appreciate strategies for low rectal cancers and tumours beyond the TME
plane.
A142 16:23
Treatment tailored according to staging
K. Haustermans; Leuven/BE (karin.haustermans@uzleuven.be)
A patient presenting with an adenocarcinoma of the rectum should be staged ac
cording the TNM staging system using different imaging modalities. Next to these
classical clinical factors also circumferential margin involvement, size of the primary
tumour and location of the primary tumour in relation to the anal sphincter are
important factors in the treatment decision. The goals of preoperative treatment in
rectal cancer are to reduce the risk of local relapse, to enable R0-resection and to
preserve the anal sphincter in low-lying tumours. Radiotherapy can be administered
either as a short course (5 fractions of 5 Gy, one fraction a day, overall treatment
time of one week) or as a long course (25 fractions of 1.8 Gy, one fraction a day,
overall treatment time of five weeks combined with chemotherapy eventually fol
lowed by an extra dose of radiation to the macroscopic tumor). In case of a short
course of radiation total mesorectal excision (TME) is performed in the week
following the end of radiation. In case of a long course of chemoradiation TME
surgery is performed after an interval of 6 to 8 weeks. When immediate surgery
is performed no tumour downstaging or downsizing can occur while after a long
course of chemoradiation followed by a long interval before surgery up to 20% of
patients have no tumour left in the resection specimen. Currently it is not known
whether aiming for sphincter preservation after a good response to preoperative
chemoradiation increases the risk of local recurrence.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand that the initial staging of rectal cancer determines the treatment
approach (patient tailored treatment).
2. To understand the difference in approach between a short course of radiation
and a long course of chemoradiation.
3. To become familiar with the concept of "the good, the bad and the ugly" in
rectal cancer.
A143 16:41
Response evaluation by imaging
R.G.H. BeetsTan; Maastricht/NL (r.beets.tan@mumc.nl)
The standard treatment for advanced rectal cancer is preoperative chemoradio
therapy (CRT) followed by standard resection of the rectum. Neoadjuvant CRT
allows downsizing and downstaging of the tumour, leading to improved resectability
and local control. The clinical question is what to do with good response after CRT.
Most surgeons advocate performing a resection on the basis of the status before
CRT disregarding the response. However, major pelvic surgery is associated with
a high postoperative morbidity rate of 40%-50%. The paradigm shift in treatment
is further tailoring of treatment for the good responders after CRT aiming at organ
saving treatment options with less morbidity, such as local excision. Although still
controversial, a wait-and-see-policy (omission of surgery under close monitoring)
is being advocated for the complete responders. This shift in treatment has con
sequences for radiologists. Our major challenge will be to provide tools that can
help in precise selection of these patients. The challenge will not only restrict to an
accurate evaluation of the local tumour response but also extend to an accurate
evaluation of the nodal response. This lecture will focus on the evidence-based
role of EUS and MRI for response evaluation after CRT.Accuracy and limitations of
each method will be discussed. The lecture will dwell on potential new techniques
(diffusion and perfusion MRI, lymph node-specific contrast enhanced MRI, PET/
CT) that can overcome the limitations of standard imaging.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the evidence based role of imaging for re-staging locally ad
vanced rectal cancer after chemoradiotherapy.
as well as cortical contusion, intraparenchymal haematoma and diffuse axonal
injury (intra-axial hemorrhage) will be discussed. Conventional MRI sequences are
less sensitive than CT in detection of hyperacute intracranial bleeding. However,
FLAIR techniques are capable to detect even small amount of extravasated blood.
Susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI) is mandatory in evaluation of microhaemor
rhages; together with DWI they play an important role in diagnosis of axonal injury.
Traumatic injury of spinal cord (SCI) in majority of cases results with devastating
medical and social consequences. MR examination is the imaging modality of choice
in such patients. It enables the clear assessment of lesion morphology, extent and
severity of trauma. To interpret MR images properly, we have to be familiar with
mechanisms of spinal cord injury which are presented in this lecture. For optimal
characterisation of SCI one has to start with estimation of canal compromise and
the degree of spinal cord compression. Then qualitative intramedullary changes
like cord swelling, oedema, contusive haemorrhage, haematomyelia, partial or
complete laceration should be evaluated. Protocols for routine MRI of the patients
SCI are proposed and discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the proper imaging protocols in trauma patients.
2. To be familiar with imaging findings in acute head trauma.
3. To learn about the imaging findings in spinal cord trauma.
16:00 - 17:30 Room C
ESR meets Radiation Oncologists
EM 2
Imaging and tailored radiation therapy in rectal
cancer
Presiding:
L. Bonomo; Rome/IT
V. Valentini; Rome/IT
A140 16:00
Chairmen's introduction
L. Bonomo, V. Valentini; Rome/IT (lbonomo@rm.unicatt.it)
This Session, jointly organised with ESTRO (European Society of Radiotherapy
and Oncology), aims at promoting an integrated approach between specialists
involved in multidisciplinary tumour boards to tailor the best treatment for each
individual patient by exploiting the use of imaging. New advanced imaging tech
nology provides not only morphological information on tumour extension, but also
information on tumour function and biology. It allows not only a good evaluation
of tumour response during and after treatment, but also an early detection of
tumour recurrence. Radiation oncologists increasingly use hybrid equipment in
which diagnostic imaging technology is incorporated within the radiation treatment
machines to allow continuous adaptation of radiation treatment according to the
daily response of the tumour, the surrounding organs and their movement. Thus,
it is our interest to enhance the collaboration between imaging specialists and
to optimise and adapt the different use of imaging to the comprehensive clinical
management of the oncological patient. By dedicating a combination of Radiology
and Radiotherapy lectures to rectal cancer model, the Session aims at offering
a programme focusing on the use of imaging in a truly multidisciplinary environ
ment, in order to support understanding between specialists belonging to different
disciplines, yet using a common language.
Session Objectives:
1. To become familiar with an integrated approach between radiologists and radia
tion oncologists in multidisciplinary tumour boards to tailor the best treatment
for each individual patient with rectal cancer.
2. To understand how to evaluate the tumour response during and after treatment,
as well as the early detection of tumour recurrence.
3. To appreciate the benefit for radiation oncologists in using hybrid equipment
to allow continuous adaptation of radiation treatment according to the daily
response of tumour, the surrounding organs and their movement.
A141 16:05
Treatment-oriented staging
G. Brown; Sutton/UK (gina.brown@rmh.nhs.uk)
In rectal cancer, the development of specialised multidisciplinary teams comprising
dedicated radiologists, oncologists, surgeons and histopathologists has been shown
to improve outcomes for patients with rectal cancer. Careful imaging assessment of
tumours enables the staging of tumours into distinct prognostic groups. The pres
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S37
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Friday
A147 16:50
Discussion
G. Brancatelli1
, W. Schima2
; 1
Palermo/IT, 2
Vienna/AT
The discussion will address the following issues:
1. Is CT or MR the best method for the detection of small HCC?
2. Can MRI really compete with CT in oncology patients?
3. What is the exact role of liver-specific MR contrast media?
4. Which method should be done when US detects an unexpected focal liver
lesion?
5. Is guided biopsy of focal liver lesions dead or alive?
6. Could DWI be a substitute to T2W and contrast-enhanced series in order to
speed up the workflow in MRI?
16:00 - 17:30 Room D2
Head and Neck
RC 708
Paranasal sinus imaging
A148 16:00
Chairman's introduction
M.G. Mack; Frankfurt a. Main/DE (m.mack@em.unifrankfurt.de)
The common cold is one of the most frequent illnesses in Europe and the United
States. Although most cold are mild and resolve within a short time period, colds
cost billions of dollars per year, mostly due to lost time at work and school. The
common cold is a group of symptoms caused by one of a large number of viruses.
Rhinoviruses cause the greatest number of colds; there are more than 100 different
varieties of rhinovirus. The average adult experiences two to three colds per year,
while children average 8 to 12 colds per year. In most cases, colds do not cause
serious illness. Most colds last for three to seven days, although many people
continue to have symptoms (coughing, sneezing, congestion) for up to two weeks.
Some viruses that cause the common cold can also depress the immune system or
cause swelling in the lining of the nose or airways; this can lead to bacterial infec
tion. One of the more common complications is sinusitis, which is usually caused
by viruses and rarely (about 2 per cent of the time) by bacteria. However, it can be
difficult to distinguish bacterial sinusitis from sinusitis caused by a cold because the
signs and symptoms can be similar. However, due to the fact that a runny nose can
also result from inflammation, trauma, foreign body and other abnormal processes,
including tumors, an excellent diagnostic workup is necessary.
Session Objectives:
1. To discuss the epidemiology.
2. To discuss the pathophysiology.
3. To become familiar with facts concerning economic aspects.
A149 16:05
A. Anatomy and anatomic variants
T. Beale; London/UK (timothy.beale@nhs.net)
It is important for the radiologist to understand the anatomy of the drainage pathways
and the frequent anatomical variants in this region in order to guide the surgeon.
These variants may impair the functional drainage pathways, increase the risk of
endoscopic surgery and make access to sites of disease extremely diffcult. This
lecture will highlight the clinical relevant sinonasal anatomy (osteometal unit (OMU),
frontal and sphenoethmoidal recesses) and variants (frontal ethmoidal, infraorbital
and sphenoethmoidal air cells, ethmoid roof and anterior skull base). By the end
of the lecture I hope that you will have learnt a logical approach to assessing the
sinonasal anatomy and variants and an ability to review and understand the sino
nasal region in all three orthogonal planes in order to accurately assess this region.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the normal anatomy.
2. To become familiar with surgically relevant anatomic variants.
3. To learn about the functional anatomy and patterns of disease.
A150 16:28
B. Sinusitis: imaging findings before and after treatment
D. Farina; Brescia/IT (nappaje@yahoo.it)
In the era of cross-sectional imaging, no role is left for conventional radiography
in patients with rhinosinusitis. Computed tomography may be helpful in acute
2. To understand the pitfalls and problems in interpreting post chemoradiation
MRI and to learn about the MR protocol.
3. To learn about potential new imaging techniques for precise selection of good
responding patients for further tailoring of treatment.
A144 16:59
Treatment of rectum cancer tailored according to longitudinal
imaging and multifactorial predictors
P. Lambin1
, R.G.P.M. van Stiphout1
, H.J.W.L. Aerts1
, J. Buijsen1
, G. Lammering1
,
R.G.H. BeetsTan1
, G.L. Beets1
, V. Valentini2
; 1
Maastricht/NL, 2
Rome/IT
For locally advanced rectal cancer (LARC) an early accurate prediction of tumour
response, more specifically pathological complete response (pCR), after preopera
tive chemoradiotherapy (CRT) is valuable to tailor treatment. Accurate prediction
could enable more individualised surgical approaches, including less extensive
resection or even a wait-and-see policy on one hand and possibly an intensification
of pre-operative treatment in selected patients on the other hand. In our research
groups several response prediction models for LARC have been developed mainly
based on longitudinal PET-imaging, and specifically SUVmax on MR imaging,
and on multifactorial nomograms including clinical parameters; see also (www.
predictcancer.org). An innovative method consists in adding CT-based features for
pre-treatment response prediction in LARC, the so-called "radiomics" approach.
We conclude that imaging-based models and the nomogram developed based on
clinical and sequential imaging data can accurately predict pCR and can be used
as a decision support tool for surgery after prospective validation.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the concept of multifactorial predictive nomograms.
2. To appreciate the value of `longitudinal' imaging.
3. To become familiar with the concept of `RADIOMICS'.
Panel discussion 17:17
16:00 - 17:30 Room D1
Controversies in Abdominal Imaging
MC 724
Liver imaging: always MR, or still a role for CT?
Moderator:
G. Brancatelli; Palermo/IT
Teaser:
W. Schima; Vienna/AT
A145 16:00
A. Why CT is the work horse
P. Rogalla; Toronto, ON/CA (Patrik.Rogalla@uhn.on.ca)
Echoes, trains, fiesta and grappa - radiologist's life is complex. Why not make
our professional life easy and simple? Just attention! Computed tomography is
straightforward, crisp and clear and offers high spatial resolution within millisec
onds. Admitted that physics in CT is complex, too, but available at our fingertips,
in a single breath hold, during a single heartbeat. But hold on: the ones who like
complexity in the liver are offered a myriad of new applications involving multiple
parameters such as perfusion imaging, tissue decomposition or multiphasic data
acquisition. Reality counts: CT is reliable, robust with virtually no contra indications
and of foremost importance: applicable to all. Artefacts? Only a few. CT is the work
horse. Be smart, saddle up!
A146 16:25
B. Why MR is the ultimate tool
C. Ayuso; Barcelona/ES (cayuso@clinic.ub.es)
MRI, a problem-solving imaging modality a few years ago, has become a first-line
imaging technique in the diagnosis of focal liver lesions. Technological improve
ments lead to high-quality images and fast sequences improving its diagnostic
accuracy. The contribution of the new cellular-specific contrast agents has been
crucial in selected situations. Diffusion-weighted images are nowadays routinely
included in the liver study protocol and its role in the detection and characterisation
of the focal liver lesions will be discussed. 3D dynamic fat saturation protocols allow
to obtain multiphasic high-quality studies and contrast bolus timing can be carefully
assessed with the development of techniques such as fluorotriggered contrast-
enhanced MRI. The newer imaging protocols and the typical imaging features of
the focal liver lesions using different MRI contrast agents will be discussed.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S38 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
should be evaluated for defining a differential diagnosis, such as multiplicity, loca
tion, origin (e.g. subcutaneous, intramuscular), size, shape, margins, peritumoral
oedema, bone involvement and rate of growth.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be familiar with the strenghts/weaknesses of US/MRI in assessing soft
tissue tumours.
2. To understand the US/MRI specific findings that aid diagnosis.
A153 16:30
B. MR of vertebral body collapse
R. Lalam; Oswestry/UK (radhesh.lalam@rjah.nhs.uk)
It is not uncommon for a reporting radiologist to come across vertebral body
collapse in day to day practice. A number of imaging options are available to the
radiologist to assess the nature of the vertebral body collapse. Vertebral body col
lapses are broadly divided into benign and malignant depending on the aetiology.
Benign collapses are most often due to metabolic diseases such as osteoporosis
and trauma. It is vital to be able to differentiate these two categories of vertebral
involvement to initiate appropriate therapy. Radiographs have a low sensitivity and
specificity in differentiating these categories of vertebral body collapse. MRI on the
other hand is excellent at differentiating between benign and malignant lesions on
standard imaging sequences.Anumber of features including retropulsion, T1 signal
characteristics, clefts, soft tissue abnormalities, posterior element involvement and
contrast enhancement help in this differentiation. Advanced imaging protocols
including diffusion and in/out of phase imaging are rarely needed. In some clinical
circumstances where the differentiation is not possible despite all these measures,
CT scan, followup imaging and/or a biopsy may be necessary.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be able to differentiate benign/malignant causes.
2. To learn about the changes of the vertebral body with time, disease progres
sion and therapy.
A154 17:00
C. MR of the unstable shoulder
M. Zanetti; Zurich/CH (marco.zanetti@hirslanden.ch)
Static instabilities are defined by the absence of classic symptoms of instability and
are associated with rotator cuff or degenerative joint disease. Dynamic instabilities
are subdivided in two main categories. The first category is traumatic unidirectional
Bankart surgery (TUBS), which is characterised by a history of trauma resulting
in unidirectional anteroinferior instability, commonly associated with a fibrous or
osseous Bankart lesion that requires surgical repair. The second category is known
as atraumatic multidirectional bilateral rehabilitation inferior capsular shift (AMBRI).
This pattern of multidirectional instability is believed to be the result of atraumatic
ligamentous and capsular laxity. Treatment is rehabilitation initially, followed by
inferior capsular shift if indicated. The anterior instability is characterised by avul
sion of the labroligamentous complex from the anteroinferior aspect of the glenoid,
which, with complete disruption of the scapular periosteum, is termed a fibrous
Bankart lesion. The presence of an associated adjacent glenoid rim fracture is
referred to as an osseous Bankart lesion. Osseous Bankart lesions can easily be
missed on MR images; therefore, CT arthrography is preferred by some authori
ties. In posttraumatic posterior dislocation, tears occurring in the posterior labrum
are referred to as a reverse Bankart lesion and impaction of the anterosuperior
humeral head are called reverse Hill-Sachs defect. Recurrent (atraumatic) posterior
shoulder instability has to be distinguished from acute and chronic (locked) posterior
dislocation. Recurrent (atraumatic) posterior instability is not related to trauma, but
rather to laxity of supporting capsular and muscular structures and/or to the shape
of the bony glenoid or the labrum.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the specific imaging findings of instability.
2. To be familiar with the different types of shoulder instability.
rhinosinusitis, though only when sign and symptoms suggest complications. In
this scenario orbits, skull base, anterior and central skull base require even more
meticulous assessment than sinus cavities; contrast administration is mandatory,
particularly to detect intracranial lesions. On the other hand, the role of CT is much
more extensive in chronic rhinosinusitis, both to indicate the need for endoscopic
sinus surgery and to plan the most proper strategy. Thorough knowledge of the
anatomy of sinuses and mucus drainage pathways is the key to interpret CT findings.
A centrifugal approach is normally used in reporting, assessing nasal fossae and
drainage conduits first, and only ultimately moving to the periphery, i.e. sinus cavi
ties, the involvement of which is quite often only a secondary effect. After surgery,
CT scan may be indicated if major signs and symptoms (nasal obstruction, pus
drainage, facial pain) persist. Sinus anatomy may be significantly altered, although -
as a general rule - it is simplified; however, interpretation of CT images is relatively
easy if the main (and most commonly used) procedures performed are known by
the radiologist. The main goals of imaging are the detection of any residual sign
of mucosal inflammation along the surgically widened mucus drainage pathways,
as well as the identification of retention mucocele or infectious complications.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the value of different imaging techniques.
2. To review imaging findings in acute infections and chronic inflammatory dis
ease.
3. To become familiar with postoperative changes.
A151 16:51
C. Sinonasal tumours
B. Verbist; Leiden/NL (b.m.verbist@lumc.nl)
There is a great variety of sinonasal tumours due to the many different tissue types
present within the maxillofacial complex. Benign lesions may be of epithelial origin,
but also fibro-osseous or vascular lesions do occur. Squamous cell carcinoma
is the most common malignancy of the sinonasal area, but other tumours may
originate from glandular tissue (e.g. adenocarcinoma) or neural crest cells (e.g.
aesthesioneuroblastoma or melanoma). Only few of them show typical imaging
features. The main goal of imaging is to evaluate tumour extent and guide treatment
planning. In this lecture, imaging patterns of sinonasal tumours will be shown. The
current TNM classification for malignant tumours will be discussed and illustrated.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the value of different imaging techniques.
2. To review imaging findings in benign and malignant disease.
3. To become familiar with TNM staging of sinonasal neoplasms.
Panel discussion:
How do we recognise important findings? 17:14
16:00 - 17:30 Room E1
Musculoskeletal
RC 710
How I report
Moderator:
C. Glaser; Munich/DE
A152 16:00
A. Soft tissue mass: US/MR
C. van Rijswijk; Leiden/NL (C.S.P.van_rijswijk@lumc.nl)
Ultrasonography (US) is a readily available non-invasive technique that can be used
for the detection of a soft tissue mass. It gives a first impression of the size, location
in relation to the fascia and consistency of soft tissue lesions. An important ability
of US is the potential to differentiate between cystic and solid lesions; however,
specificity in further characterising a soft tissue mass is low. MR is the next imag
ing modality to perform for the evaluation of soft tissue lesions. MR is accurate in
determining size, confinement to or extension beyond the anatomic compartment
of origin and the relationship to the neurovascular bundle and adjacent bone and
joints. Although histopathological examination remains the gold standard, differen
tiation between malignant and benign soft tissue masses, indication of the grade of
malignancy and prediction of the histological diagnosis are challenging goals of MR
imaging.As such, characterisation of soft tissue masses starts with interpretation of
signal characteristics on T1- and T2-weighted sequences. Combinations of signal
intensities reveal the different tumour components (e.g. fat, water, and blood), and
thus provide indirect information about the nature of soft tissue masses. Additional
imaging parameters combined with clinical parameters such as age, gender, etc.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S39
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Friday
the radiology unit. Ultrasound is a rapid, portable and reliable method for screening
of patients with abdominal trauma. Emergency sonography is performed bedside
and simultaneously with physical assessment, resuscitation and stabilisation within
the first minutes of the patient's arrival. Focused assessment with sonography for
trauma (FAST) is now part of the Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) protocol,
while becoming the standard of care in the management of adult and children
trauma patient for the detection of intraperitoneal, intrathoraic and pericardial
fluid. The primary goal of this examination is to determine the need for immediate
laparotomy. Recently, FAST has been extended to evaluation of pneumothorax
and vascular filling (extended FAST or EFAST). Limitations of FAST include its
inability to detect the injuries, and the possibility that the initial bedside ultrasound
results negative because fluids are too less to be identified or they have not yet
accumulated in the peritoneal pouches.
Learning Objectives:
1. To discuss the role of US in the unstable trauma patient.
2. To understand the role of US in the stable trauma patient.
3. To evaluate what to trust and what not to trust US for in trauma.
16:00 - 17:30 Room F1
Special Focus Session
SF 7a
My most beautiful mistakes
A158 16:00
Chairman's introduction
M. Zins; Paris/FR (mzins@hpsj.fr)
Interpreting the results of imaging studies is more and more challenging and time
consuming due to the large volume of data to evaluate, compare and post-process.
Radiological errors are inevitable, affect all radiologists and may be defined as a
mistake that has management implications for the patient. Errors can be broadly
classified into technical errors, active errors (errors in perception, judgment or
knowledge) and errors of communication. The majority of errors are false-negative
interpretations and occur during interpretation of CT examinations. Good communi
cation between the referring physician and the radiologist is essential. Unfortunately,
only a small minority of radiologists keep a personal record of their errors. Patient
safety should benefit from the repeat organisation of "error meetings" through the
act of collective learning. Radiologists and radiology departments must continue
to improve the process of recording and addressing errors.
Session Objectives:
1. To understand the potential pitfalls that may be encountered in interpreting
imaging exams with emphasis on oncologic and emergency cases.
2. To describe the different types of errors: technical or active errors.
3. To learn about methods to facilitate identification of errors in order to minimise
their occurrence.
A159 16:05
Breast
T.H. Helbich; Vienna/AT (Thomas.Helbich@meduniwien.ac.at)
Breast cancer remains a major cause of cancer death among women worldwide.
Imaging plays a key role in the early detection of breast cancer. Mammography
is an accepted screening modality. Ultrasound and MR imaging of the breast can
significantly improve cancer detection and characterisation and are used as an
adjunct to mammography. Misinterpretation due to technical and human errors has
a significant impact on mortality and morbidity of breast tumour/ cancer patients.
The potential harm caused by breast imaging includes the creation of unneces
sary anxiety, morbidity, costs and the use of ionising radiation. It is for this reason
that the strongest possible emphasis on quality control and assurance is required.
These start with the identification of eligible women, with the commitment that
breast imaging of the highest possible standard is performed, that films are read
by proper trained radiologists, that prompt and further effective investigations are
provided, that outcomes are monitored and evaluated regularly, that regular audits
are performed, and that training of the staff is ensured. During this session the
auditorium will learn about the spectrum and factors that contribute to errors in the
interpretation by breast imaging exams highlighted by case studies.
16:00 - 17:30 Room E2
Foundation Course: More About Ultrasound
E 720b
Emergency radiology: where does US fit in?
Moderator:
Y. Menu; Paris/FR
A155 16:00
A. Acute abdomen in adults: US vs CT
L.E. Derchi; Genoa/IT (derchi@unige.it)
Although CT is commonly regarded as the best imaging method in patients with
acute abdominal symptoms, the rapid growth of its use in emergency medicine has
raised concern about increasing radiation exposure to population. There is a need
for strategies using a non-ionising radiation technique such as US as first approach
in this clinical setting, with CT used in equivocal or negative US results. Furthermore,
US may be the preferred choice to approach patients with renal impairment, since it
does not need the use of potentially nephrotoxic contrast media. In addition, it must
be stressed that US is clearly the first imaging approach to the pregnant patient
with acute symptoms. This presentation deals with the comparison of the results
of these two imaging techniques in emergency patients with acute abdomen. Their
sensitivity and specificity is compared, and special attention is given to the need of
a standardised complete protocol of US examination of the whole abdomen. Since
the results of US are considered to be highly dependent on the level of expertise
of the examiner, such protocol could possibly allow a more standardised level of
results. In some cases, US may be also requested as integration to emergency CT.
For instance, presence of thin septations or small echoes within fluid collections
can provide clues to their nature, while small parenchymal lesions can be easily
recognised as either cystic or solid without the need of dedicated CT scanning
protocols. Examples are provided of the many possibilities of US in this field.
Learning Objectives:
1. To know the US findings in the most common conditions leading to acute
abdomen in adult patients.
2. To learn the examination tricks that allow the diagnosis to be reached.
3. To understand the advantages and disadvantages of US vs CT in adult patients
with acute abdomen.
A156 16:30
B. Acute abdomen in children: US vs CT
R.R. van Rijn; Amsterdam/NL (r.r.vanrijn@amc.uva.nl)
In paediatric radiology abdominal ultrasonography plays an important role in day-
to-day clinical practice. The well-known advantages of ultrasonography in children
are the lack of ionising radiation, the bed-side applicability, the potential to perform
the study without sedation, and the relative low costs of the examinations. The
body composition of most children, in contrast to adults, yields an exquisite depic
tion of anatomical structures which makes US the paediatric abdominal imaging
modality of first choice. However, CT is being increasingly used for the diagnosis
of patients presenting with an acute abdomen. Overall the number of CT exams,
more so in adults compared with children, has shown a steady increase over the
past decades. In this session the application of both US and CT, based on clinical
paediatric cases, will be discussed and compared. Both gastrointestinal as well
as non gastrointestinal causes of the paediatric acute abdomen will be presented.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the value of FAST in the paediatric population, in light of the
current non-operative management.
2. To learn the value of US in the child with intussusception.
3. To understand the comparative merits of US and CT in children with acute
appendicitis.
A157 17:00
C. Abdominal trauma: US or not US?
M. Valentino; Parma/IT (mvalentino@ao.pr.it)
Trauma is one of the leading causes of morbidity and mortal
ity in young patients. Despite the high number of victims, trauma re
mains a challenge. Physical examination is not accurate because of the
altered mental status of the patients and the presence of multiple fractures.
Computed Tomography continues to be the gold standard for imaging the traumatic
patients, but it requires transportation of the patients outside the emergency room to
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S40 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
16:00 - 17:30 Room F2
Breast
RC 702
Breast MRI today
A162 16:00
Chairman's introduction
C.K. Kuhl; Aachen/DE
Breast MRI has become a powerful tool in everyday clinical situations. Technological
requirements must be met in order to guarantee diagnostic examinations. Besides
being the most sensitive technique in breast cancer staging, the technique has
been proven to have a prognostic value and can also be of help in regional and
distant staging. Clinical applications of breast MRI are well established, although
the consolidation of breast MRI in the preoperative scenario has not been fully
achieved due to concerns about harm caused by overdiagnosis. The aim of this
integrated RC is to review the current status of breast MRI seen from different
angles: the basic technological requirements, other possible uses of BMRI and
the eternal controversy about overdiagnosis.
A163 16:05
A. How to set up a high quality breast MRI unit
M.L.A. Van Goethem, I. Verslegers, L. Hufkens, I. Biltjes, P. Parizel; Antwerp/BE
(Mireille_Van_Goethem@hotmail.com)
MR mammography has become an important imaging technique, but because
of low specificity, controversies remain, especially in the field of preoperative
staging and screening. Some multicentre studies showed disappointing results
due to inexperienced participating centres. Lack of standardisation also can be a
reason of inferior results. To have the best results, MR units 1 T are necessary,
with double dedicated breast coils, preferably multichannel. Regular checks using
standardised quality control are recommended. Gentle pressure of the breasts must
be performed to avoid motion, but this should not result in compression of vascular
structures. A T2 weighted series must be done, followed by a dynamic contrast-
enhanced examination with slice thickness 3 mm, spatial in-plane resolution 
1.5 mm2 and temporal resolution 120 s. Reporting must contain description of
lesion morphology, per cent enhancement versus time curves, number and location
of lesions and extent of disease. The use of a standardised interpretation system,
such as the BI-RADS lexicon, is recommended. Clinical examination, mammog
raphy, ultrasound and earlier MR must be included in the interpretation. To reduce
false positives, MR mammography must be performed between day 7 and 12 of
the menstrual cycle or at least 4 weeks after stop of hormone substitution therapy,
except in urgent cases. To optimise specificity, techniques as diffusion, spectroscopy
and ultra fast scanning have been studied and new signs are described. But of
utmost importance to make MR mammography a useful examination is to reserve
it only for good indications.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the necessary technical and training level prerequisites for a
high quality breast MRI unit.
2. To understand how to maintain optimal quality and performance.
3. To appreciate the importance of auditing.
A164 16:28
B. Beyond differential diagnosis and local staging: prognosis and
distant staging
J. Veltman; Almelo/NL (j.veltman@zgt.nl)
Contrast-enhanced MRI has proven to be superior in the detection and staging of
breast cancer. Besides the primary tumour stage the lymph node (LN) status and
the presence of distant metastases have significant impact on treatment planning
and overall prognosis. Even small LN metastases can already have a negative
impact on the disease-free and overall survival of patients. Sentinel LN biopsy or
complete axillary LN dissection remains the standard of care in spite of the associ
ated morbidity. Diagnostic imaging strategies using ultrasound (with FNA), MRI
or FDG/PET can be used in the preoperative LN evaluation. Due to the limited
accuracy of these strategies they are so far not able to overcome the surgical
standard and reduce the patient's morbidity. The presence of distant metastases
results in a stage IV breast cancer and is considered non curable with a 10-year
survival of about 10%. For the detection of distant metastases a chest x-ray, liver
ultrasound and bone scintigraphy (BS) are commonly used. PET/CT or whole body
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the potential pitfalls that may be encountered in interpreting
breast imaging exams.
2. To understand the technical errors in the realisation of breast imaging exams
that contribute to misinterpretation.
3. To be aware of the spectrum of factors that contribute to active errors (detec
tion, characterisation) in interpretation of breast imaging exams.
A160 16:28
MSK
B. Vande Berg; Brussels/BE
Imaging of the musculoskeletal system differs from that of other organs by many
features: limited specificity of presenting symptoms (pain), variable qualification
of referring physicians, high frequency of trauma-related lesions and relative rarity
of non-traumatic life-threatening conditions, frequent anatomic variants, possibility
of successive imaging procedures with unsatisfactory communication of previous
imaging or clinical findings. These features may contribute to numerous pitfalls and
errors at MSK imaging. During this lecture, we will focus on common causes of
errors. For lesion detection, we will emphasise the limitations of ultrasound, the inap
propriate use of which may lead to significant difficulties. For lesion characterisation,
we will focus on a several causes of misinterpretation at MR imaging including the
lack of recognition of air, gas and calcium at MR imaging and the inappropriate use
of fat-saturation. We will also remind the audience of the underestimation of septic
disorders with inappropriate management of percutaneous biopsies. Finally, we
will also draw the attention to mistakes that are related to the patients, including
unconscious patients, relatives or VIP patients.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the potential pitfalls that may be encountered in interpreting
MSK imaging exams.
2. To understand the technical errors in the realisation of MSK imaging exams
that contribute to misinterpretation.
3. To be aware of the spectrum of factors that contribute to active errors (detec
tion, characterisation) in interpretation of MSK imaging exams.
A161 16:51
Neuro
P.C. Maly Sundgren; Lund/SE (Pia.Sundgren@med.lu.se)
The reasons for mistakes in the interpretation of neuro-imaging examinations are
similar to those in radiology in general, i.e. poor technique, artefacts, failure in
perception, lack of knowledge and misjudgment. The reader may commit so-called
scanning errors (overlook the primary or additional lesion), recognition errors or
decision-making errors. Factors like misleading- or even correct clinical history,
presence or absence of previous studies, knowledge and experience of the reader,
etc, may lie behind an incorrect interpretation. Although experience increases the
accuracy, marked differences have been reported between the most experienced
readers. In neuro-imaging there is an increased risk of errors due to the large
(and increasing) number of images to be reviewed per case, the complexity of
some of the images and of the analysis. The risk of errors is increased also due
to artefacts, especially in the interpretation of MRI, or due to poor imaging quality,
for example in MRA or CTA. In the present lecture different causes for mistakes,
such as artefacts, misdiagnosis due to lack of- or comparison to wrong previous
studies, poor imaging technique and wrong clinical information will be addressed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the potential pitfalls that may be encountered in interpreting
neuro imaging exams.
2. To understand the technical errors in the realisation of neuro imaging exams
that contribute to misinterpretation.
3. To be aware of the spectrum of factors that contribute to active errors (detec
tion, characterisation) in interpretation of neuro exams.
Panel discussion:
What have we learned from our mistakes? 17:14
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S41
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Friday
the type and extent of parenchymal injuries. It can help detect active extravasation
of contrast and is of great help in guiding transcatheter embolisation. It may also
demonstrate urine leakage, preexisting abormalities with increased risk of injury
from blunt trauma, and associated abdominal and retroperitoneal injuries. The
volumetric data acquired can be used to obtain high-resolution MPR, MIP and 3D
images that help display complex injuries. The wide availability of MDCT in major
trauma patients has reduced the use of other imaging modalities: IVU in unstable
patients already in the operative room, and ultrasonography.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn the indications, advantages and disadvantages of imaging modalities
in evaluating the kidney and ureter after trauma.
2. To learn the appropriate diagnostic imaging studies and imaging findings of
different types of kidney and ureteral trauma.
3. To be able to identify a kidney that is in danger after trauma.
A167 16:30
B. Imaging the bladder and urethra
U.G. MuellerLisse; Munich/DE
Trauma to the bladder and urethra is seldom an isolated injury, such as in self-
inserted urethral foreign objects in men. Often, the lower urinary tract (LUT) is one
site of a more complex trauma injury process involving the pelvis and abdomen.
Trauma scan (TS) protocols for computed tomography (CT) have been widely ap
plied in emergency radiology since the advent of multidetector-row CT (MDCT).
Acute LUT injury has thus become subject to TS as the primary imaging modality,
with intravenous contrast media being used in various phases of its distribution,
potentially including arterial, venous and excretory, as in CT-urography (CTU).
Delayed diagnosis appears to rarely affect LUT in TS patients. Cystography and
urethrography may play a complimentary role and remain useful modalities in
the initial evaluation and followup of LUT trauma that may determine urological
management. Complications of LUT trauma, such as urine leaks, urinomas and
fistulas, are increasingly being diagnosed by means of MDCT. However, particularly
in LUT fistulas, voiding cystourethrography and urethrography are still important.
Complications of LUT injury may require imaging-guided interventional procedures,
whether by means of fluoroscopy, ultrasonography or CT.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be able to identify patients at risk of bladder and urethral trauma and those
requiring urgent urethrography.
2. To recognise the imaging findings identifying bladder and urethral injury.
3. To learn the imaging techniques necessary for accurate initial evaluation of
the urethra in cases of complicated pelvic trauma.
A168 17:00
C. Interventional radiology for GU trauma
B. Peynircioglu; Ankara/TR (borapeynir@gmail.com)
GU trauma can easily be missed when associated with other abdominal/pelvic
injuries. The type/mechanism of the trauma is the key for both imaging and treat
ment. Iatrogenic injuries of the GU tract are getting more and more common as a
result of increasing numbers of percutaneous procedures (e.g. nephrolithotomies,
biopsies). In general, renals are the most common injured part of the tract; however,
by increasing numbers of renal transplantation, ureteral injuries are now common as
well. Timing of the intervention is as important as taking the decision of percutaneous
approach for optimal management of injury. Multiphasic CT imaging with contrast
injection via both IV line and trans-urethral catheter (if possible) can demonstrate
most of the injured sites with high sensitivity. CT is also useful in predicting which
haemodynamically stable patients may benefit from percutaneous (non-operative)
management. Vascular injury of the GU tract almost always involves renals, and
bleeding and/or ischaemia is the problem. Unless the patient is at unresponsive
haemodynamic shock, or has complete vascular avulsion, endovascular treatment
may always be the choice. The American Association for the Surgery of Trauma
system for grading injury to the kidney is also helpful in making a decision whether
surgical or endovascular intervention is used. Embolisation of a bleeding artery/
pseudoaneurysm or stenting of an intimal dissection are the most common cases.
Although the vascular injuries of the GU results in retroperitoneal haemorrhages,
non-vascular injuries leading urine leaks may present with intra or extra peritoneal
urinomas. Nonvascular percutaneous intervention may be applied to urinoma,
urine leak, ureteral laceration and transection injuries. These interventions include
percutaneous nephrostomy for urine diversion, ureteral stent placement for ureteral
injuries and drainage tube placement for urinoma formation.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be able to determine which cases deserve management by interventional
radiology.
MRI can also be used for the detection of distant metastases. Earlier detection of
for instance bone metastases is needed to optimise treatment and reduce or delay
skeletal-related events. Diffusion weighted whole body imaging with background
suppression (DWIBS) was found to be equally sensitive with respect to staging.
However, DWIBS was able to detect more lesions in cases with many bone le
sions. In this presentation imaging techniques that can be used in the evaluation
of axillary lymph nodes and distant metastases are discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the value of breast MRI in breast cancer prognosis.
2. To become familiar with the use of breast MRI in regional staging.
3. To consolidate knowledge of the present use and results of MRI in distant
staging.
A165 16:51
C. Evidence-based controversies
F. Sardanelli; Milan/IT (f.sardanelli@grupposandonato.it)
Breast MRI (b-MRI), increasingly used in clinical practice, is placed in the context
of breast cancer (BC) care, characterised by high disease prevalence; screening
mammography experience; standardised therapy protocols aimed at a maximal
rate of breast-conserving treatment; and tendency towards "breast units" according
EU regulations. This explains the reasons for which b-MRI, differently from other
MRI applications, undergoes a careful evidence-based evaluation. A discussion is
open about indications, due to the lack of unequivocal evidence in terms of patient
outcome. However, a substantial consensus among breast cancer specialists exists
for non-contrast b-MRI for evaluating suspected breast implant ruptures and for
contrast-enhanced CE b-MRI for evaluating the response to neoadjuvant chemo
therapy, searching for occult primary BC, and screening high-risk women. Regarding
the last indication, individual risk modelling and calculation outside proven BRCA
mutation carriers as well as the level of risk sufficiently high to deserve annual CE
b-MRI are matter of debate. Moreover, recent studies opened a perspective for
using only MRI for high-risk screening. A hot controversy concerns CE b-MRI for
ipsi/contra-lateral staging before treatment, refuelled by the recent publication of
the results of two randomised controlled trials (COMICE, MONET), both of them
not in favour of the use of CE b-MRI but also burdened by relevant problems and
limitations. While the risk of overdiagnosis/overtreatment being relatively low for
high-risk MRI screening, it could be substantial for MRI staging, requiring a strict
relationship between radiologists and surgeons. Further high-quality research is
needed to clarify this issue.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with current controversies in clinical applications of breast
MRI.
2. To review literature on the role of MRI in breast cancer staging and screening
in high risk patients.
3. To be aware of the potential impact of overdiagnosis in breast MRI.
Panel discussion:
Do we find too many cancers with MRI? 17:14
16:00 - 17:30 Room G/H
Genitourinary
RC 707
Diagnosis and management of GU tract trauma
Moderator:
A. Magnusson; Uppsala/SE
A166 16:00
A. Imaging the kidney and ureter
M.F. Bellin; Le KremlinBicetre/FR (mariefrance.bellin@bct.aphp.fr)
Urinary tract injuries occur in approximately 10% of all abdominal trauma patients,
the kidney being the most commonly injured organ. The spectrum of renal injuries
ranges from minor trauma requiring no treatment to major life-threatening renal inju
ries that require surgical intervention. There is a growing trend towards conservative
management of renal trauma. To help predict the outcome and to guide manage
ment of renal trauma, the American Association for Surgery of Trauma has created
a renal injury grading system, which is based on the appearance of the kidney at
surgery. Indications for renal imaging include penetrating trauma and haematuria;
blunt trauma, shock, and haematuria; and gross haematuria. Contrast-enhanced
MDCT is currently the test of choice for assessing renal injury, since it provides, with
short examination times, both anatomical and functional data. It is helpful to assess
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S42 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the imaging modalities which enable to detect and
differentiate benign and malignant bone neoplasms.
2. To consolidate knowledge of radiographic, CT and MRI findings which enable
to classify and stage bone tumours.
3. To understand the potential role of PET-CT and whole body MRI.
4. To learn the signs indicative of favourable and poor response to preoperative
chemotherapy and for recurrence of malignant bone tumours.
A171 16:55
C. Chemo- and radiation therapy-induced toxicity
H.U. Kauczor; Heidelberg/DE (HansUlrich.Kauczor@med.uniheidelberg.de)
Multimodal cancer therapy, including chemotherapy, biologicals and radiotherapy,
is frequently associated with adverse, toxic effects. Depending on the specific
agent different organs, such as brain, lung, liver, bowel, bone and heart might be
affected. Inflammatory reactions" will occur. These will be detected on imaging as
white matter lesions in the brain, reticular changes and consolidations in the lung
(fibrosis, cryptogenic organizing pneumonia), diffuse liver disease, colitis, bone
necrosis, or cardiomyopathy. These direct toxic effects have to be differentiated
from infectious complications due to chemotherapy-induced neutropenia. These
infections mainly affect the lung and are caused by fungi or viruses. Angioinvasive
aspergillosis of the lung is the most frequent, but sinusitis, abscesses in brain and
liver as well as sepsis with haematogeneous foci are also encountered. Toxic effects
of radiotherapy will mainly occur within the planned target volume and result from
application of high doses to radiosensitive normal tissue leading to inflammation,
fibrosis and necrosis. As imaging is routinely performed for therapy response
monitoring or surveillance, in patients suffering from cancer toxic effects have to
be differentiated from infectious complications, postsurgical or postradiation scar
tissue or tumour recurrence. Specific patterns of toxic effects of cancer therapy in
brain, lung, liver, pelvis and their differential diagnoses will be reviewed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To get an overview of organ-specific toxicity and other adverse effects of
chemo- and radiotherapy.
2. To review the key imaging findings of therapy-induced organ toxicity and
adverse effects.
3. To understand how to differentiate inflammatory, infectious, fibrotic, and necrotic
changes from tumour recurrence.
Questions 17:20
16:00 - 17:30 Room L/M
Special Focus Session
SF 7b
Assessing novel technology: applications,
performance and quality issues
A172 16:00
Chairmen's introduction
C. Vandulek1
, M. Maas2
; 1
Kaposvar/HU, 2
Amsterdam/NL
(cvandulek@gmail.com)
One of the major characteristics of medical imaging in the 2 1st Century is the
dramatic influx of novel technology. The impact of new technology and techniques
is experienced in all modalities. The continuous development and implementation
of highly sophisticated medical products and devices is key to the evolution of
medical imaging leading to the improvement of patient care in terms of quality
and positive outcomes. Radiographers have an important role in responding to
changes in medical imaging in respect to novel technology. The impact of novel
technology has increased the responsibility of radiographers apparently in medical
imaging department. Continuous professional development is mandatory equally
both for radiologists and radiographers. The results of the introduction of learning
management systems and eLearning are promising by providing a viable learning
environment for radiographers to enhance their professional expertise. Continuous
education and development of key practical skills in respect to novel technology
are essential for maintaining the expected quality standards and performance.
Session Objectives:
1. To appreciate the impact novel technology has on radiographers.
2. To understand the importance of continuous professional development.
3. To learn how to maintain optimal quality and performance with new technology.
2. To understand the techniques to manage fistulas and ruptures of the ureter
and urethra.
3. To appreciate the vascular and non-vascular interventional techniques in kidney
trauma.
16:00 - 17:30 Room I/K
Joint Course of ESR and RSNA (Radiological Society of North
America)
MC 728
Essentials in oncologic imaging: what radiologists
need to know (part 4)
Moderator:
H.U. Kauczor; Heidelberg/DE
A169 16:00
A. Lymphoma
H. Schoder; New York, NY/US (schoderh@MSKCC.org)
PET/CT with FDG is useful for staging, response assessment and followup of
Hodgkin and Non Hodgkin lymphoma (HL, NHL). Most HL and NHL show FDG
uptake higher than local background; disease sites are therefore easily recognised.
Some entities (e.g., follicular lymphoma I) have low FDG uptake, reflecting their less
aggressive nature. For staging, combined CT and PET define the disease better
than either test alone. For instance, PET can better show involvement of spleen and
bone marrow, but CT remains necessary for anatomic detail, detection of disease
with low FDG uptake and size measurements. FDG PET is more accurate than
morphologic criteria in assessing response early (decline in FDG uptake correlates
with rapidity of response and often predicts ultimate outcome) and also at the end of
treatment (lack of FDG in residual masses reliably indicates lack of residual viable
tumour).Anegative PET after 2 or 4 cycles of chemotherapy predicts excellent out
come. In contrast, up to 50% of positive interim scans are false-positive, and hence
cure may still be possible. Persistent FDG uptake after end of treatment indicates
a worse prognosis, even when treated with radiotherapy. Recurrent disease is well
detected on CT and PET, but there is no proof that prolonged routine imaging after
end of therapy is necessary or advantageous (possible exception: poor prognosis
aggressive NHL). Followup imaging can probably be avoided entirely in patients
with early-stage HL and negative end of treatment FDG PET/CT. Recent data with
the agent 18 F fluorothymidine will be discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To get a practical, clinically relevant summary of key imaging issues in Hodgkin
and non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
2. To learn how imaging, especially PET and PET-CT can optimally assess and
measure tumour treatment response, providing a value-added radiology report.
A170 16:30
B. Musculoskeletal neoplasms
M.F. Reiser; Munich/DE (Maximilian.Reiser@med.unimuenchen.de)
Diagnosis, staging and followup of musculoskeletal tumours are most important
for selection of adequate therapeutic measures and prognosis of patients. Modern
imaging technologies have greatly contributed to improvement. With modern MRI
systems high contrast of neoplastic tissue vs. normal uninvolved structures is
achieved. This allows for adequate delineation of intraosseous and soft tissue ex
tension and thereby facilitating high precision in staging. Compartmental infiltration
is readily detected. Dynamic, contrast enhanced studies allow for assessment of
vascularity and perfusion, which provides valuable information concerning malig
nancy and benign character of a particular tumour. With diffusion weighted imaging
and diffusion tensor imaging, microstructural information can be obtained, which
correlates with response to chemotherapy and viability of the tissue. Malignant
bone tumours may spread within the bone or to distant organs. Therefore, whole
body imaging modalities hold great potential for comprehensive assessment. In
computer tomography major advances have been achieved recently. The combina
tion of CT and PET in hybrid systems allows to assess function and morphology
within one session. With FDG-PET the metabolic activity of a particular lesion can
be analyzed. The standard uptake value (SUV) can be utilized for differentiation
of benign malignant lesions. However, there are various benign lesions, such as
NOF, fibrous dysplasia, eosinophilic granuloma and aneuysmal bone cysts as well
as inflammation and infection. False negative results in FDG-PET may be found in
low grade chondrosarcoma, multiple myeloma, low grade osteosarcoma, Ewings
sarcoma and low grade soft tissue sarcomas.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S43
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Friday
Learning Objectives:
1. To consolidate knowledge of issues radiographers face in respect to novel
technologies.
2. To appreciate the expertise expected of the next generation of radiographers.
3. To understand the multidisciplinary approach of novel technologies.
Panel discussion:
How can radiographers best face the challenge of novel
technologies? 17:14
16:00 - 17:30 Room N/O
Interventional Radiology
RC 709
Evaluation and treatment of common venous
disorders
Moderator:
D. Ettles; Hull/UK
A176 16:00
A. Pelvic congestion
A. Basile; Catania/IT (antodoc@yahoo.com)
Pelvic congestion syndrome (PCS) causes acute or chronic pelvic pain most often
in multigravids, and the diagnosis is considered when other significant gynaecologi
cal or pelvic pathologies are excluded. The demands made on venous return by
hormonal changes in pregnancy together with a congenital absence of valves in
the ovarian veins lead to reflux of blood towards the ovarian veins into the internal
iliac veins. This is more commonly seen in the left side, because the ovarian vein
drains directly into the left renal vein. The consequent congestion of the pelvic
vein leads to swelling and engorgement. The symptoms are various, classically
post-coital, and can be acute and severe or chronic and dull. The diagnosis is
based on a detailed history and physical examination correlated by radiological
imaging confirmation such as ultrasound examination, computed tomography (CT),
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA).
However, all of these studies may be capable of demonstrating only severe venous
engorgement in the pelvis. For this reason, gonadal venography through femoral
or jugular access still remains the definitive imaging modality to diagnose patients
with PCS. If no reflux is seen, then it is highly unlikely that the patient has PCS.
If reflux is present, selective catheterisation and embolisation can be performed.
Sclerosant agents plus coils or plug are the suggested embolic materials even if
some studies report the use of each material alone.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the concept of pelvic congestion and its clinical and imaging
evaluation.
2. To be familiar with the techniques of interventional management.
3. To learn about the results and complications.
A177 16:30
B. Varicose veins in the extremities
C. Binkert; Winterthur/CH (christoph.binkert@ksw.ch)
Varicose veins of the lower extremity are a common problem. Besides the unsightly
look, venous reflux can lead to swelling, heaviness and itching, and eventually to
ulcerations. In many cases, the underlying cause is an insufficient saphenous vein.
Duplex ultrasound is essential for the diagnosis of reflux and treatment planning.
Endovenous thermal ablation has largely replaced surgery (vein stripping) in the
United States because of equal results, outpatient set-up and an overall much
quicker and easier recovery. The endovenous treatment is well tolerated. Post-
interventional pain and tenderness is low (VAS < 2). It seems that the discomfort
is slightly lower for RFA (closure fast) than laser (bare fibre). Severe complications
such as deep vein thrombosis or skin burn are extremely rare. Minor complications
such as hyperpigmentation, erythema and paraesthesia occur in < 5%. Thermal
ablation can be done with RFA or laser, including different wavelength and bare
or covered fibre tip). The results seem similar between the different endovenous
treatments. In the short term (1 month), an occlusion rate of close to 100% can be
expected. Mid- and long-term results (up to 48 months) maintain an elimination
of reflux > 90%.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about imaging and clinical evaluation of varicose veins.
2. To know more about the minimaly invasive treatment modalities.
3. To become familiar with the short-term and long-term results.
A173 16:05 
The impact of radiographers on performance and quality issues
arising with novel technology
F. Girard; Pont de Roide/FR (franck.girard@opteamage.com)
The emergence of new technologies in the medical field is putting pressure on the
technologist's job.Among other questions, training, performance of these technolo
gies and image quality are especially under scrutiny. This presentation will cover
these aspects, always from a technologist's point of view and will give an outlook
on the implications expected from the emergence of these new technologies in the
radiographers' world. The influence of the technicians' role will be demonstrated
through MR and CT images acquired following standard procedures.A longitudinal
followup study will show not only that regular refresher courses are one part of
the solution to be applied for a better image quality, but also that the technologists
should be part of the front line of developments, through regular readings of spe
cialised papers, participation to technical congresses and to professionals forums.
This is very often not compatible with a daily work and it is one topic of concern to
be addressed by the radiology management. The radiographer is instrumental in
today's and tomorrow's medicine, but he/she needs to be constantly challenged,
helped and brought to the highest possible level of education, always ultimately
to the benefit of the patient.
Learning Objectives:
1. To consolidate knowledge of novel technologies faced by radiographers.
2. To identify quality issues radiographers have to overcome with new technolo
gies.
3. To appreciate the radiographer's role in providing quality imaging services.
A174 16:28
How to keep up with new technique application: a continuous
education programme for radiographers in action
C.A. TipkerVos, S. Kolkman, A.A. Bak, L.F. Beenen, J.S. Lameris;
Amsterdam/NL (c.a.tipker@amc.uva.nl)
Continuous education of radiographers is needed to keep up with state-of-the-art
techniques. To maintain a high quality standard of radiological examinations we
introduced a continuous education programme for radiographers. The Academic
Medical Center Amsterdam started to make an inventory of the actual expertise
and preferences for education of radiographers in 2008. The main outcome of the
initial inventory was that radiographers appeared less competent on new technol
ogy, such as emergency CT. Also, the prior level of education appeared to be a
mediating factor in the competence of the radiographers. Subsequently, continuous
education was implemented on a per modality basis and at two levels for some
modalities. The attendance to education was registered by means of Edumanager.
Also, radiographers were able to maintain a digital education portfolio by them
selves. The effectiveness of the education was evaluated after two years (2010).
The radiographers valued the education highly. Higher expertise of the radiogra
phers was found after two years regarding emergency CT. The effectiveness of the
education varied with the prior education level of the radiographers. Additionally,
radiologists were asked to evaluate the quality of the radiological examinations.
The radiologists valued about 5% of the radiological examinations as insufficient
and approximately 75% as good-excellent. We did not find a significant trend over
time. Continuous education remains urgently needed to keep up to date with cur
rent radiological technique. Our continuous education will be adapted based on
the outcomes of the questionnaires. The difference in prior education is a matter
of concern and needs special attention.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with (digital) portfolio-based continuous education.
2. To learn about potential pitfalls in portfolio-based learning.
3. To understand the key factors of using learning management system.
A175 16:51
The role of radiographers in respect to applications of novel technologies
B. Bailey; Manchester/UK (bill.bailey@cmft.nhs.uk)
Radiographers working within cross-sectional imaging need to understand their role
in respect to the pathology they are imaging and the significance of the images they
produce in respect to patient care-pathways.Adaptation and implementation of new
and `novel' techniques is fundamental in achieving the best possible information
for the clinician and thus improved patient treatment. The modern cross-sectional
radiographer needs to be knowledgeable, flexible and be able to operate in an MDT
environment in order to deliver a `first class' service. Only then can the profession
advance to become an integral part in the patient care delivery.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S44 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
absolute myocardial blood flow. The extra processing time for quantitative analysis
has to be weighed against the speed of visual analysis. The potential added value
of quantitative over qualitative perfusion analysis is under investigation.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the different quantification techniques.
2. To become familiar with the strengths and limitations of the various quantifica
tion techniques.
3. To understand the current and future role of MR perfusion imaging in risk
stratification of patients with CAD.
A181 17:00
C. Imaging patients after bypass surgery
K.F. Kreitner; Mainz/DE (kreitner@radiologie.klinik.unimainz.de)
Besides drug therapy, the mainstays in the treatment of coronary heart disease
(CHD) are interventional therapy and coronary bypass surgery. The need to image
coronary bypass grafts is based on their limited lifetime: the occlusion rate at 10
years ranges between 5 and 15 % for arterial, and between 40 and 50% for venous
grafts, respectively. Graft sclerosis develops in 38% of nonoccluded venous bypass
vessels after 5 years and in 75% after 10 years. This sclerosis causes more than
50% luminal narrowing in approximately half of the affected vessels. Non-invasive
imaging of coronary bypass grafts by MD-CT requires information about the opera
tive procedure. With the increasing implementation of 64slice CT scanners and
beyond, it is possible to scan the heart and the full anatomic extent of grafts with
sub-millimeter slice-thickness within a single breath-hold. When analysing the grafts,
three graft segments should be assessed: the origin or proximal anastomosis, the
body of the graft and the cardiac anastomosis, either single or sequential. Recent
studies have shown that graft patency and the presence of significant graft stenosis
can be assessed with an accuracy of 100% using most recent MD-CT technology
(256/320 slice CT or dual source CT). The assessment of native coronaries with
respect to the progression of CAD may still be problematic in cases with severe
calcifications of the native coronary arteries. In these cases, MR perfusion imaging
in combination with Cine and late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) imaging may
be helpful in detecting newly developed, stress-induced myocardial ischaemia.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn the indications of CTA for bypass graft assessment.
2. To understand the clinical impact of CTA in this subgroup of patients.
3. To be able to suggest possible indications for MR imaging in patients after
bypass grafting.
16:00 - 17:30 Room Z
Vascular
RC 715
Vascular imaging: diabetes and vascular occlusive
disease
Moderator:
M.W. de Haan; Maastricht/NL
A182 16:00
A. Metabolic syndrome, diabetes and vascular disease: what do we
need to know?
E. Minar; Vienna/AT (erich.minar@meduniwien.ac.at)
The metabolic syndrome refers to the clustering of cardiovascular risk factors that
include diabetes, obesity, dyslipidaemia and hypertension. The association between
metabolic syndrome and cardiovascular diseases raises important questions about
the underlying pathological processes, especially for designing targeted therapeutic
interventions. Insulin resistance and visceral obesity have been recognised as the
most important pathogenic factors. Metabolic syndrome generally precedes and is
often associated with type 2 diabetes. Cardiovascular risk reduction in individuals
with metabolic syndrome should include 1) control of obesity, unhealthy diet and
lack of physical activity; 2) control of the individual components of metabolic syn
drome, especially atherogenic dyslipidaemia, hypertension, hyperglycaemia and
prothrombotic state; and 3) control of insulin resistance, a defect closely linked to
metabolic syndrome. Appropriate management of metabolic syndrome should be
able to prevent the progression from impaired glucose tolerance to frank diabetes
and thus to prevent the increasing prevalence of type 2 diabetes and vascular
diseases. Each 1% increase in HbA1c is associated with a 28% increase in risk
of incident PAD. Diabetes is also highly associated with progression of PAD and
especially with development of critical limb ischaemia. Rigorous control of blood
A178 17:00
C. Varicocele
M. Mansour, P. Haage; Wuppertal/DE (michaelmansour@hotmail.com)
The testicular varicocele is a pathological dilatation and tortuosity of the veins of the
pampiniform plexus of unknown aetiology. Clinical presentation can include scrotal
swelling and pain; the varicocele is more often seen in the subfertile or infertile man.
The primary diagnostic imaging tool is ultrasound. Right-sided varicoceles can be
symptomatic; a profound abdominal diagnostics is necessary. Therapeutic options
include minimally invasive surgical and open microsurgical treatment, as well as
interventional radiological therapy. The IR treatment by percutaneous venography
includes the selective catheterisation of the spermatic vein and subsequent emboli
sation or sclerotherapy. Technical and clinical success rates are encouraging and
complications are rare. In this lecture, diagnostic modalities, clinical and imaging
features plus the indications for therapy will be discussed. In addition, the different
therapy options and its results will be elucidated; furthermore, the management
of the endovascular occlusion in treatment of varicoceles will be demonstrated in
a step by step fashion.
Learning Objectives:
1. To know more about clinical evaluation and imaging of varicocele.
2. To become familiar with the techniques of interventional management of
varicocele.
3. To be informed about the results, complications, and comparison with surgical
options.
16:00 - 17:30 Room P
Cardiac
RC 703
Imaging of ischaemic heart disease
Moderator:
K. Gruszczynska; Katowice/PL
A179 16:00
A. CT: angiography, function and perfusion
G. Feuchtner; Innsbruck/AT (Gudrun.Feuchtner@imed.ac.at)
Myocardial function and coronary anatomy from one scan? This science"-fiction
has become true now for computed tomography (CT). Over years, we have often
worried whether a lesion found on CTAis significant" (= causes myocardial ischae
mia indicating the need for coronary revascularisation) or not. Now, CT-perfusion
(CTP) provides that information. Different CTP- techniques will be discussed (e.g.
the one-shot" approach and dynamic"). New CT technology providing low radiation
dose will be highlighted in this course. CT is also established technique for imaging
of global and regional cardiac function. Beyond, imaging of myocardial viablity using
delayed enhancement will be discussed. The aim of this course is to understand
basic principles of functional imaging by CT, to learn how-to" perform these scans,
to review current scientific evidence and to discuss potential clinical applications.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn how to perform functional CT studies: CT perfusion (CTP), CT func
tion, combined CTA/CTP and viablity exams.
2. To review the current scientific data supporting the use of CTP and to under
stand basic principles and pitfalls.
3. To discuss potential clinical applications and which patients benefit.
A180 16:30
B. MR perfusion imaging: how much quantification do we need?
A. de Roos; Leiden/NL (A.de_Roos@lumc.nl)
Most commonly MRI myocardial perfusion images are analysed by visual inspec
tion, noting regions of hypointensity (ischaemia) during the first pass of a contrast
medium bolus of a gadolinium chelate. High temporal resolution is required to
capture transient ischaemia in the myocardium under pharmacological stress and to
distinguish artefacts (e.g. dark rim artefacts during a few frames at peak enhance
ment). Various modifications of T1-weigthed, ECG gated, multislice acquisitions
have been proposed to assess first-pass myocardial signal intensity changes in
cine mode. The time-versus-intensity curves allow quantitative analysis by deriv
ing parameter values from the time series of intensity values (e.g. upslope, peak,
absolute myocardial blood flow). Epi/endocardial contour tracing is required for
segmental analysis, by pixels or to construct perfusion maps. Time intensity curves
are deconvoluted for arterial input function using a Fermi function for estimating
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S45
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Friday
glucose prevents the microvascular complications of diabetes, although similar
benefits on the macrocirculation have not been ascertained. Patients with diabetes
and PAD should have an aggressive control of blood glucose levels with an HbA1c
goal of < 7.0% or as close to 6% as possible.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn the principles of metabolic syndrome and diabetes.
2. To understand how both diseases affect the vascular system.
3. To learn which vascular territories are primarily affected.
A183 16:30
B. Imaging strategies in diabetic foot syndrome
R. Iezzi; Rome/IT (roberto.iezzi@rm.unicatt.it)
Peripheral arterial disease (PAD) is a common cardiovascular complication in
patients with diabetes. In contrast to non-diabetic PAD, it is more prevalent and,
because of the distal territory of vessel involvement and its association with pe
ripheral neuropathy, it is more commonly asymptomatic. Diabetic PAD may present
later with more severe disease and have a greater risk of amputation. The pervasive
influence of diabetes on the atherothrombotic milieu of the peripheral vasculature is
unique. The abnormal metabolic state accompanying diabetes results in changes in
the arterial structure and function. The proatherogenic changes include increases
in vascular inflammation and derangements in the vascular cellular components,
alterations in blood cells and haemostatic factors. These changes are associated
with an increased risk for accelerated atherogenesis as well as poor outcomes. In
contrast to the focal and proximal atherosclerotic lesions of non-diabetic PAD, in
diabetic patients the lesions are more likely to be more heavily calcified, diffuse and
distal, sparing the proximal vessels and mainly affecting the more distal arteries in
the calf and the foot. By identifying a patient with subclinical disease and instituting
preventative measures, it may be possible to avoid acute, limb-threatening ischae
mia. The primary imaging modality to be used should be duplex ultrasound, due to
its non-invasive nature, lower risks and costs. CT-angiography and MR-angiography
are now replacing DSA as standard imaging methods, providing a non-invasive
assessment of the localisation and extension of a vascular lesion and allowing an
accurate planning of endovascular and/or surgical treatment.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the typical lesions encountered in diabetic foot syn
drome.
2. To understand the underlying pathophysiology.
3. To learn about imaging strategies for the evaluation of diabetic foot syndrome.
A184 17:00
C. Imaging prior to revascularisation: US, CTA, MRA or DSA?
S.O. Schonberg; Mannheim/DE
The choice of the appropriate modality for imaging of the peripheral vascular system
strongly depends on the type of disease. In the acute setting of lower leg ischaemia
caused by embolism or thrombosis on top of a pre-existing high-grade stenosis,
CT angiography frequently is the imaging modality of choice due to its 24-hour
availability and robustness with reasonable accuracy in the upper leg exceeding
90%. With the introduction of dual energy CT, visualisation of lower leg arteries
and highly calcified areas has improved. For elective patients, contrast-enhanced
MR-angiography (CE-MRA) is the technique of choice, in patients with renal insuf
ficiency preferably at 3 Tesla with a single dose of macrocyclic contrast agents.
Recent continuous table-movement techniques have substantially reduced the
complexity and scan time and extended the spectrum to the emergency stetting.
Time-resolved CE-MRA improves the detection of small arteries in the lower leg
and reduces artefacts from venous overlay. Accuracy of state-of-the art CE-MRA
exceeds 95% compared to digital subtraction angiography (DSA). New fast-spin
echo and steady-state free precession MRA techniques without contrast media
demonstrate a high negative predictive value in areas without motion. DSA should
be restricted to the display of the target lesion, inflow and run-off during the inter
ventional procedure, as well as to the in-detail visualisation of the anastomosis site
prior to surgical revascularisation, particularly in the lower calf.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the appropriate imaging protocols for each modality.
2. To understand quantitative analysis of occlusive disease in peripheral arteries
in order to plan revascularisation.
3. To learn about the specific pros and cons of ultrasound, MRA, CTA and DSA
in diabetic foot syndrome prior to revascularisation.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S46 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S47
C D E F G H
A
Saturday, March 3
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S48 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
The high-voltage pulses cause substantial muscle contractions (comparable to
electro shocks); therefore, complete muscle relaxation under general anaesthesia
is necessary. Moreover, the high-voltage pulse may induce cardiac arrhythmia,
what can be prevented by using an ECG-controlled trigger device allowing pulse
delivery only in the non-vulnerable phase of the cardiac cycle. Preliminary experi
ence exists in IRE of tumours of the liver, prostate and lung, where the feasibility
of IRE could be documented. However, there are some unique characteristics
making IRE rather different from other ablative techniques. General anaesthesia
with a complete muscle blockade is mandatory to avoid generalised muscle
contractions as well as ECG gated delivery of the high-voltage pulses to avoid
serious cardiac arrhythmias. Nevertheless, the observation that IRE creates very
well-demarcated ablation volumes preserving surrounding structures, maintaining
blood flow in adjacent vessels, may smooth the way for local ablative therapy in
very crucial anatomical areas as, e.g. in close proximity to the bowel, cardiac,
neural and vascular structures.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the technique.
2. To know about the specific indications.
3. To know about the outcomes and complications.
A188 09:09
High intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU)
F. Orsi; Milan/IT (franco.orsi@ieo.it)
High intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) is a highly precise medical procedure
using ultrasound energy for destroy the tumour tissue at depth within the body,
selectively and without harming overlying and adjacent structures within the path of
the beam. Unlike RFA and Cryo, HIFU is completely non-invasive and can be used
to treat tumour deeply located, if an acoustic window is available for ultrasound
transmission. Many reports underline the reduced toxicity with HIFU compared with
other ablation techniques because of the non-invasive nature of the procedure.
Diagnostic ultrasound has an excellent safety profile, with no clinically significant
biologic effects; however, at high energy, ultrasound can result in tissue heating
and necrosis, cell apoptosis and lysis. Localised heat generation due to absorp
tion of the acoustic energy is the main biological effect in tissues where it rapidly
raises temperatures from 55 C to 100 C, causing coagulation necrosis within
a few seconds, as the result of biological effects from a combination of heating,
cavitation and vascular destruction. Combination between imaging and technolo
gies for local therapy has made ablative procedures more reliable and practical,
allowing for safe and feasible application of HIFU in clinical practice. US-guided
HIFU has been recently used to treat patients with various kinds of malignancies,
including liver, breast, kidney, pancreas bone and soft tissue, both in Asia and
Europe. MR-guided HIFU is currently used in North America, Europe and Asia for
treating uterine fibroids. Investigation and applications of HIFU are growing rapidly
worldwide, expanding clinical indications for this new technology.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the technique.
2. To know about the specific indications.
3. To know about the outcomes and complications.
A189 09:27
Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT)
J.J. Aristu; Pamplona/ES (jjaristu@unav.es)
High-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) is a highly precise medical procedure
using ultrasound energy for destroying the tumour tissue at depth within the body,
selectively and without harming overlying and adjacent structures within the path of
the beam. Unlike RFA and Cryo, HIFU is completely non-invasive and can be used
to treat tumour deeply located, if an acoustic window is available for ultrasound
transmission. Many reports underline the reduced toxicity with HIFU compared with
other ablation techniques because of the non-invasive nature of the procedure.
Diagnostic ultrasound has an excellent safety profile, with no clinically significant
biologic effects; however, at high energy, ultrasound can result in tissue heating
and necrosis, cell apoptosis and lysis. Localised heat generation due to absorp
tion of the acoustic energy is the main biological effect in tissues where it rapidly
raises temperatures from 55 C to 100 C, causing coagulation necrosis within
a few seconds, as the result of biological effects from a combination of heating,
cavitation and vascular destruction. Combination between imaging and technolo
gies for local therapy has made ablative procedures more reliable and practical,
allowing for safe and feasible application of HIFU in clinical practice. US-guided
HIFU has been recently used to treat patients with various kinds of malignancies,
including liver, breast, kidney, pancreas bone and soft tissue, both in Asia and
Europe. MR-guided HIFU is currently used in North America, Europe and Asia for
08:30 - 10:00 Room A
New Horizons Session
NH 8
Ablation beyond radiofrequency
A185 08:30
Chairman's introduction
J. Bilbao; Pamplona/ES (jibilbao@unav.es)
Image-guided percutaneous ablation is currently accepted as the best therapeutic
choice for non-surgical patients with early-stage hepatocellular carcinoma. Abla
tion is usually performed by the injection of ethanol (PEI) or by heating the tumour
with the administration of radiofrequency (RF). Several published series have
demonstrated their efficacy by showing a clear improvement in patients survival.
RF is also currently used within the multidisciplinary approach of patients with
liver metastases, either as a complementary treatment during a hepatectomy or
as a unique method to increase the local control of a liver nodule. Finally, in recent
years several series have demonstrated excellent results with the application of
RF in other non-liver tumours such as renal or lung carcinomas. In spite of being a
relatively safe procedure the use of RF has some limitations and is not exempt from
complications. In general they include the need of the introduction of a needle, the
decrease in its efficacy when the tumour is located close to a blood vessel and the
impossibility to obtain a complete necrosis, with a safety margin, in tumours bigger
than 3.5 cm in its greatest diameter. To overcome some of these limitations, new
locally ablative methods have been developed. Some may not need the insertion
of a needle and can be applied in many different tumoural locations, among them
high intensity focused ultrasound" (HIFU) or stereotactic body radiation therapy"
(SBRT). Others like microwave ablation" or irreversible electroporation" may be
applied to tumours bigger than 4 cm or situated close to blood vessels.
Session Objectives:
1. To become familiar with new techniques for ablation.
2. To know about the specific indications of each technique.
3. To know about the outcomes and complications that each technique may offer.
A186 08:33
Microwave ablation
T. de Baere; Villejuif/FR (debaere@igr.fr)
Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) provides complete ablation of most of the tumours
less than 3 cm and away from vessels larger than 3 mm. For tumours larger than
3 cm success rate of RFA decreases due to limited volume of ablation that can
be obtained with one RF delivery and impossibility to deliver treatment through
several RFA electrodes at the same time. Success rate of RFA also decreases
when tumours are close to large vessels. Microwave (MWA) might be a valid
answer to these difficulties in size and vascular cooling due to the possibility to
use several microwave antennas at the same time and better thermal profile,
namely by being able to reach rapidly temperature superior to the ones used for
RFA. High MWA energy can be nowadays delivered through microwave antennas
inserted percutaneously, especially due to needle shaft cooling. Synergy has been
demonstrated when multiple antennas are used at the same time. Consequently,
MWA has been applied in lung, liver and kidney ablation where large ablation
volumes were obtained with promising success rate of complete ablation when
treating large tumour. Great care should be taken to avoid complications that can
occur when very large volumes of ablation are performed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the technique.
2. To know about the specific indications.
3. To know about the outcomes and complications.
A187 08:51
Irreversible electroporation
T.K. Helmberger; Munich/DE (Thomas.Helmberger@klinikummuenchen.de)
In irreversible electroporation (IRE) repeated high power electrical pulses (up to
3000V and 50 A)---applied via percutaneous probes---cause nano-scale defects
in the cell lipid-bilayer followed by a leakage of intracellular ions, a collapse of the
homeostatic conditions inside the cell and finally cell death. In contrast to other
ablative techniques structures in close proximity to the destroyed tissue as large
blood vessels, biliary ducts or bronchioli are preserved. The probes are placed into
tumour tissue under imaging guidance comparable as in other ablation procedures.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S49
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Saturday
these issues adequately may be helpful in preoperative patient selection and result
in avoidance of unnecessary laparotomy.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the principles of cytoreductive surgery followed by
hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC).
2. To learn about intraoperative staging and surgical scoring systems.
3. To understand criteria for selecting candidates for cytoreductive surgery and
HIPEC.
4. To appreciate areas of special attention during intraoperative staging.
A192 08:55
MDCT vs MRI: advantages and drawbacks
F. Iafrate; Rome/IT (francoiafrate@gmail.com)
Peritoneal carcinomatosis is usually associated with a poor overall survival rate.
Recently, introduction of more aggressive surgical treatment and intraperitoneal
chemotherapy appears to significantly increase the overall survival rate for these
patients. A detailed preoperative assessment of peritoneal carcinomatosis could
be very challenging in the field of imaging, but a new aggressive surgical approach
requires an accurate preoperative assessment of the disease. Cross-imaging using
CT and MRI with diffusion-weighted (DW) sequences is important for appropriate
management of patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis. Appreciation of the spec
trum of diagnostic patterns and pitfalls as well as different sites of involvement of
peritoneal carcinomatosis using CT and DWI is crucial for appropriate surgical
treatment. The aims of the lecture are to underline the role of 64 MDCT and DWI
3 T MRI in the evaluation of Peritoneal Metastases (PMs) in patients undergoing
peritonectomy and hypertermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC), to under
stand advantages and drawbacks of each diagnostic imaging technique and to
address which particular abdominal areas are the most important and crucial to
evaluate in order to exclude the presence of PMs for a right selection of patients
that must be surgically treated by HIPEC.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about CT/MR imaging patterns of malignant peritoneal dissemination.
2. To become familiar with tailored CT/MR imaging protocols in the diagnosis
and evaluation of disease extent.
3. To discuss strengths and weaknesses of CT and MR imaging diagnosis.
4. To understand difficulties and pitfalls in disease assessment and preoperative
staging by MDCT or MRI.
A193 09:25
What is the added value of PET/CT?
G. Antoch; Dusseldorf/DE (antoch@med.uniduesseldorf.de)
Diagnostic potentials - as well as limitations - associated with morphological
cross-sectional imaging on the one hand, and functional imaging on the other,
are increasingly well understood. It has become obvious that in many cases both
kinds of imaging complement one another. So hybrid PET/CT imaging must be
considered one of the most promising new developments in medical imaging. The
most recently launched line of PET/CT scanners combines high-definition PET
with high-end multislice CT. These imaging systems do not only provide a higher
diagnostic accuracy based on detection of smaller lesions with CT and PET, but
also offer integration of complex CT protocols into the PET/CT scan. Detection
of peritoneal carcinomatosis has been challenging with all imaging procedures.
A peritoneal cake" can be detected easily; however, in many cases peritoneal
disease will be rather diffuse compromising its detection with cross-sectional
imaging techniques. This also applies to FDG-PET/CT where low FDG-uptake in
low-grade tumours and the anatomical resolution of PET may hamper detection of
small lesions. Additional contrast-enhanced CT as part of the PET/CT scan may
aid lesion detection in this situation. The aim of this talk is to give an overview
concerning PET/CT in detection of peritoneal carcinomatosis.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with PET imaging findings in the diagnosis and evaluation
of disease extent in peritoneal carcinomatosis.
2. To understand limitations and pitfalls of PET/CT in malignant peritoneal dis
semination at initial presentation and disease followup.
3. To understand the role of PET/CT in selecting candidates for cytoreductive
surgery or in avoiding unnecessary surgery.
Panel discussion:
Optimised imaging algorithms in peritoneal carcinomatosis 09:45
treating uterine fibroids. Investigation and applications of HIFU are growing rapidly
worldwide, expanding clinical indications for this new technology.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the technique.
2. To know about the specific indications.
3. To know about the outcomes and complications.
Panel discussion:
Which method should then be used for tumoural ablation? 09:45
08:30 - 10:00 Room B
Special Focus Session
SF 8a
Peritoneal carcinomatosis
A190 08:30
Chairman's introduction
P.K. Prassopoulos; Alexandroupolis/GR (pprasopo@med.duth.gr)
Cytoreductive surgery followed by hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy
is the current trend in the treatment of peritoneal carcinomatosis. Thanks to this
approach, prognosis and quality of life have significantly improved during the pst
decade, in selected group of patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis. Imaging may
have a pivotal role in the preoperative selection of patients that may benefit from
cytoreductive surgery, by determining tumour burden and presence of disease
in specific areas that may implicate the surgical procedure. CT is considered the
modality of choice in diagnosing peritoneal carcinomatosis and in disclosing the
specific patterns of malignant extension in the abdomen. MRI has a complementary
role and it may perform better than CT in exact forms of the disease. Tailored CT and
MR imaging protocols (including dynamic, diffusion/perfusion imaging) are required
to allow a detailed and accurate site by site demonstration of disease extent and
type of involvement. Selection of candidates for cytoreductive surgery and surgi
cal planning can be based on optimal preoperative imaging examinations. PET/
CT has an emerging role in the initial assessment and especially in the followup
evaluation of patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis. Closer collaboration between
dedicated surgeons and radiologists and in-depth exploitation of the potential of
new imaging techniques would have a significant impact on patients' management.
Session Objectives:
1. To learn about the imaging strategies for the diagnosis, evaluation of disease
extent and followup in patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis.
2. To become familiar with the evolution of new treatment options in peritoneal
carcinomatosis.
3. To understand the necessity for accurate preoperative staging by means of
imaging techniques.
A191 08:35
What does the surgeon want to know?
E. de Bree; Iraklion/GR (debree@edu.uoc.gr)
Intraoperative hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) has been in
creasingly used in the treatment of peritoneal carcinomatosis. The pharmacokinetic
advantage of intraperitoneal chemotherapy consists of high locoregional and low
systemic drug concentrations, resulting in increased efficacy and decreased sys
temic toxicity. During HIPEC, the direct cytotoxic effect of heat and its synergistic
effect with drugs are utilised. Since the drug penetration depth is limited to a few
millimetres at the most, extensive cytoreductive surgery (CRS) is warranted. Various
intraoperative staging scoring systems to quantify the extent of peritoneal disease
before CRS have been developed, which predicts the possibility of adequate CRS
and are of prognostic value for survival. Most frequently, the Peritoneal Cancer
Index (PCI) is used. Surgical scoring systems have been designed to describe the
residual disease after CRS. Only when no, or very small tumour nodules (2.5 mm)
are left behind, may HIPEC be of therapeutic benefit. Adequate patient selection
is of importance, since CRS followed by HIPEC is associated with considerable
morbidity and mortality, high costs and poor survival in many patients. Besides
performance status and tumour histology, there are many other selection factors.
Extra-abdominal disease, (multiple/irresectable) hepatic metastases, high peritoneal
disease staging score and involved areas that may exclude adequate CRS such as
extensive small bowel or mesentery involvement, hepatic hilar involvement, gross
involvement of the hepatogastric ligament and invasive ureteral obstruction may
be considered as contraindications. Preoperative imaging methods demonstrating
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S50 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn how to report detected and recognised bacterial and parasitic CNS
infections basically.
2. To learn how to assist clinicians with the diagnosis and differential diagnosis
of bacterial and parasitic CNS infections.
3. To learn what to include in the report of CNS infections for treatment planning.
4. To learn how to report followup and treatment monitoring of CNS infections.
08:30 - 10:00 Room D1
Controversies in Abdominal Imaging
MC 824
Abdominal emergencies: US resists CT!
Moderator:
M. Laniado; Dresden/DE
Teaser:
P.R. Ros; Cleveland, OH/US
A196 08:30
A. Why bother with CT when US answers so many questions?
J.B.C.M. Puylaert; The Hague/NL (dr.jbcmpuylaert@wxs.nl)
The specific advantages of US over CT are that US has an image definition in
the close range which is much higher. US is more interactive: patient's history as
well as painful area or palpable mass can be correlated with the US findings. US
shows peristalsis, pulsations and blood flow. US shows the effects of respiration,
Valsalva manoeuvre, gravity and compression with the probe, allowing to assess
whether organs as bowel and gallbladder are soft or rigid. US allows easy puncture
of intraperitoneal fluid and drainage of pus. US in acute abdomen is performed with
graded compression. Compression is necessary to displace or compress bowel,
eliminating the disturbing influence of bowel gas and to approach the pathological
structure closely. This allows using a high-frequency transducer with a better image
quality. The compression should be graded to avoid unnecessary pain and to avoid
pushing organs out of the US plane. US examination should be symptom-directed
and requires communication with the patient. In patients with an acute abdomen
the entire abdomen should be examined, i.e. from the axilla to the groin. The final
US report should be integrated with the clinical findings, laboratory data, CT-scan
and possible other radiological examinations. The US images of appendicitis,
diverticulitis, intussusceptions, acute biliary, urological and gynaecological condi
tions, infectious ileocecitis, perforated peptic ulcer, small bowel obstruction, ruptured
aneurysm, pancreatitis, Crohn's disease, epiploic appendagitis, omental infarction
and perforating malignancy will be demonstrated using illustrative case histories,
with emphasis on the specific advantages of US over CT.
A197 08:55
B. Why lose time with US when CT gives you all you need to know?
D. Akata; Ankara/TR (dakata@hacettepe.edu.tr)
Multidetector computed tomography (CT) has emerged as the modality of choice
for evaluation of patients with most of the traumatic and nontraumatic conditions
causing acute abdominal pain. Operator dependency and technical inadequacy
secondary to the body habitues or intestinal gas of the patient are not so rare limita
tions of the ultrasound exam.Although radiation and use of contrast material are the
main drawbacks, CT is the fastest imaging modality for scanning patients. Moreover,
multidetector CT scanners allow performing multiplanar reformation without loss of
image resolution, a technique that has been shown to improve physician confidence
in either confirming or excluding the diagnosis of abdominal emergencies. Increased
certainty improves treatment planning and can reduce inappropriate utilisation of
hospital resources. Also in trauma patients with multiorgan injuries additional post
processing techniques, such as maximum intensity projection and volume render
ing, multiplanar reformation may also improve identification and characterisation
of especially vessel and bone injuries in the same setting. MDCT is the primary
imaging technique used in evaluating patients suspected with most common causes
of abdominal pain; acute pancreatitis, acute appendicitis, abdominal abscess or
renal stone. It has a high sensitivity and specificity and high confidence level to
diagnose or rule out the pathology. CT also has an indispensable role to differentiate
nonsurgical rare conditions of acute abdominal pain such as epiploic appendages,
omental infarct, mesenteric panniculitis or diverticulitis.
08:30 - 10:00 Room C
Interactive Teaching Session
E 820a
Infections of the central nervous system: what the
radiologist must report
A194 08:30
A. `Dangerous' viral and prion infections
G. Wilms; Leuven/BE (Guido.Wilms@uz.kuleuven.ac.be)
The most common viral infection of the brain is herpes encephalitis (HSV1). It
is a necrotising encephalitis with a mortality rate of more than 50%. On imaging
studies lesions will be seen in the "limbic system", i.e. the temporal lobes, hip
pocampi, insular cortex and cingulate gyrus. They appear as hypodensity on CT,
T2- and FLAIR hyperintensity on MRI, possibly with haemorrhagic transformation.
Diffusion is restricted in the early phase. Enhancement occurs at a later stage.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection is a multifocal giant-cell encephalitis
eventually leading to a progressive leuco-encephalopathy. On MR atypical focal
or diffuse symmetrical signal abnormalities are seen neither with mass-effect nor
with enhancement and typically sparing the U-fibres. Spectroscopy can show an
increase of myo-inositol. Progressive multifocal leuco-encephalopathy (PML) is
due to reactivation of the JC polyomavirus in immunocompromised patients, 10%
of which are HIV positive. On MRI "scalloped" multifocal asymmetrical lesions are
seen with minimal mass effect and without enhancement. New treatments of HIV,
especially highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) can lead to a paradoxical
worsening of patients due to the immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome
(IRIS). On MRI mass lesions are seen with diffuse patchy enhancement. Cerebral
toxoplamosis appears as multiple enhancing lesions with marked perilesional
oedema. Calcification is possible. Prion diseases are caused by a proteinaceous
infectious particle leading to Creutzfeld-Jacob disease in humans. Diffusion
weighted MR images show high signal intensities in the cortex and the basal
ganglia. Abnormalities on T2-weighted images and FLAIR occur at a later stage
where atrophy is mostly prominent.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be familiar with the imaging pattern of most common viral and prion CNS
infections.
2. To learn how to recognise and differentiate between the different viral and
prion CNS infections.
3. To learn how to report detected viral and prion CNS infections.
4. To improve knowledge about followup and treatment monitoring of viral and
prion infections.
A195 09:15
B. Bacterial and parasitic infections
E.T. Tali; Ankara/TR (turgut.tali@gmail.com)
Most of the cerebral infections can be treated successfully as long as they are
detected early. Radiological evaluations play important role in the diagnosis, subse
quent treatment and treatment monitoring. Cerebritis is poorly localised perivascular
inflammatory infiltrations with scattered necrosis, oedema, and petechial haemor
rhage. Bacteria, fungi and parasites may cause cerebritis. In one-third of the cases
more than one agent is found. Brain infection in newborn and infants differs from
the adults. They are relatively larger in size, typically originate in the periventricular
WM and capsule formation is relatively poor. Radiological findings may differ ac
cording to the stage of the infection. MRI findings vary from oedema, mass effect,
mild/patchy/heterogeneous enhancement of cerebritis to ring-like lesions (thicker
border near cortex, thinner near ependyma), with the capsule hypointense on
T2WI, hyperintense on T1WI, heterogeneous enhancement, central necrotic area,
surrounding oedema of abscesses. DWI shows high signal intensity while ADC
map shows low signal intensity of the central necrotic area of the abscesses. MRS
shows elevated lactate and amino acid peaks. Cystic lesions isointense to CSF
are also seen at the parasitic infestations. Treatment can also be monitored mainly
by MRI; decrease in oedema, decrease in mass effect, decrease in the degree of
enhancement, decreasing signal on DWI, increasing signal on ADC maps, gliosis,
occasionally focal calcifications, turning of lactate and amino acid peaks to normal
at MRS are the indicators of successful treatment.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S51
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Saturday
demonstrated. CT urography may not be perfect, but it is the best single imaging
modality we have for diagnosing UUT-UCC.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be able to evaluate CT urography for diagnosis of upper urinary tract
urothelial cancers (UTUC).
2. To understand how to optimise CT urography for diagnosis of UTUC.
3. To be able to provide solutions to problems with CT urography for diagnosis
of UTUC.
A201 09:30
C. Adrenal tumours
F.M. Danza; Rome/IT (fmdanza@gmail.com)
Adrenal tumours are a wide group of masses where imaging plays an important
role in diagnosis. Most of them are incidental findings during radiological CT or
MRI studies, performed for oncological or non-oncological indications. A list of all
possibilities will be presented with special consideration on the embryological origin
of the tumours. A rationale for technical protocols in CT and MRI is presented in
particular to apply to clinical settings. The differential diagnosis between adenoma
and mets is the more frequent dilemma in oncologic patients. In non-neoplastic
cases the tool is to distinguish between functioning and non-functioning masses,
with all the endocrinological implications. More rarely, larger lesions may represent
the diagnostic challenge for radiology: to recognise benign and malignant find
ings is crucial to orient towards different histotypes. Relations with neighbouring
structures are also necessary to correctly stage the disease. CT and MRI have
some potential diagnostic possibilities to be utilised in the characterisation at
tempt: density, enhancement, de-enhancement, variations of signal intensity, in
particular in FS and IN-OUT of false sequences. Particular considerations will be
given to some particular tumours as angioma, myelolipoma, adrenal carcinoma
and collision tumours.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the role of different radiological techniques used for demonstra
tion and characterisation of adrenal tissue and masses.
2. To know the major problems encountered with radiological imaging in the dif
ferential diagnosis of adrenal nodules in oncologic and non-oncologic patients.
3. To know the appearance of primary benign and malignant tumours of adrenals,
either originating from the medulla or from the adrenal cortex, using different
radiological techniques.
08:30 - 10:00 Room E1
Musculoskeletal
RC 810
Bone marrow oedema and bone marrow oedema-
like lesions
A202 08:30
Chairman's introduction
B. Vande Berg; Brussels/BE
The term bone marrow oedema was introduced to describe ill-defined bone marrow
hypointensity on T1Wi and hyperintensity on T2Wi and water sensitive sequences.
Bone marrow edema can be found in many similar unrelated disorders, such as
bone contusions, osteonecrosis, inflammatory or degenerative disease, being a
non-specific MRI abnormality representing a diagnostic challenge for radiologist.
Recently has been demonstrated that bone marrow oedema might be a prognosis
marker for OA (osteoarthritis) and inflammatory disease, and could be used as a
powerful predictive tool for treatment options. Therefore our role as radiologist is to
try to increase specificity to help patient management and decrease progression.
The aim of this refresher course is to describe MR imaging features of bone marrow
edema in different important and frequent disorders: osteoarthritis, inflammatory
diseases and trauma.
A203 08:35
A. BME and osteoarthritis
F.W. Roemer; Augsburg/DE (f.w.roemer@gmx.de)
The objective is to discuss the terminology, differential diagnoses, and clinical and
structural significance of MRI-detected subchondral bone marrow lesions (BML)
of osteoarthritic joints. Subchondral BMLs are a hallmark of knee osteoarthritis
(OA) on MRI, but are also regularly seen in hip OA and in non-weight bearing de
A198 09:20
Discussion
M. Laniado1
, P.R. Ros2
; 1
Dresden/DE, 2
Cleveland, OH/US
The discussion will address the following issues:
1. Are there situations in which US and CT do not compete, like cholecystitis for
US or perforation for CT?
2. What is the most time and cost-efficient strategy: US and optional CT or direct
CT (and optional US1/4)?
3. What is the role of US in the era of teleradiology?
4. Should we teach emergency doctors to perform US and can we define limits
for their expertise?
5. Is there any role for MRI in emergency patients?
08:30 - 10:00 Room D2
Urogenital Imaging
CC 821
Renal and adrenal tumours
Moderator:
G.M. Villeirs; Gent/BE
A199 08:30
A. Imaging and staging of renal parenchymal tumours
U.G. MuellerLisse; Munich/DE
The staging of kidney tumours includes a systematic approach to recognise and
describe the local, regional, and distant extent of tumour burden. Staging results
determine therapeutic approach, success of individual treatments, and prognosis
of individual patients. Evolving diagnostic, therapeutic, and prognostic experience
continues to re-define staging categories. In renal cell carcinoma (RCC), the
Robson classification has been replaced by the TNM classification. Since 2002,
the TNM classification includes RCC of 4 cm or less in stage T1a, since recent
surgical experience suggests that partial nephrectomy (nephron-sparing surgery)
can be curative, while it preserves excretory capacity. Since surgery is currently
the only means of curative treatment, lymph node (N-) or distant metastatic (M-)
extent of RCC is associated with unfavourable prognosis. However, new therapeutic
concepts involving tumour anti-angioneogenesis factors or multi-kinase inhibitors
demonstrate promising effects on tumour volume or tumour viability. Staging and
followup of RCC may involve various imaging modalities. However, the increase
in speed and range of both CT and MRI suggests that these modalities may soon
limit or obviate the need for other imaging modalities in the staging of renal tumours.
PET-CT appears to be promising for the followup on new therapies in patients with
metastatic RCC. Transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) of the kidney is a differential
diagnosis in patients with solid renal lesions who do not have other primary tumours.
Learning Objectives:
1. To know the different imaging methods for the detection and staging of renal
cell carcinoma.
2. To be able to explain the role of imaging in the detection and staging of renal
cell carcinoma.
3. To learn about the implications of the staging classifications for renal cell
carcinoma.
A200 09:00
B. Tumours of the renal pelvis and ureter: the revolution of CT urography
N.C. Cowan; Oxford/UK
CT urography is defined as CT examination of the kidneys, ureters and bladder
with at least one imaging series acquired during the excretory phase of contrast
enhancement. The principal reason for the existence of CT urography is for diag
nosing UUT-UCC. In adults, CT urography is now the preferred initial examination
for patients with haematuria at high risk for upper urinary tract urothelial cell cancer
(UUT-UCC). CT urography is evaluated for diagnosing UUT-UCC by analysis of
results from haematuria clinics as well as by comparison studies using ultrasound,
excretory urography and retrograde ureteropyelography. Technical aspects of
image acquisition and processing will be explored and technical tips relating to
protocol design given to optimise CT urography for diagnosing UUT-UCC.The
principal problems with using CT urography for diagnosing UUT-UCC are reader
error and false-positive diagnoses. Solutions to the problems will be proposed.
Use of a formative teaching programme with the aim of reducing reader error will
be put forward. A radiologically guided method for upper tract lesion biopsy will be
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S52 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
pivot-shift, dashboard, hyperextension, clip injuries and patellar dislocation were
recognised, which correlate with ligamentous lesions. Similar correlations can
be found in ankles and shoulders. In cases of bone contusion, BME significantly
decreases in 12 weeks and resolution pattern is centripetal. If clinical symptoms
persist, unresolved BME can indicate more serious osseous injuries including
subchondral fracture or osteochondral injury.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about BHE physiopathology in trauma scenarios: direct and indirect
mechanism.
2. To recognise BME as a footprint that allows other soft tissue injuries to be
ruled out.
3. To understand whether BME can be a valuable tool for followup.
Panel discussion:
Can we still use the term BME or should we be more specific? 09:44
08:30 - 10:00 Room E2
Foundation Course: More About Ultrasound
E 820b
Volumetric imaging: where are we, where are we
going to?
Moderator:
P. Mildenberger; Mainz/DE
A206 08:30
A. Volume imaging in obstetrics and gynaecology
C.B. Benson; Boston, MA/US (cbenson@partners.org)
The addition of 3D and 4D techniques to ultrasound in the area of obstetrical and
gynaecologic ultrasound has expanded the diagnostic capabilities of the modal
ity and has provided a means to improve scanning efficiency. For gynaecologic
images, 4D acquisitions of the uterus permit real-time visualisation of the coronal
plane of the uterus, a plane that cannot be imaged with conventional ultrasound.
This coronal plane is ideal for assessing the uterine shape and contour to diagnose
duplication anomalies, for presence and position of masses such as fibroids and
polyps, and for IUD placement. In obstetrical imaging, anomalies of the face and
extremities, including facial clefts, limb reduction defects, and abnormal posturing
of the hands and feet, are best visualised using 3D imaging with surface rendering.
Anomalies of the spine and extremities can be assessed with 3D imaging in skeletal
mode to provide an image similar to an x-ray, for evaluation of such abnormalities
as hemivertebrae and skeletal dysplasias. With respect to scan efficiency, 3D
sonography permits acquisition of a volume or several volumes of data in just a few
minutes. After the patient has left, these volumes can be rendered into sectional
planes for interpretation on the workstation, or they can be manipulated into the
usual scanning planes for measurements and diagnosis. Storing 3D volumes for
subsequent interpretation can diminish scanning time significantly with no loss of
diagnostic accuracy.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn how to optimise your 3D scan to best evaluate the foetal malforma
tions.
2. To learn the benefits of using 3D to evaluate the female pelvic organs.
3. To learn how to use volume scanning to dramatically reduce scan time and
improve your scanning efficiency by rescanning stored volumes of complete
foetal anatomy.
A207 09:00
B. Volume US: a plus or a new approach to body imaging
S.T. Elliott; Newcastle upon Tyne/UK
Volume (or 3D/4D) ultrasound has seen some significant new developments in
recent years. Once restricted mainly to surface rendering in obstetrics, new software
and manipulation tools, coupled with advances in transducer technology, are open
ing up applications in general imaging, such as abdominal and small parts. Users
are discovering that this is not just an additional way to image, but with innovative
thinking, volume acquisition ultrasound can change the way we practice or deliver
a service; often this is has the double benefit of greater efficiency and greater
accuracy. This presentation will review the latest volume ultrasound technology,
outline the basic concepts and techniques and provide evidence of how this can
change our approach to general imaging with ultrasound.
generative joints. BMLs in OA are understood as non-cystic subchondral areas of
ill-defined hyperintensity on T2w images and of hypointensity on T1w MR images.
BMLs are observed regularly in conjunction with adjacent cartilage alterations. As
the disease progresses, an increase in BML volume is seen in the same region
subchondrally in many patients, which is positively correlated with an increase
in cartilage loss and radiographic joint space narrowing. Subchondral cysts are
strongly associated with BMLs in the same subregion and develop within non-cystic
BMLs. BMLs fluctuate in size and the majority of subchondral BMLs may regress or
resolve completely. Fluctuation of joint pain is positively correlated with fluctuation
of BMLs in the same direction. Several validated semiquantitative and quantitative
methods exist to assess BMLs in a research setting. Histologic correlation studies
showed that the lesions consisted of a mixture of different tissue patterns with only
little oedema. Specific changes in bone mineralisation and remodelling in areas
of BMLs have further been reported. Differential diagnoses of OA-related BMLs
include traumatic bone contusions and fractures with or without disruption of the
articular surface. Osteonecrosis, inflammation, idiopathic BMLs, red marrow and
post-surgical alterations should also be considered.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the basic physiopathology of OA and its relation to BME.
2. To be informed about the distribution and natural history of BME in OA.
3. To understand the differential diagnosis and relevance of BME in staging OA
and as a marker of prognosis.
A204 08:58
B. BME and early inflammatory disease
A.J. Grainger; Leeds/UK (andrew.grainger@leedsth.nhs.uk)
Marrow oedema is identified as a feature of many forms of inflammatory and
mechanical arthritis, but has been most studied in inflammatory arthritides and
particularly in rheumatoid arthritis. It was first reported as a feature of RA as far
back as 1986. Studies have been undertaken both using human specimens and
specimens from animal models, which suggest that marrow oedema seen on MRI
in RA corresponds to areas of inflammation associated with invading pannus,
lymphocytic aggregates and hypervascularity. There is also evidence that the mar
row lesions seen on MRI in ankylosing spondylitis correspond to histopathological
inflammatory change. Marrow oedema has been shown to be an important predictor
of future joint damage in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. In addition to predicting
bone destruction for erosion, marrow oedema is independently predictive of joint
space loss and therefore cartilage destruction. It also correlates well with other
measures of disease activity. We have applied dynamic contrast enhancement
techniques to show that treatment with anti-TNF therapy brings about a reduction
in contrast uptake in areas of marrow oedema in patients with RA. In the seronega
tive arthritides, marrow oedema in the spine in ankylosing spondylitis has been
shown to be predictive of future changes and of response to treatment. Diffusion-
weighted imaging of marrow lesions in ankylosing spondylitis can also be used to
show a treatment response, seen as a change in the apparent diffusion coefficient.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the imaging pattern of seronegative and rheumatoid
arthritis distribution.
2. To understand the relationship between BME and early diagnosis of inflam
matory disease.
3. To understand whether BME helps in patient management, diagnosis and
followup.
A205 09:21
C. BME and trauma
S. Dzelzite, P. Likums; Riga/LV (dzelzitis@apollo.lv)
Most of the acute traumatic skeletal injuries are evaluated and treated on the basis
of plain radiographs. Increased use of magnetic resonance imaging in investigation
of acute musculoskeletal injuries during the last few years highlighted the value
of recognition of the different bone marrow oedema patterns for more precise
diagnosis of possible obscured soft tissue injuries. BME-like lesions in cases of
traumatic injuries presented as focal bone marrow changes with decreased signal
on T1W images and increased signal on T2W and STIR images; this appearance
is thought to represent areas of haemorrhage, oedema or infarction secondary to
trabecular microfractures. The osseous injuries may be the result of a direct blow or
of compressive forces of adjacent bones impacting on one another. These injuries
produce extensive BME. The indirect injury is the result of traction forces, which
displays as avulsion injuries with localised BME. Sanders and Hayes in two different
articles in "Radiographics" in the year 2000 identified distribution patterns of BME
with different soft tissue and ligamentous injuries in the knee. Subsequently, the
term "footprint" was introduced. In the knee, 5 different contusion patterns such as
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S53
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Saturday
ing, especially for assessing lung and liver metastases. Despite inherent low tissue
contrast, the excellent spatial resolution due to isotropic and multiplanar capacities
has nowadays also improved the accuracy for local staging, provided that watery
rectal enema is performed. Thanks to excellent tissue contrast, MRI has evolved
as a powerful tool for regional staging, in particular to distinguish between T2 and
T3 tumors and to assess the relationship of the tumour with the mesorectal fascia.
The prerequisites are data acquisition in high-resolution mode and adequate slice
positioning. However, perirectal desmoplastic reaction, inherent in rectal cancers,
may mimic tumour infiltration, thus overestimating the T-stage. This drawback does
not seem to change significantly with high-field MRI (3 T). For accurate lymph node
staging, neither EUS, neither CT, nor MRI has proven excellent accuracy. Thus,
alternative imaging modalities are steadily being evaluated, without any international
consensus so far. Furthermore, state-of-the-art requirements and advantages of
the most important recently developed imaging techniques, such as perfusion-CT,
diffusion-MRI and USPIO-enhanced MRI for lymph node staging, as well as the
indication for 18F-FDG PET/CT, will briefly be discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about optimised MR and CT techniques for rectal cancer staging.
2. To become familiar with the role of endorectal ultrasound in rectal cancer
staging.
3. To understand basic TMN staging and assessment of the CRM on imaging.
4. To become familiar with new methods for whole body staging, notably PET/
CT and whole body MRI.
A211 09:01
B. Assessing tumour response
S. Gourtsoyianni; Athens/GR (sgty76@gmail.com)
Patients identified at initial MRI staging as having locally advanced rectal cancer
undergo neoadjuvant chemoradiation therapy (CRT) for their tumour to be down
sized and downstaged, especially in low rectal cancers so that sphincter sparing
surgery may be performed. In 15-30% of patients, complete pathological response
is achieved. Reimaging with MRI at 6 weeks post-treatment is of great importance
for assessing tumour response. However, referral depends greatly on the strategy
that is to be followed by the surgeons in case of complete imaging response (no
deviation from initial surgical plan, "wait and see" policy). Conventional MRI has a
reported moderate accuracy for prediction of mesorectal fascia (MRF) involvement
after CRT therapy, mainly due to its inability to differentiate between fibrosis with/
without the presence of tumour cells. Morphological MR imaging criteria that cor
respond to free of disease/ involved MRF have been reported, as well as criteria
indicating disease being confined to the rectal wall (ypT0-T2). High-resolution MR
images combined with radiologists' rising level of familiarity regarding the assess
ment of reactive changes post-CRT have increased local staging accuracy of MRI,
including both T and N stage reporting. Introduction of imaging techniques such
as diffusion weighted imaging, especially when combined with morphological T2w
sequences and to a lesser degree PET/CT, for early and late tumour assessment
response have shown promising results, especially when quantitative analysis is
performed by means of post-CRT or % change of ADC values and SUV Response
Index measurements.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn the rationale for followup of patients after neoadjuvant chemoradia
tion.
2. To understand conventional imaging criteria for assessing tumour response.
3. To learn about new techniques for assessing response, including diffusion
MRI and PET.
A212 09:23
C. Changes in clinical treatment paradigms: the role of radiology
R.G.H. BeetsTan; Maastricht/NL (r.beets.tan@mumc.nl)
The increasing role of radiologists in the multidisciplinary management team of
patients with rectal cancer is recognised and the role of MR imaging for stratifying
these patients into a differentiated treatment is consolidated. Nowadays, with pr
eoperative chemoradiotherapy (CRT), advanced rectal cancer shows phenomenal
response with downstaging to small tumours (ypT0-2) confined to the wall. In 15-
20%, no residual tumour is found in the resection specimen (complete response,
ypT0N0). The paradigm shift in treatment has been further tailoring the treatment
for the good responders after CRT, aiming at organ saving treatment options with
less morbidity, such as local excision. Although still controversial, a wait-and-see
policy (omission of surgery under close monitoring) is being advocated for the
complete responders. This shift in treatment has consequences for radiologists.
Our major challenge will be to provide tools that can help in precise selection of
these patients. The challenge will not only be restricted to an accurate evaluation
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the basic concept and principles of volume acquisition US.
2. To learn how developments in transducer technology might change scanning
techniques.
3. To understand how volume US can improve accuracy and efficiency in a
general imaging department.
A208 09:30
C. Why volume imaging and fusion are important for diagnosis and
treatment
E. Leen; London/UK (edward.leen@imperial.ac.uk)
Fusion imaging is not new. However when combined with volume imaging and
navigation, it becomes a very strong tool broadening ultrasound as well as CT clini
cal applications for both diagnostic and interventional practices and in particular in
guiding therapy without or reduced ionising radiation. Currently available systems
have been shown to be useful in a) the US tracking of liver and renal lesions for
detection, characterisation of difficult/occult lesions and followup following therapy,
b) in the guidance of biopsy and ablation of occult liver or renal tumours as well as
c) a much needed training tool for interventional clinicians. A practical work-flow
through various fusion and navigation systems for the clinical applications as well
as their current benefits, limitations and future developments will be reviewed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the features of volume imaging, fusion and navigation.
2. To develop the protocol to set up the systems.
3. To learn indications and benefits of volume imaging and fusion for diagnosis
and treatment.
08:30 - 10:00 Room F1
GI Tract
RC 801
Rectal cancer imaging: the next phase
A209 08:30
Chairman's introduction
L.C.O. Blomqvist; Stockholm/SE (lennart.k.blomqvist@ki.se)
Preoperative staging of rectal cancer implies detailed recognition of tumour extent,
providing the basis for multidisciplinary team (MDT) treatment planning. The role
of diagnostic imaging continues to increase in this setting. There are technologi
cal advances in all imaging modalities, and treatment is based on a synthesis of
information in each patient. Diagnostic imaging discussed in MDT conferences
is recognised as a quality assurance parameter in rectal cancer, ensuring that
the available prognostic information is adequately used all the way to treatment
decision. The multidisciplinary approach also has continuous educational advan
tages. For radiologists, recognition and reporting of tumour relation to anatomical
structures such as the mesorectal fascia, the peritoneal reflection, the levators
and anal sphincters, as well as identification of extramural venous invasion, lymph
node involvement and evaluation of tumour response to neoadjuvant treatment,
are all important parts of this educational process. MDT-based imaging discus
sions continue to result in new surgical and oncological treatment strategies to
be considered both in randomised clinical trials or in single patients. Being able
to stratify patients into prognostic groups based on imaging may help to identify
not only those in whom neoadjuvant treatment is beneficial, but also those where
primary surgery can be performed without need for radio- or chemotherapy. In this
session, the present role of different imaging techniques for local and distant stag
ing of rectal cancer will be presented, including their advantages and limitations.
New treatment strategies and challenges based on assessment of response to
treatment will also be presented and discussed.
A210 08:36
A. Local and distant staging
S. Schmidt, J.Y. Meuwly, R. Meuli; Lausanne/CH (sabine.schmidt@chuv.ch)
Accurate local and distant staging of rectal cancer is crucial for ensuring successful
surgery, and also for correctly selecting patients with T3 rectal tumours, increasingly
treated by neoadjuvant chemoradiation. Nowadays, an integrated and multidiscipli
nary approach seems mandatory. Endoscopic rectal ultrasound (EUS) particularly
helps in the assessment of early tumours (T1), suitable for local transanal excision,
which are not detected by MRI or CT. CT remains the working horse for distant stag
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S54 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
scoring for coronary events, independent of risk factors. The predictive value of
coronary calcification outperforms other non-invasive measures of atherosclerosis.
Meta-analysis results show a very low risk of coronary events in case of a zero
calcium score, also in symptomatic patients depending on pre-test probability of
coronary artery disease. With the growing distribution of SPECT-CT and PET-CT
scanners, nuclear scanning is increasingly combined with calcium scoring in
patients suspected of coronary artery disease. In studies in symptomatic patients,
calcium scoring has been found to have additional diagnostic and prognostic value
compared with nuclear scanning alone. In recent years, scientific radiological and
cardiological societies have recommended calcium scoring in asymptomatic indi
viduals at intermediate risk of coronary heart disease. Calcium scoring can also
be considered in case of low-risk individuals with a strongly positive family history.
A potential role of calcium scoring in symptomatic individuals is matter of debate.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the basics of coronary calcium scoring.
2. To learn about the results of the most important clinical trials on prognostic
value of calcium scoring.
3. To know about the current indications of calcium scoring for prognosis assess
ment.
A215 08:58
Coronary CT angiography to predict future events
F. Cademartiri, E. Maffei; Monastier di Treviso/IT (filippocademartiri@gmail.com)
Coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA) using 64-detector rows or
greater has been recently introduced as a novel non-invasive anatomic method
for evaluation of CAD, demonstrating high diagnostic accuracy for detection and
exclusion of obstructive CAD. Several recent reports have also examined the prog
nostic value of CCTAfindings for prediction of future adverse CAD events, but have
been generally limited to single centres and by small patient cohorts. Further, prior
studies examining risk stratification by CCTAfindings have been primarily restricted
to measures of obstructive CAD by maximal luminal diameter stenosis severity on
a per-patient or per-vessel basis, with other plaque characteristics visualised by
CCTA, including location, distribution, extent, and composition and non-coronary
cardiac findings including left ventricular systolic function, volume, and regional
wall motion, largely neglected within development of prognostic models. Several
preliminary studies showed that CCTA has an incremental value over traditional
risk factors, coronary calcium score and other imaging tests for the prediction of
cardiovascular events. The interesting value of CCTAis also related to the capability
of stratification in the area of sub-clinical atherosclerosis and in the definition of
plaque type. With the implementation of low-dose CCTA the prognostic potential
of CCTA can be imagined as a reliable clinical information. At the moment there
is one large international multicentre registry that started to explore the predictive
potential of CCTA in large number of patients (> 20.000).
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the usefulness of coronary CTA in plaque characterisation.
2. To learn about evidence-based approach to using coronary CTA for prognosis
assessment.
3. To learn about current clinical recommendations to use coronary CTA for
prognosis assessment.
A216 09:21
MRI predictors in coronary artery disease
J. Bogaert; Leuven/BE (Jan.Bogaert@uz.kuleuven.ac.be)
Coronary artery disease (CAD) is the leading cause of morbidity and mortality
in the industrialised countries. In order to determine which patients are at risk to
develop sudden cardiac death or non-fatal future cardiac events (e.g. myocardial
infarction/ischaemia-related cardiac arrhythmias), traditional risk factors have
been established. These are helpful to triage patients in high/intermediate/low
risk groups. However, many patients in the high-risk group will never experience
a cardiac event, while patients in the other risk groups can be falsely reassured.
This has urged clinicians and scientists to assess novel prognostic factors better
predicting future cardiac events. MRI, amongst other techniques, seems promising
to improve prediction of patient prognosis. MRI is the reference technique to assess
cardiac volumes and function. It allows to reliably assess the impact of coronary
artery stenoses on myocardial perfusion and function in resting and stressed con
ditions, and this technique enables to noninvasively depict myocardial necrosis/
fibrosis and to fully characterise the jeopardised myocardium in the acute setting.
These applications are not only useful in the diagnosis but also to predict clinical
outcome and to assess patient prognosis as increasingly shown in literature. In this
presentation, the added value of MRI in the different CAD subgroups (stable CAD,
acute ischemic event, chronic ischemic cardiomyopathy) will be discussed in detail.
of the local tumour response, but also be extended to an accurate evaluation of
the nodal response. The objective of this lecture is to understand the increasingly
important role of radiologists for stratifying rectal cancer patients, not only before
but also after preoperative treatment. It will discuss the evidence for organ saving
new treatment options and how this evolution will influence our diagnostic decision-
making process. It will elucidate the (limited) role of present imaging and point
at potential future techniques (diffusion and perfusion MRI, lymph node-specific
contrast-enhanced MRI, PET/CT) for the precise selection of patients.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the prognostic signs in imaging that may refine treat
ment.
2. To understand the importance of local nodal staging in patient management
and review techniques to improve staging accuracy (3 Tesla, diffusion-weighted
MR, lymph node specific enhanced MRI).
3. To appreciate `wait and watch' treatment paradigms after neoadjuvant chemo
radiation and highlight the role of imaging.
4. To understand the current role of the radiologist in the context of multidisci
plinary assessment and correct treatment triage.
Panel discussion:
What will clinicians really expect from us in 2012? How should we
image our patients? 09:45
08:30 - 10:00 Room F2
Special Focus Session
SF 8b
Cardiac imaging: from diagnosis to prognosis
A213 08:30
Chairman's introduction
M.R. Rees; Gwynedd/UK (m.rees@bangor.ac.uk)
There have been very significant advances in cardiac imaging over the past decade.
These advances have changed clinical practice in many areas. Calcium scoring
has become a first line diagnostic investigation for patients with chest pain. The
National Institute of Clinical Excellence in the UK which has suggested that calcium
scoring replace treadmill exercise testing in patients with low risk of coronary dis
ease. For those patients with a positive calcium score the next line of investigation
is CT coronary angiography. A negative calcium score carries no further need for
chest pain investigation For patients with medium risk the first line of investigation
is stress MRI or Nuclear stress testing. These diagnostic protocols are bringing
cardiac radiology into the centre of cardiac patient management. Cardiac MRI is
now the fastest growing test for use in determining ventricular muscle viability prior
to revascularisation. A negative MRI stress test also carries a good prognosis. The
STICH trial which investigated patients undergoing surgical revascularisation with
poor left ventricular function was the first trial to demonstrate an improved mortality
in patients who had demonstrable viability. Societies concerned with cardiac MRI
have recommended that there needs to be a significant increase in the number
of cardiac MRI investigations performed for a broad range of indications. Train
ing of radiologists in cardiac imaging is a challenge. We will need to train much
larger number of radiologists in cardiac imaging to meet the demands of this fast
developing specialty.
Session Objectives:
1. To understand the importance of prognosis assessment in cardiovascular
diseases.
2. To learn about the widely used and most recent prognostic factors.
3. To review the role of imaging for prognosis assessment.
A214 08:35
Coronary calcium scoring: is it good for prognosis assessment?
R. Vliegenthart; Groningen/NL (r.vliegenthart@umcg.nl)
Identification of (a)symptomatic individuals at high risk of myocardial infarction is
important to optimise treatment and prevent a coronary event. However, optimal
patient selection remains a challenge, even after evaluation of cardiovascular risk
factors. The coronary calcium score, derived from newer CT generations (at least
16-MDCT), accurately reflects the amount of coronary atherosclerosis and can
improve cardiovascular risk assessment. In this presentation, results from recent
prospective population-based studies will be discussed, including the Heinz Nixdorf
Study, Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis and Rotterdam study. These asymp
tomatic, general populations consistently show strong predictive value of calcium
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S55
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Saturday
detector technology used: while clinical CT scanners use structured detectors with
a high dynamic range the flat detector technology uses unstructured scintillators
and the read-out electronics are limited in available space and only allow for a low
dynamic range. Recently, a promising technique that allows for 4D interventional
imaging was proposed. It provides complete tomographic volumes as a function
of time and thus may have the potential to replace the traditional radiographic
imaging. To acquire the complete 4D information at the same low-dose levels as
they are accepted in interventional CT today, a new mathematical framework called
compressed sensing is used for image reconstruction.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with interventional CT.
2. To understand the differences between clinical CT and c-arm CT.
3. To comprehend cone-beam image reconstruction.
A220 09:20
MR interventional techniques
J. De Wilde; Edinburgh/UK (janet_dewilde@btinternet.com)
Interventional MRI techniques incorporate a wide range of procedures including
image-guided biopsies, MR-guided thermal ablation and more complex surgical
procedures such as cardiovascular repairs. The talk will highlight applications
such as MRI guidance in breast biopsies which has increased following develop
ments in MR mammography coils and biopsy needles. Another application is
MRI Focused Ultrasound Surgery, where MRI is used to guide the deposition of
US energy to the target site and MR thermometry allows for the measurement
of energy deposition which results in accurate monitoring of the thermal ablation
process. MR-guided endovascular interventions are of increasing interest as MRI
can be used to guide stents and other device delivery. The use of MR imaging for
interventional procedures is attractive option as it does not use ionising radiation.
However, there are caveats as it uses the strong static magnetic field, transmitted
radiofrequency and time-varying gradients fields. These can affect instrumentation
including projectile attraction and/or twisting of tools to align with magnetic field and
operational interference. Hence the MRI interventional suite requires care and the
use of specialised non-magnetic instruments (e.g. Titanium tools). Interventional
MRI also requires staff to stay in the scanning room during imaging which presents
a range of safety issues that will be discussed. Access to the patient is also a
consideration; options include using an open bore scanner or having a surgical
suite where the patient can be moved on a sliding patient table between the MRI
scanner and another one for access.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the wide range MRI Interventional techniques.
2. To understand the clinical applications.
3. To understand the considerations, including patient and staff safety and patient
access, for using MRI as an interventional tool.
A221 09:40
US interventional techniques
L. Solbiati; Busto Arsizio/IT
In the last 30 years, imaging-guided percutaneous aspiration biopsies of non-
palpable targets, drainages of fluid collections and, more recently, thermal abla
tions with radiofrequency, microwaves, cryotherapy, laser, etc .. of either benign
or malignant tumors have extensively entered clinical practice. An essential
prerequisite for the correct use and the success of these procedures is the avail
ability of precise, reliable imaging techniques, for careful pre-procedure planning,
accurate intraprocedure targeting and elaborate post-procedure monitoring and
assessment of the results achieved. Ultrasound (US) is the most widely diffused
imaging technique for this purpose, as it allows for real-time visualisation of the
whole procedure, and does not require ionizing radiation. US guidance overcomes
some of the limitations of other imaging modalities such as computed tomography
(CT) or magnetic resonance (MRI), like limited or absent real-time capability, very
frequent need for the administration of contrast agents to visualize targets, use
of ionising radiation, high costs, etc.. . Yet, a significant number of body targets
are not sufficiently or at all visible at US, and can be visualised only with contrast
enhanced CT or MRI. In order to improve the visualisation of targets with US, to
increase precision and safety of US-guided procedures and to allow more accurate
monitoring and assessment of percutaneous, US-guided therapeutic interventions,
several technological innovations have been introduced into clinical practice in the
last years, like dedicated biopsy probes, ultrasound contrast agents (microbubbles)
and systems of real-time fusion of US and cross-sectional, static imaging modali
ties (CT, MRI and CT-PET).
Learning Objectives:
1. To know about prognostic factors evaluated with cardiac MRI.
2. To become familiar with the prognostic value of myocardial function, perfusion
and viability.
3. To learn about current clinical recommendations to use cardiac MRI for prog
nosis assessment.
Panel discussion:
Cardiac CT and MRI vs traditional prognostic predictors: what is the
evidence? 09:44
08:30 - 10:00 Room G/H
EFOMP Workshop
New technology in diagnostic radiology: frontiers in
interventional radiological imaging
EF 1
Advances in technology for interventional
radiology: general overview
Moderators:
R. Padovani; Udine/IT
P. Sharp; Aberdeen/UK
A217 08:30
Welcome address
L. Bonomo1
, P. Sharp2
; 1
Rome/IT, 2
Aberdeen/UK (lbonomo@rm.unicatt.it)
A218 08:40
Radiologist's point of view: physician required for the new technology
J.A. Reekers; Amsterdam/NL (jimreekers@xs4
all.nl)
Does improved technology lead to better outcome in vascular interventions? In
some cases it does, but most of the time we just have no idea and we all follow
the delusion of the day. Maybe the European notified bodies should start to handle
registration of new medical devices and implants in the same way as they do with
new drugs. This would be a great stimulus for good research, better patient care
and most likely a reduction in medical treatment related costs. More than 90% of
the new devices will never reach a more than a 3-4 level of evidence. Single arm
and single centre studies, often underpowered and with a dubious methodology,
presented at medical meetings or published in second class journals, that is
main stream in new technologies for vascular medical devices, and probably this
is also true for other specialities in medicine. Who are the main stakeholders in
this game? The patients, who will be treated with a device without any proof of
efficacy or superiority compared to standard treatment. The doctors who like new
technology (gadgets). The health care providers, who will have to pay for expensive
non-proven technology. The manufacturers who want a good return of investment
for their shareholders. The weakness of the current regulatory will be discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To comprehend how new device technology is introduced.
2. To understand the limitations of CE marking.
3. To become familiar with the limitations of the current European system to
introduce new medical devices and inplants.
A219 09:00
Rotational angiography and cone beam CT
M. Kachelrie; Heidelberg/DE (marc.kachelriess@dkfz.de)
Traditionally, interventional procedures, such as coronary interventions or ortho
pedic procedures, were guided using simple x-ray fluoroscopy, which delivers
two-dimensional radiographic images as a function of time. During the past decade
these c-arm systems became capable of acquiring tomographic information. This
so-called rotational angiography or interventional cone-beam CT has found rapid
application in the catheterisation laboratories and in the operating rooms. Today,
many interventional procedures rely on the tomographic information taken before,
during or after the intervention. While standard tomographic c-arm devices are
equipped with cost-efficient image intensifiers the high-end systems use the flat
detector technology, which is more compact and not prone to distortions. Compared
with clinical CT rotational angiography allows for a far better patient access, provides
images of higher spatial resolution, but suffers from the lack of low-contrast resolu
tion and from low temporal resolution. The main reason for these differences is the
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S56 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
or better: time-resolved MRA) is the current gold standard for non-invasive and
quantitative assessment for chronic PE. For aortic pathologies, CTA is the clinical
gold standard in the acute setting. MRA is becoming increasingly popular in the
followup setting and for the evaluation of chronic disease.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn more about recent improvements in CT angiography.
2. To be informed about the current clinical applications of CT angiography and
how to report them.
3. To become familiar with the role of CT angiography in comparison to MR
angiography.
A224 09:30
C. PET/CT
E.J.R. van Beek; Edinburgh/UK (edwinvanbeek@ed.ac.uk)
Multimodality imaging has taken flight, particularly with the introduction of PET-CT.
This presentation will demonstrate how to: optimise the viewing of these complex
studies, obtain quantifiable data, and incorporate the use of both modalities inde
pendently, and then use fused images to increase the diagnostic accuracy and
value of PET-CT reports.
Learning Objectives:
1. To review the basic principles of PET/CT using FDG.
2. To become familiar with the current role of PET/CT using FDG in oncology
and how to report.
3. To learn about the future role of PET/CT in oncology compared to whole body
MRI.
08:30 - 10:00 Room L/M
Vascular
RC 815
Vascular imaging in ischaemic stroke
Moderator:
J. Barkhausen; Lubeck/DE
A225 08:30
A. Extracranial and intracranial atherosclerotic disease of carotid arteries
C. Catalano; Rome/IT (Carlo.Catalano@uniroma1
.it)
During the presentation, technical aspects and clinical indications for all imaging
modalities will be reviewed. The development of imaging modalities now allows
scanning large body volumes in a very short time, necessary to obtain pure vascular
phases. In particular, scanning of the extracranial and intracranial carotid arteries
should be performed in less than 10 seconds, to avoid filling of jugular veins and
image degradation. Either with computed tomography or magnetic resonance,
such a short scanning is feasible, maintaining an excellent spatial resolution that
allows detection of even minimal parietal irregularities. By performing such exams,
it is possible not only to assess the patency of the vessels and demonstrate the
degree of stenosis or the presence of aneurysms, but also to evaluate the charac
teristics of atherosclerotic plaque, which is also important for treatment planning.
In this setting, magnetic resonance may provide some advantages over computed
tomography, either exploiting its high intrinsic contrast or by using intravascular
or high relaxivity contrast agents, which allow acquisition not only during the first
pass, but also in the steady state. In particular during the steady state, it is possible
to acquire high-resolution images with the result of increasing the detectability of
small parietal ulcerations and wall irregularities. Magnetic resonance is generally
preferred also when dynamic imaging is required, especially when malformations
and/or fistulas need to be evaluated.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn imaging signs of atherosclerotic disease of carotid arteries.
2. To learn about lesion morphology at the carotid bifurcation and intracranial
arteries.
3. To become familiar with appropriate imaging protocols for all imaging modali
ties and the pros and cons of each modality.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the large variety of interventional (diagnostic and thera
peutic) procedures that can be guided by sonography.
2. To learn the most updated ultrasound facilities for guiding interventional
manoeuvres.
3. To understand advantages and limitations of ultrasound as image modality to
guide interventional procedures.
08:30 - 10:00 Room I/K
Chest
RC 804
How I report
Moderator:
M. Escobar; Barcelona/ES
A222 08:30
A. Bedside chest radiography
E.E.J.G. Coche; Brussels/BE (emmanuel.coche@uclouvain.be)
Interpretation of bedside chest radiograph is particularly difficult, because only one
antero-posterior view is available in patients with severe illness and sub-optimal
breath-holding. The storage phosphore-based computed radiography system is
frequently used in this clinical setting and provides several advantages: for example,
compensation for variations in exposure and decreased radiation to the patient
with a better image quality. Technical requirements are important to know because
the bedside chest radiography has to be reported using optimal conditions: patient
upright or in a semi-erect position at deep inspiration with a target-to-film distance of
approximately 130 cm. In ICU, technical parameters are often limited with the patient
supine and a shorter focus-film distance. Consistency in technique and positioning
is critical for optimal evaluation of the patient on serial examinations, and technical
parameters have to be transmitted between technicians in order to reproduce the
same conditions. Careful plain film analysis begins with systematic control of the
technical quality, followed by a careful analysis of external devices, chest tubes and
catheters. Potential kinking and aberrant positions must be reported. Systematic
comparison between both lungs will help the radiologist to discover abnormal
findings. Repartition of air and fluid is different on bedside chest radiography and
knowledge of their appearance is essential. Differential diagnosis of radiological
patterns is often difficult and will be confronted with the clinical information. In many
situations, a side-by-side comparison between standard radiography and CT will
be performed to better understand the imaging findings, discover the main pitfalls
and help the radiologist for eventual reinterpretation.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the technical requirements of portable chest units.
2. To understand key imaging findings in different clinical settings.
3. To learn from side-by-side comparison of radiological patterns at bedside chest
radiography and CT.
4. To improve confidence by linking pattern recognition, interpretation and diag
nosis.
A223 09:00
B. CT angiography
J.E. Wildberger; Maastricht/NL (j.wildberger@mumc.nl)
Current multi-slice spiral computed tomography (MSCT) allows for a robust exami
nation of the entire chest with submillimeter collimated protocols in a single breath-
hold. This is the basis for dedicated analysis of the thoracic vasculature, especially
in an interactive setting, for instance using curved multiplanar reformats (cMPR).
CT angiography (CTA) is mainly used for clinical suspicion of acute pulmonary
embolism (PE), and for the assessment of acute and chronic aortic disease. With
ECG synchronisation of the data set, a complete assessment of the cardiothoracic
vasculature can be achieved, including the coronary arteries. Iodine mapping
(depicting the segmental defects in iodine distribution in locations corresponding
to embolic vessel occlusions) has become technically feasible in PE, e.g. using
dual energy acquisition protocols. This might further improve detection of emboli
and give insights into the effects on perfusion deficits in the adjacent lung paren
chyma. In addition, an overview on the current status on computer-aided diagnosis
software for the semi-automated assessment of PE will be provided. The current
role of the different techniques will be reflected based on the current guidelines on
diagnosis and management. At this moment, there is no dedicated role for MRA in
the assessment of acute PE. However, magnetic resonance angiography (MRA;
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S57
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Saturday
08:30 - 10:00 Room N/O
Interventional Radiology
RC 809
Percutaneous drainage for general radiologists
Moderator:
J.L. del Cura; Bilbao/ES
A228 08:30
A. Pleural drainage
A. Keeling; Dublin/IE (aoifekeeling@hotmail.com)
Empyema represents a common medical problem with a mortality of up to 20%.
Difficulty in differentiating empyema from simple pleural effusion with imaging
alone often occurs. Needle aspiration with or without formal chest drainage may be
necessary in many circumstances. Traditionally, large-bore chest drains (28-30 Fr)
with underwater seals achieved decompression of pleural fluid collections. Recent
literature suggests that small-bore drains may be adequate, with image guidance
playing an important role. Pleural space anatomy including fissural locations will
be revised. Aetiology of transudates, exudates and empyemas, along with typical
clinical presenting features are outlined. Various examples of plain film, ultrasound,
multi-detector computed tomography and MRI appearances of pleural collections
and their aetiologies are presented. Selection of patients, image guidance meth
ods, catheter size, insertion technique, pitfalls and procedure complications are
discussed. The importance of physician-radiologist liaison with respect to catheter
management and catheter dwell times is emphasised. Pleural space fluid collec
tions are common clinical entities that radiologists can accurately diagnose as well
as successfully treat. An overview of the aetiology, radiological appearances and
method of image-guided drainage of infected pleural fluid collections is provided.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be familiar with the indications for drainage.
2. To learn about the technical aspects of catheter drainage.
3. To appreciate the efficacy of drainage and the appropriate followup.
A229 09:00 
B. Abdominal abscess
T.G. Vrachliotis; Athens/GR (vrachliotis2
@yahoo.com)
Image-guided percutaneous abscess drainage is one of the most common inter
ventional procedures performed today. It can provide definitive treatment of most
collections in the chest, abdomen, pelvis and, selectively, other body parts, thus
obviating surgical exploration. The most critical step in performing percutaneous
abscess drainage is selection of the imaging modality and selecting the appropriate
access route. Uncorrectable coagulopathy and lack of a safe route for catheter
placement, most commonly due to interposed bowel loops, are contraindications
to the procedure. Local anaesthesia or light sedation is usually employed. Children
and uncooperative patients may need general anaesthesia. The shortest pathway
between the skin entry point and the abscess is usually chosen. Tandem-trocar
technique, Seldinger technique and direct trocar catheter placement are the most
common catheter insertion methods. The catheter sizes used range from 8 to 24
Fr and most have an inner retention mechanism. The drainage catheter is secured
to the skin after placement and the abscess is completely evacuated while the
patient is in the x-ray department. The catheter is then left to gravity drainage
connected to a collection bag. Occasionally, if catheter placement is not feasible,
needle aspiration may be safe and effective. The catheter is checked on a daily
basis and irrigated with 5-10 mL of normal saline to maintain patency. The success
rate of percutaneous abscess drainage can be as high as 90% when combined
with the appropriate antibiotic therapy. Major complications include bleeding and
hollow viscus perforation.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand imaging strategies and indications for drainage.
2. To learn about image guidance, route planning and catheter placement.
3. To appreciate the efficacy of drainage and the appropriate followup.
A230 09:30
C. Nephrostomy
R.H. Portugaller1
, K.A. Hausegger2
; 1
Graz/AT, 2
Klagenfurt/AT
(rupert.portugaller@medunigraz.at)
Percutaneous nephrostomy (PCN) is mostly performed to relieve the urinary tract
from benign or malignant obstructions, urinary leakage or fistulas, or to obtain ac
A226 09:00
B. Vertebrobasilar atherosclerotic arterial disease
L. Valvassori; Milan/IT
Intracranial atherosclerosis is a systemic and multifactorial disease, associated with
atherosclerosis of carotids, coronaries, aorta, renal and iliofemoral arteries. Over
one third of ischemic strokes occur in the posterior circulation, a leading cause of
which is atherosclerotic vertebrobasilar (VB) disease. Symptomatic VB disease
carries a high annual risk of recurrent stroke, averaging 10-15% per year, despite
medical therapy. VB stroke is particularly prone to devastating consequences due
to the eloquence of the regional brain tissue and is associated with high rates of
death and disability. More common in older age and in Western countries, without
differences of gender. CTA and/or MRA are excellent screening tool, but DSA is the
gold standard to show focal stenosis, luminal irregularities, thrombosis, occlusion,
arteries ectasia and elongation, serpentine aneurysms. Transient ischemic attack,
along with severe stenosis and progressive occlusion, are most common symptoms.
An important stroke mechanism in VB atherostenosis is regional hypoperfusion.
Furthermore, both embolic and flow processes can synergize to increase stroke
risk, reducing the wash-out of emboli from the distal circulation in hypoperfused
regions. Posterior circulation collateral channels may maintain adequate distal flow.
The existence and extent of these compensatory blood flow pathways, evaluated
by DSA, may influence the risk of stroke. Percutaneous angioplasty and stenting
for symptomatic atherosclerotic VB stenosis is a feasible and effective therapeutic
method, but good experience and full understanding of neurology and hemody
namics are required.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn the imaging signs of atherosclerotic disease of vertebral and basilar
arteries.
2. To learn about the epidemiology, symptomatology and the natural history of
the vertebrobasilar atherosclerotic disease.
3. To learn about classification of lesions and indication for treatment.
A227 09:30
C. Dissection and vasculitis of intracranial and extracranial arteries
H.R. Jager; London/UK
Dissection of the carotid and vertebral arteries are an important cause of stroke in
young and middle-aged adults. Carotid artery dissections occur most frequently
extracranially but 20% are primarily intracranial. Vertebral artery dissections occur
predominantly in the atlas loop (V3 segment). Intracranial carotid and vertebral
artery dissections can cause subarachnoid haemorrhage. MRA and CTA have
largely replaced catheter angiography for the diagnosis of dissections and associ
ated complications such as pseudo-aneurysms. Cross sectional MRI demonstrates
the vessel wall and intramural hematoma. MR and CT perfusion imaging are
useful to assess the hemodynamic effects of dissections. Cerebral vasculitis can
affect the large (proximal intracranial) vessels, medium-sized vessels (distal to the
MCA bifurcation) and small vessels < 300 m. Cerebral vasculitis can occur as
primary angiitis of the CNS, as complication of a systemic vasculitis (Takayashu's,
Poloyartitis nodosa), as secondary vasculitis in connective tissue disorders (SLE,
rheumatoid arthritis and Behcet's), infections (tuberculosis, aspergillosis, varicella,
HIV, borreliosis), and drug use (cocaine, heroin). CTA and MRA can demonstrate
involvement of large and medium sized vessels. Invasive cerebral angiography
has the best spatial resolution but carries a procedural risk and is still unable to
detect involvement of small vessels (< 300 m). The latter is diagnosed by the
effects on the brain parenchyma on MRI (infarcts, microhaemorrhages) and local
hypoperfusion on MR perfusion studies. Whilst MRI is highly sensitive to detect
changes in cerebral vasculitis, its specificity is relatively low and brain biopsy is
frequently required to make a definitive diagnosis of cerebral vasculitis.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn the imaging signs of dissection and different types of vasculitis.
2. To learn about lesion morphology and hemodynamic consequences of dis
section and vasculitis.
3. To learn about imaging protocols for detection of dissection and vasculitis.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S58 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
neuroimaging studies. Despite these advantages, operating at such field intensity
raises technical challenges. First, pulse sequence design and implementation
must take into account specific characteristics of MR physics at high-field strength
(increased T1 and decreased T2 relaxation times, increased chemical shift or B0-
and B1-related inhomogeneities). For this reason, merely transposing imaging
sequence protocols that are effective at lower fields is not sufficient, because there
are particular theoretical issues. Second, there are several artefacts and drawbacks
resulting from some of these physical events, such as magnetic susceptibility-
induced artefacts (resulting in signal misregistration and intravoxel dephasing),
compromised fat suppression (specially on air-tissue or air-bone interfaces) or
image B1-induced dielectric effects on abdominal imaging. Other types of artefacts
such as patient (in)voluntary motion, CSF pulsation, blood flow or Gibbs are also
present at lower-field strength; there are nevertheless variations that are more
misleading and appear frequently and in a more severe way at high-field strength.
By understanding the cause of such particularities, the radiographer should be able
to identify and deal with most of the high-field strength-related difficulties, despite
some hardware-related situations which cannot be dismissed. This presentation
will revise the physical explanation for most of the artefacts present in high-field
strength MRI, on both body and neuroimaging studies, as well as ways to avoid or
compensate for them without impairment of diagnostic quality.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be familiar with the artefacts of high field MRI in clinical applications (brain,
body).
2. To be able to suggest technical solutions to compensate for these disadvan
tages.
3. To understand the important role of the radiographer in making the most of
advanced MRI technology, even in challenging situations.
A233 09:30 
C. Reducing motion artefacts in foetal MRI: the contribution of the
radiographer
C. Malamateniou; London/UK (cm1
@ic.ac.uk)
MRI is a safe technique for imaging the foetus due to the lack of ionising radiation.
It is considered an adjunct to ultrasound for studying the foetal brain in vivo and
additionally offers improved soft tissue differentiation and increased field of view
compared to ultrasound. The use of MRI in this field of diagnosis is increasing
steadily following hardware and software advancements as well as clinical needs.
Perhaps, the single most important problem in foetal MRI after low signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) is foetal motion, which can induce severe motion artefacts and turn
images non-diagnostic. Foetal motion is unpredictable and it is currently one of the
most challenging areas for motion correction for image post-processing. However,
there are many different ways to compensate for foetal motion from a patient
preparation/ protocol planning point of view (sequence optimisation, scanning time
minimisation, motion-resistant MRI protocols) and the radiographer's knowledge
and contribution are essential to this end. This paper will review different motion
compensation techniques in foetal MRI from a radiographer's perspective.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the challenges and constraints of foetal MRI.
2. To recognise common motion artefacts associated with foetal MRI.
3. To be able to suggest remedial strategies to minimise motion artefacts in foetal
MRI scans.
08:30 - 10:00 Room Q
Paediatric
RC 812
Imaging the paediatric spine
Moderator:
E. Vazquez; Barcelona/ES
A234 08:30
A. Congenital malformations and neonatal spinal imaging
I. Gassner; Innsbruck/AT (ingmar@gassner.or.at)
The spine and spinal cord form a couple of structures. Abnormal development of
one structure is usually associated with the maldevelopment of the other. Spinal
dysraphism and caudal spinal anomalies are the most common congenital malfor
mations. Examination of the intraspinal contents is therefore performed predomi
nantly in the screening evaluation of neonates with suspected spinal dysraphism
(cutaneous lesion of the back, deformities of the spinal column, neurological
cess to the collecting system for manipulations such as stone disintegration and
removal. Ultrasound, fluoroscopy or, in complex cases, computed tomography (CT)
as well as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may serve to guide the procedure.
With the single stick technique, a renal calyx is punctured and probed directly
to introduce the drainage catheter over a stiff guidewire. Alternatively, the renal
pelvis can be opacified via a non-traumatic fine needle before definitive access is
achieved under fluoroscopy (double-stick method). For PCN, technical success
rates of approximately 98% were reported for obstructed collecting systems,
whereas the success declined to 85% in non-dilated tracts. Severe complications
such as septic shock and transfusion-demanding haemorrhage occur in 1.3% to
1.8% and 2% to 4%, respectively. In case of pyonephrosis, the rate of septic shock
can be as high as 7%. To prevent encrustation of the nephrostomy catheters,
outpatient catheter exchanges are usually scheduled at 8-week intervals. If the
urinary bladder function is preserved, antegrade double-j ureter-stent insertion via
the nephrostomy access may be reasonable. Then, every 3 months transvesical
stent exchange is recommended.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the current indications for nephrostomy.
2. To learn the various imaging modalities for guidance and basic techniques.
3. To appreciate the efficacy of the procedure and the appropriate followup.
08:30 - 10:00 Room P
Radiographers
RC 814
Challenges and solutions for radiographers in MRI:
high field and imaging under patient motion
Moderators:
L. Abernethy; Liverpool/UK
C. Malamateniou; London/UK
A231 08:30
A. Advantages of high field MRI: a radiographer's perspective
E. Lavdas; Athens/GR (lavdas@med.uth.gr)
High-field magnetic resonance (MR) imaging may provide better SNR compared
to low field. Many are excited about the opportunity not only to use the increased
SNR for clearer images, but also to exchange it for better resolution or faster scans.
The benefits of 3 T MR imaging in the depiction of CNS were initially established.
In addition, it has been recently noticed that also body and cardiac high-field
imaging combined with parallel imaging techniques decreases scan time exam
and resultant motion artefacts, resulting in higher image quality compared to low
field. Specifically, high-field MRI has increased susceptibility effect and prolonged
T1 relaxation time. The first improves the sensitivity to the presence of haemor
rhages and produces better perfusion and functional images, while the second
has been exploited to succeed superior time-of-flight MRA angiographies and
T1 contrast-enhanced imaging. Chemical fat suppression can be optimised due
to the processional frequency difference between fat protons and water protons,
which is double at 3.0 T compared to 1.5 T. Combined with the ability to increase
resolution, high-field MRI is superior in the depiction of breast, musculoskeletal,
adrenal, in mrcp and in spectacular. Recently, 3-dimensional contrast-enhanced
magnetic resonance venography in high-field MRI has been able to more clearly
visualize intracranial venous, vena cava and peripheral veins. MRI at high field
combined with phased array coil, modern sequences and techniques is promising
for the future and in the edge of technology. Therefore, every radiographer should
be familiar with it and apply it properly.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be able to identify human anatomical areas where the use of high field MRI
is advantageous compared to low field MRI.
2. To be able to identify human body and brain pathologies whose depiction is
facilitated by high field MRI compared to low field MRI.
3. To understand the important role of the radiographer in making the most of
advanced MRI technology.
A232 09:00 
B. Artefacts at high field MRI: clinical applications and technical solutions
S. Brandao; Porto/PT (sofia.brand@gmail.com)
The use of high-field magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is known to provide better
signal-to-noise ratio, spatial resolution and fat suppression efficacy, enabling in
creased quality on morphological images, as well as on spectroscopy and functional
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S59
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Saturday
urge for competing at the highest level leads to intensive training programmes in
young children and adolescents. The growing lumbar spine is an area of well-known
overuse-related injuries. Within the range of stress-induced bone marrow oedema-
like patterns of abnormality, the devastating end stage is a stress fracture of the
pars intervertebralis. The potential role of imaging, both in detecting as well as
prognosis, is discussed. Imaging strategy both in the acute as well as the overuse
type of injury will finalise the presentation.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand how best to investigate a child with suspected spinal trauma.
2. To appreciate the imaging findings.
3. To consolidate knowledge about the differences between the paediatric and
adult spinal trauma.
09:00 - 10:00 Room Z
The Beauty of Basic Knowledge: Interpretation of the Chest
Radiograph
MC 27C
Major vessels
A237 09:00
Major vessels
J. Caceres; Barcelona/ES (josecac@gmail.com)
Diseases of major thoracic vessels can be suspected in conventional chest radiog
raphy and confirmed by cross-sectional imaging with contrast enhancement. The
most common pathologies of the thoracic aorta are aneurysms and dissection.
Pulmonary arterial hypertension can be detected in the chest radiograph if one
is aware of its signs. It is important as well to detect pathology and abnormalities
of the thoracic venous system (Superior and inferior vena cava and the azygos-
hemiazygos system)
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn to recognise aortic pathology in the plain film.
2. To be able to evaluate pulmonary artery pathology.
3. To review alterations of the thoracic veins.
10:30 - 12:00 Room B
ESR meets Egypt
EM 3
Oncologic imaging and paleoradiology in Egypt: the
past, present and future
Presiding:
M. Abdel Wahab; Cairo/EG
L. Bonomo; Rome/IT
A238 10:30
Introduction
M. Abdel Wahab; Cairo/EG (mabdelwahab.mahmoud@yahoo.com)
The Egyptian Society of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine is invited to meet the
European Society of Radiology and to be given the opportunity to present some of
the main topics which are of special interest to our community. Egypt is the largest
country in the Middle East with a population exceeding 80 millions. Imhotep the
great Egyptian pharaoh is recognised as the founder of medicine and the world's
first doctor in 27th century BC (2655-2600 BC). The number of radiologists in Egypt
is approximately 3425, working in more than 565 public and university radiology
departments as well as 258 specialised private radiology centers. In this session we
have chosen to give an overview of imaging of the more frequent cancers in Egypt
namely urinary bladder, liver and breast. The place of imaging of bladder carcinoma
and its relation to schistosomiasis will be highlighted. The Egyptian experience in
interventional management of hepato-cellular carcinoma shall be presented. An
update of the Egyptian National Screening program for early detection of breast
cancer among Egyptian women will also be demonstrated. We have also thought
of Paleoradiology in imaging Egyptian mummies as an interesting topic with the
use of Multi Detector CT to unveil their secrets. Three short interludes, between
presentations, will tackle urinary diversion and ancient Egyptian medicine and
present Egypt's charm.
disturbances) and is important in the evaluation of syndromes with known risk for
spinal cord compression and of birth-related spinal cord injury. Sonography allows
detailed depiction of the spinal cord in newborns and young infants, because the
incompletely ossified posterior arches create an acoustic window that permits
transmission of the ultrasound beam. Ultrasonography with high-frequency trans
ducers can demonstrate the whole spectrum of intraspinal pathologic conditions
with the same diagnostic accuracy as MRI and should be the imaging modality of
choice for investigation of the spinal cord in newborns. Only in selected cases, MRI
reveals additional findings. The lecture demonstrates the examination technique,
normal findings and variants of spinal cord, reviews the open and closed spinal
dysraphisms (myelomeningocele, myelocele, lipomyelomeningocele, lipomyelocele,
myelocystocele, diastematomyelia, dermal sinus, caudal regression syndrome,
tight filum terminale, filar and intradural lipoma, persistent terminal ventricle) and
also shows acquired diseases of the spinal canal and cord (birth trauma, CSF fluid
leakage after lumbar puncture).
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the most common congenital malformations of the
spine.
2. To learn about the role of sonography, CT and MRI in the investigation.
3. To understand when additional imaging of the brain is necessary.
A235 09:00
B. Inflammation, infection and tumours: the role of imaging
M.I. Argyropoulou; Ioannina/GR (margyrop@cc.uoi.gr)
Intramedullary and intradural-extramedullary tumours are less common than in
tracranial tumours. Spinal cord enlargement and heterogeneous appearance with
solid and cystic components represent the main characteristics of intramedullary
tumours. Low grade astrocytomas (pilocytic) are the most common, followed by
gangliogliomas. Extensive involvement of the spinal cord is common. Holocord in
volvement and calcifications are most frequently seen in gangliogliomas. Paediatric
intramedullary ependymomas are almost never seen outside the context of NF2.
Metastatic disease due to CSF seeding of intracranial tumours (medulloblastomas)
represents the most common intradural-extramedullary tumours. Multiple intradural
neurinomas and meningiomas are found in NF2. Inflammatory demyelinating dis
orders my affect the cord and the spinal nerve roots in childhood. Guillain-Barre
syndrome is an autoimmune acute demyelinating poly-radiculoneuropathy char
acterised by either diffuse or ventral nerve root enhancement. Spinal cord lesions
in multiple sclerosis (MS) are mainly located dorsolaterally, extend over less than
two vertebral segments in length and affect less than half the cross-sectional area
of the cord. Spinal cord lesions in acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM)
extend over more than three vertebral segments in length and occupy more than
two-thirds of the cross-sectional area of the cord. Differences in brain and spinal
cord imaging findings are useful in the differential diagnosis between MS andADEM.
Spinal cord involvement similar to that found in ADEM may be found in idiopathic
acute transverse myelitis (ATM) and in neuromyelitis optica (NMO). Lack of brain
involvement in ATM and the presence of the NMO-specific IgG autoantibody are
useful in the differential diagnosis with ADEM.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the etiologies and the imaging findings of infectious, parainfec
tious and autoimmune disorders.
2. To appreciate the role of spinal MRI in the differential diagnosis of MS vs MS
mimics.
3. To become familiar with the imaging findings of primary and metastatic tumours.
4. To learn about the indications of whole spine MRI in presence of brain tumours.
A236 09:30
C. Imaging spinal trauma in childhood
M. Maas; Amsterdam/NL (m.maas@amc.uva.nl)
The presentation will focus on acute trauma in the cervical spine and more chronic,
sports-related overuse kind of trauma in the lumbar spine of paediatric patients.
Although it is thought that cervical spine injuries in paediatric patients following
acute trauma are extremely rare, the clearance of the paediatric cervical spine
on admission to the emergency room remains a challenge for both clinicians as
well as attending radiologists. For adults, the use of The National Emergency
X-Radiography Utilization Study (NEXUS) guidelines is validated and thus useful
in daily practice. The number of imaging cervical spine in adults, especially using
high-dose multi-detector computed tomography (MDCT) has increased rapidly. The
literature on the use of Nexus criteria and MDCT in the paediatric population will
be critically debated. In clearing C-spine, the mainstay is conventional radiography.
Guidelines for interpretation of these views will be given and examples of its use
are illustrated. Also, the imaging findings when using MDCT will be enhanced. The
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S60 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
A242 11:10
Interlude: Ancient Egyptian medicine
S. Hanna; Cairo/EG
A243 11:15
Interventional management of HCC: Egyptian experience
A. ElDorry; Cairo/EG (ahmed_eldorry@hotmail.com)
Barcelona clinic of liver cancer (BCLC) is one of several staging systems used for
Hepatocellular Carcinoma (HCC); it has been endorsed as the preferred system in
Europe and most of the Middle East countries including Egypt. This system groups
patients into six potential treatments: curative options for early disease (BCLC A:
resection, transplantation, ablation), palliative options for intermediate (BCLC B:
chemoembolisation) or advanced disease (BCLC C: Sorafenib) and supportive care
for end-stage disease (BCLC D). In Egypt living donor liver transplantation is still
replacing cadaveric transplantation. The socio-economic status and the shortage
of donors are major obstacles, resulting that only 75% of indicated cases. On the
other hand, Sorafenib is the only treatment for advanced stage HCC according to
BCLC; however, this drug is not economically feasible to most of our patients, where
only < 20% of cases in advanced stage could afford its expenses. Therefore, TACE
is performed for many patients in this stage and combined with only short course
of Sorafenib to antagonise the angiogenic effect of the vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) which increases in the immediate post TACE period. So in Egypt we
try to follow the BCLC staging system; however due to our special socioeconomic
status, we have to expand the role of interventional radiology to cover the shortage
in liver transplantation and the financial unfeasibility of Sorafenib.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the different interventional methods used for management of
HCC in Egypt.
2. To recognise the difference between the Egyptian and international protocols.
3. To compare Egyptian results with international results.
A244 11:30
Interlude: Discover Egypt's charm
S. Hanna; Cairo/EG
A245 11:35
Egyptian women's health outreach programme: yesterday, today and
tomorrow
D. Salem; Cairo/EG (dorriasalem@yahoo.com)
Egypt's MOHP has identified breast cancer as a priority health area and is deter
mined to improve awareness, services and outcomes. However, as Egyptians, we
need to ask as to why breast cancer should be a priority health area. The Egyptian
Women's National Council announced that breast cancer represents 33% of all
female cancers, with 10% of cases metastatic at presentation; average size at
presentation is 5 cm, and the average age of presentation is 10 years less than
that in the west. Consequently, launching of "WHOP" was announced in October
2007. It is governmentally funded offering free screening for breast cancer, dia
betes, hypertension and obesity for all women above 45 years. Double reading
Digital mammography interpretation is performed using a specially designed
BIRADS interpretation report. Positive cases are offered treatment free of charge.
Implementation of this project, with well-constructed policies and procedures is
sketched over a 5-year plan to reach all 27 Egyptian governorates through mobile
and fixed digital mammography units. To date we have served 17 governorates
and screened over 75,000 eligible ladies, out of whom 1545 were suspicious by
mammography, of which 383 cases were operated upon.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the basic requirements for implementation of a screening
programme for breast cancer in limited/medium resource countries using the
maximum available resources.
2. To learn how to make use of the available resources to achieve international
standards.
3. To identify the challenges and hear about solutions for them.
Panel discussion 11:50
Session Objectives:
1. To give an overview of imaging of the more frequent cancers in Egypt, namely,
breast, liver and urinary bladder.
2. To inform the audience about imaging of urinary diversion.
3. To describe the secrets of Royal Egyptian Mummies after MDCT.
4. To explain the Egyptian experience in management of HCC.
5. To present the outcome of national screening programme for breast cancer.
A239 10:35
Imaging of urinary bladder cancer
T. ElDiasty; Mansoura/EG (teldiasty@hotmail.com)
The urinary bladder is the most common site of cancer in the urinary tract. Squa
mous cell carcinoma (SCC) accounts for only 1% of bladder cancer in England and
around 5% in US. In an Egyptian series SCC represented 59% of 1026 cystectomy
specimens. Most of SCCs in Egypt are associated with Schistosomiasis. The
aim of imaging is to assess the extent of the local tumour and to detect tumour
spread to lymph nodes and other organs. Anatomical and functional information
to help in making therapeutic decisions can be obtained using different imaging
methods. The first treatment decision is whether the patient has a superficial or
muscle-invasive tumour. If it is superficial, patients should undergo MR imaging to
confirm lack of invasion prior to undergoing trans-urethral resection (TUR). Further
imaging modalities, such as CT, bone scan, PET and certain MRI techniques, are
reserved for patients with muscle-invasive bladder cancer. The second treatment
decision, based on staging, is to identify patients with organ-confined from patients
with non-organ confined cancer and in particular those with locally advanced or
metastatic disease. Computed tomography (CT) cannot differentiate accurately
between organ-confined and extravesical extension. The correlation between CT
findings and tumour extent in cystectomy specimens is 65-80%. MDCT urography is
helpful for monitoring patients undergoing neo-adjuvant chemotherapy or bladder-
sparing treatment modalities. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) cannot detect
microscopic extension into the perivesical fat. However, the overall accuracy of
MR staging remains better than CT by 10- 30%.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the relation between schistosomiasis and carcinoma of the
urinary bladder in Egyptian patients.
2. To learn the place of imaging in the detection of bladder cancer.
3. To describe the role of different imaging modalities in staging of bladder cancer.
A240 10:50
Interlude: Imaging of urinary diversion
S. Hanna; Cairo/EG
A241 10:55
MDCT of Royal Egyptian Mummies: secrets unveiled
A.S.M. Selim; Cairo/EG (ashraf.selim@cairoscan.com.eg)
Paleoradiology (paleo means ancient) involves the use of x-rays and advanced
medical imaging modalities to evaluate ancient human and animal skeletons as
well as biological materials from archaeological sites. Paleoradiological studies
have been performed on mummies, skeletal remains and fossils to determine their
sex and age at death as well as to detect ancient diseases. The great advantage
of the roentgenographic examination is that it allows examination of mummies
without either destroying or unwrapping them. Mummification is the preservation
of human bodies after death. It symbolises the fear ancient Egyptians had of death
and answers their belief and eager desire for immortality. The main principle was
to dry the bodies so that bacteria could not live on its tissues. The mummification
process secrets and technique will be presented. The Egyptian Supreme Council
of Antiquities has initiated a large ongoing project, started in 2005, for scanning all
the royal mummies that belong to the 18th and 19th dynasties. Among the great
Kings and Queens scanned are Tut Ankh Amun and his family, KV55 (presumed
Akhenaton), Amenhotep 3rd, Ramses 2nd and 3rd, Tuthmosis family, KV 60
(presumed Queen Hatchepsut), KV 35 (presumed Nefertiti) and many others. The
CT scanning of all these great pharaohs revealed intense amount of information
that helped to unveil their secrets. The most important of these discoveries will be
presented some of which for the first time.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about paleoradiology and its applications.
2. To learn about methods of mummy preservation.
3. To become familiar with normal CT of mummies.
4. To appreciate the important discoveries made about Royal Egyptian mummies
after MDCT scanning.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S61
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Saturday
10:30 - 12:00 Room E2
Foundation Course: More About Ultrasound
E 920b
Elastography and high frequency US
Moderator:
A.V. Zubarev; Moscow/RU
A248 10:30
A. Breast: when elastography adds to conventional US
G. Rizzatto; Gorizia/IT (grizzatto@libero.it)
Real-time elastography (RTE) of the breast may easily and quickly integrate conven
tional breast imaging. A mechanical force is applied to the tissue and sophisticated
algorithms are used to estimate the tissue stiffness. Qualitative scores are usually
derived from the estimate of the strain and help to differentiate soft benign lesions
from malignancies. These are usually stiffer due to the secretion of collagen and
fibronectin, and the surrounding oedema. Fluid lesions almost always show a
typical three-layered pattern. Strain scores may be integrated by semi-quantitative
data (fat-to-lesion ratio); unfortunately, cutoff values vary for different companies.
Dedicated RTE technologies as an alternative track the shear wave propagation
through tissues to obtain a true quantitative evaluation of the acoustic modulus and
promise to be the gold standard for the future applications. Clinical reports show
a high diagnostic accuracy: increased specificity for atypical carcinomas and a
very high specificity in benign lesions, including BI-RADS category 3 lesions. With
the best cutoff point between elasticity scores 3 and 4, the true negative predic
tive value is over 90%. In invasive carcinomas RTE clearly shows the peripheral
infiltration improving the volume measurement; 3D elastography and tomographic
imaging may help in this respect. RTE works better with small lesions, less than
10 mm in diameter. RTE is almost insensitive to breast thickness and echogenicity.
RTE scores are well reproducible. Indexes of intra-observer and inter-observer
agreement are very good. Still RTE score is only a complementary descriptor that
requires global experience in breast imaging and strict guidelines.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the basics: pathology, physics and technologies.
2. To get a comparison of the reported clinical results.
3. To become familiar with guidelines for daily clinical practice.
A249 11:00
B. US of the thyroid gland and the neck
S.M. Dudea; ClujNapoca/RO (dudea@clicknet.ro)
Ultrasonography is the widest accessible and most cost-effective means to assess
thyroid morphology and neck masses. Diffuse thyroid disease evaluation implies
not only thyroid volume measurement but also parenchymal echogenicity and
vascularisation assessment as this may offer clues to different types of hyperthy
roidism and thyroiditis. In thyroid nodule management, whether single or nodular
goiter, the main role of US is to point, for further fine needle aspiration biopsy
assessment, to suspicious nodules that might represent papillary carcinoma.
Sonographic criteria pointing to nodular malignancy are marked hypoechogenicity,
interrupted halo, irregular /invasive contour, punctate microcalcification or central
or interrupted annular macrocalcifications, taller than wide appearance, increased
central vascularisation and hypo / avascular rim and accelerated volume increase
on followup. Malignant lymphadenopathy and extrathyroid spread are late signs.
Evocative signs of benignity are also discussed. The current role of elastography
and contrast imaging is presented briefly. The peculiar appearance of rare thyroid
malignancies is presented. Clues on how to identify abnormal parathyroid glands
and differentiate them from thyroid nodules are pointed out. The most common
differentials of neck masses are illustrated: lymph nodes, branchial and thyroglossal
duct cysts, carotid body and salivary gland tumours and strap muscle haemato
mas. The lecture concludes with a brief overview on US-guided diagnostic and
therapeutic procedures in the neck.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about US anatomy and appearance of disease of the thyroid and
parathyroid glands.
2. To become familiar with the ultrasonographic differential diagnosis of neck
masses.
3. To appreciate the role of neck ultrasonography in the guidance of diagnostic/
therapeutic procedures and to learn about new ultrasonographic diagnostic
techniques.
10:30 - 12:00 Room C
Interactive Teaching Session
E 920a
Common radiological problems: incidental chest
lesions
A246 10:30
A. Solitary pulmonary nodule
E. Castaner; Sabadell/ES
Pulmonary nodules are spherical radiographic opacities (solid and subsolid) that
measure up to 30 mm in diameter. Extremely common in clinical practice, pulmonary
nodules, especially small ones under 1 cm in diameter, are a challenge to manage.
It is important to identify malignant nodules because they are potentially curable.
The first step in assessing a pulmonary nodule on a chest radiograph is to determine
that it is indeed a lung nodule rather than a pleural or chest wall abnormality. It is
essential to review images from previous examinations, because a solid nodule
that remains stable for at least 2 years is probably benign. Topics discussed in
this talk include the importance of nodule size, growth rate, margin morphology,
density (solid, ground-glass, part solid), calcifications or fatty components within
the nodules, the significance of cavitations or bubble-like densities, enhancement
patterns at dynamic contrast-enhanced CT, and findings on positron emission to
mography (PET). The talk also covers the current guidelines for the management
of incidentally detected nodules (solid and subsolid).
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn how to detect and characterise a pulmonary nodule.
2. To learn how to apply adequate protocols according to the clinical situation.
A247 11:15
B. Mediastinal mass
J. Vilar; Valencia/ES (vilarjlu@gmail.com)
The mediastinum is a region of the thorax that separates both lungs and com
municates with the neck and the abdomen. These two anatomic features are very
important to understand the behaviour of some diseases and their radiological
manifestations. Most asymptomatic mediastinal masses are benign, while clinical
symptoms may raise the possibility of a malignant lesion. Imaging plays a very
important role, especially CT and MRI. In the presence of a mediastinal mass we
must ask ourselves two questions: 1) where is the mass located? The classic
divisions of the mediastinum in compartments remain very useful, because it nar
rows the differential diagnosis. 2) Is the lesion cystic or solid? Pure mediastinal
cysts are benign and their characterisation depends on their location: Thymic cyst
(anterior mediastinum), bronchogenic and duplication cysts (middle mediastinum)
and menyngoceles (posterior mediastinum). Solid lesions may be benign or
malignant while some lesions may have a cystic component. Solid lesions of the
anterior mediastinum are usually thymomas, germ cell tumours or lymphomas. In
the middle mediastinum most masses are of lymphatic origin but we should also
include aortic or oesophageal pathology. Intrathoracic thyroid usually follows the
trachea and thus is situated in the upper-middle mediastinum although posterior
and anterior extensions may occur. In the posterior mediastinum most masses
are of neural origin. There are some locations that will typically indicate specific
diagnosis or a narrow differential. Such is the case of the cardiophrenic angle
masses, juxtadiaphragmatic lesions and thoracic inlet pathology.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn how to detect and characterise a mediastinal mass.
2. To learn how to apply adequate protocols according to the clinical situation.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S62 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
A252 10:50
Patient and staff radiation issues in angiography
E. Vano; Madrid/ES (eliseov@med.ucm.es)
Different medical specialties are using fluoroscopy-guided procedures due to many
clinical benefits. X-ray systems are becoming more complex and many imaging
protocols are available including rotational and cone beam CT. The potential of
high-radiation doses for patients and staff are the reasons to implement specific
radiation safety and quality assurance programs. Radiation quantities and units
used to describe the radiation risks for patients need to be understood by clini
cians and dose values considered as part of the optimisation strategies. Electronic
dosimeters to inform in real-time on the level of scatter dose may be used as part
of the occupational radiation protection program. Patient dose reports and the
future integration in DICOM standards will be presented together with the need
to promote automatic software tools to process all the dosimetric information and
to help in the optimisation of the clinical procedures including a clinical followup
programme for high-dose procedures. Strategies of radiation protection (RP) of
patients and staff will be addressed. The new ICRP recommendations on the use
of diagnostic reference levels for interventional procedures and the new suggested
annual limit for the equivalent dose to the lens of the eye of 20 mSv for occupational
exposure need to be implemented in the angiography and interventional radiology
units. Practical recommendations for RP of patients and staff will be summarised
together with the international recommendations and standards, dealing with in
terventional radiology, including the need of a dedicated training and certification
in RP for professionals using these techniques.
Learning Objectives:
1. To comprehend the complexity of the modern interventional x-ray systems,
the many imaging protocols and the involved radiation doses.
2. To understand the need to include the radiation protection aspects as part of
the quality assurance program.
3. To become familiar with patient and staff doses management in angiography.
A253 11:10
Panel discussion with angiographic equipment manufacturers
L. Desponds1
, B. Hoornaert2
, M. Lendl3
; 1
Buc/FR, 2
Eindhoven/NL, 3
Ottensoos/DE
1. Exposure management and features: dose reduction and image quality. What
are the future trends?
2. Acceptance testing: protocols, tools, requirements and regulations; what is the
cooperation between manufactures and users? Role of the physicist and clinical.
3. Image integration and registration (angio, cone-beam CT, CT, MRI, SPECT,
PET): the relationship between dose, image quality for the future.
4. Role of robotics and image guidance, robotics/integration multi-modality.
5. Alternatives to x-ray interventional techniques.
6. What will an interventional room look like in 2020?
Final discussion 11:55
10:30 - 12:00 Room N/O
Standards and Audit Session
The future of radiological reporting: by whom,
where, and how will it be done?
Moderator:
E.J. Adam; London/UK
A254 10:30
Structured reporting: the benefits of uniformity of reporting world-wide
C.E. Kahn; Milwaukee, WI/US (kahn@mcw.edu)
Structured reporting uses standardised language and predefined formats to create
clinical radiology reports. In this presentation, we will define structured reporting,
describe its advantages and disadvantages and identify the motivations for its
adoption. This session will discuss how structured reporting can make it easier to
retrieve reported information, evaluate the appropriateness of imaging procedures
and aggregate data across healthcare enterprises. Structured reporting can support
radiology quality improvement, research, and education, and has the potential to
improve the quality of communication between radiologists and their referring col
leagues. The use of standardised terminologies, such as RadLex(R) and SNOMED
Clinical Terms(R), allows interoperability across a variety of languages and informa
tion systems. We will explore how structured reporting might advance the quality
and effectiveness of radiology worldwide.
A250 11:30
C. US in musculoskeletal diseases
S. Bianchi; Geneva/CH (stefanobianchi@bluewin.ch)
Ultrasound (US) has gained widespread acceptance as an accurate, dynamic, non
invasive and inexpensive modality to assess joints, tendons, muscles, nerves and
vessels of the extremities. The couple US-standard radiographs, obtained after
a good clinical examination, allow a correct diagnosis in most patients and orient
towards more expensive imaging technique in the remaining patients. In this lecture
we will recall the fundamental practical rules of musculoskeletal US examination.
Then we will present the basic normal and pathologic US appearance and the role
of US in the clinical workup of the main disorders of the musculoskeletal system.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn the fundamental practical rules of high frequency US examination of
the joints, muscles, tendons and nerves.
2. To become familiar with the basic normal and pathologic US appearance of
the musculoskeletal structures.
3. To appreciate the role of high-resolution US in the clinical workup of the main
disorders of the musculoskeletal system.
10:30 - 12:00 Room G/H
EFOMP Workshop
New technology in diagnostic radiology: frontiers in
interventional radiological imaging
EF 2
Advances in technology for interventional
radiology: technology assessment
Moderators:
A. Torresin; Milan/IT
W.J.M. van der Putten; Galway/IE
A251 10:30
Angiographic equipment performance assessment
A. Trianni1
, P.E. Colombo2
; 1
Udine/IT, 2
Milan/IT
(trianni.annalisa@aoud.sanita.fvg.it)
In the last years great changes occurred in the technology of X-Ray angiographic
systems: in particular the development of the new Flat Panel Detectors (FD) as
dynamic detectors in replacement of Image Intensifiers (II). In the literature many
studies have been conducted to evaluate the FD technology and compare it with
the old one, but the results are often contradictory and no clear conclusion has
been established yet. Indeed, the complexity of today angiographic systems is
posing new questions in the assessment of imaging performances. On one hand,
it is difficult to monitor all the acquisition and image processing parameters, since
the protocols depend on manufacturer's optimization and customer's requests.
On the other hand, it's difficult to assess the performances of each individual
component (X-ray generation, exposure control with automatically added filtra
tion, image detector and image post-processing) due to their inter-dependency
in the overall system design. Moreover, the quality metrics typically used in the
characterization of digital detector, like MTF, NPS and DQE, do not reflect the final
image quality perceived by the physicians during clinical procedures and might
not be good indicators of the performances of systems. Different methods, based
on contrast-to-noise ratio and various figures of merit, have been developed to
evaluate the dosimetric characteristics and image quality performances. But rarely
these measurements have been correlated with subjective evaluation of clinical
images. When done, the comparisons between test object and clinical image quality
on different systems demonstrated that the test objects currently used have some
limitations in simulating the clinical imaging tasks. New test objects more close to
the clinical situation should be investigated.
Learning Objectives:
1. To review methods in use for angiographic equipment performance assess
ment.
2. To understand the critical issues of image evaluation.
3. To underline the importance of a clinical oriented.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S63
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Saturday
12:30 - 13:00 Room A
Plenary Session
HL 2
Antonio Chiesa Honorary Lecture
Presiding:
L. Bonomo; Rome/IT
A257 12:15
Small is beautiful! The voyage of head and neck imaging into the future
R. Maroldi; Brescia/IT (maroldi@med.unibs.it)
In the head and neck, a great number of anatomical structures and functions are
concentrated within a very confined area. Some of these structures allow us to
explore the surrounding environment through "senses" like sight, hearing, smell
and taste. Others, as the larynx and pharynx, perfectly organise and coordinate
breathing and swallowing. Also, the combination of voice and hearing permits a
sophisticated interaction with the other humans. Surprisingly, all these functions
are provided by miniaturised structures. Hence, miniaturisation is the least com
mon denominator of the head and neck field. To image these structures and to
identify subtle abnormalities requires the combination of two main factors. The first
is the availability of high spatial and high-contrast resolution imaging techniques.
Today, "high" goes beyond MSCT, high field MR, CBCT and PET-CT, getting to
high-resolution hybrid imaging like MR-PET. The second factor is an adequate
knowledge of anatomy, functions and physiopathology. In fact, if not properly trained,
the radiologist might not be able either to correctly perform the examination - though
using advanced imaging equipment - or to detect key findings for diagnosis and
treatment planning. So far, parallel to technical progress, a whole community of
radiologists has been walking, sharing a true enthusiasm for the fascinating depths
of the head and neck imaging field, like small - very small indeed - structures
and complex lesions. And today, the real challenge is to transmit and share this
interest, enticing those young radiologists willing to voyage into the future of this
wonderful "inner space".
Learning Objectives:
1. To appreciate the appealing world of analyzing those small structures that are
critical for great human functions.
2. To learn about the below-100 micron imaging techniques in temporal bone
and facial lesions.
3. To learn about the micro-structural and neo-angiogenesis imaging of head
and neck malignant neoplasms (DWI, IVIM, DCE-CT and DCE-MR).
4. To understand the impact on clinical decision-making made possible by current
imaging ultimate technology advances like MR-PET.
12:30 - 13:30 Room Z
Molecular Imaging
MC 23C
Imaging tumour biology and microenvironment
Moderator:
A.E. Sundin; Stockholm/SE
A258 12:30
A. Modulation of the tumour microenvironment to optimise the
response to therapies
B. Gallez; Brussels/BE (bernard.gallez@uclouvain.be)
The tumour microenvironment plays a major role in determining tumour response to
radiation therapy or chemotherapy.As a key factor, tumour hypoxia is considered to
be a therapeutic problem, as it makes solid tumours resistant to ionising radiation
and some forms of chemotherapy. Overall, it has been shown that modification of
tumour hypoxia significantly improved the effect of radiotherapy for the outcome
of loco-regional control and with an associated significant overall survival benefit.
Therefore, the predictive value of imaging markers of response to treatment is of
crucial importance in the management of cancer patients in order to improve the
therapeutic index by allowing better individualisation of treatment. In parallel, innova
tive therapies able to modulate the microenvironment such as flow and oxygenation
are currently being developed in order to improve treatment outcome. In this lecture,
we will discuss how it is possible to get parametric oxygen images from tumours or
surrogate imaging markers of tumour hypoxia (MRI and PET). We will also discuss
Learning Objectives:
1. To define structured reporting and its role in radiology.
2. To become familiar with current efforts for structured reporting of imaging
procedures.
3. To identify how report consistency will promote the quality of radiology services.
A255 11:00
Teleradiology: more disadvantages than advantages
R. FitzGerald; Wolverhampton/UK (richardfitzgerald@nhs.net)
Teleradiology benefits many patients: those caring for them, and healthcare
systems. Many radiologists choose to practice/use teleradiology and derive
substantial economic and/or work-life benefits. Large-scale teleradiology is less
than 10 years old and we have yet to see the full extent of its negative, often
unintended, consequences. Commoditisation of radiology by teleradiology, and
increasing pressure on healthcare budgets in this age of austerity may lead to
hospital departments losing contracts for less complex reporting, the funding from
which is needed to cross-subsidise complex imaging. Local departments may have
to curtail services and cut staff. The cut-throat marketplace of radiology reporting
facilitated by teleradiology may encourage faster reporting and may discourage
comparison with relevant previous imaging and reports, interrogation of electronic
patient records, direct discussion with clinicians and service development. This
could have adverse consequences for patients. We have yet to see the long-term
occupational health and accuracy implications of call centre productivity applied to
teleradiology reporting by companies having to secure contracts with ever tighter
margins. Radiologists` pay, pensionability, tenure and working conditions could
be at risk. Medical regulation of teleradiologists is patchy and this poses risks to
patients. Legislative regulatory solutions and their implementation are years away,
despite lobbying since 2004.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the risks to hospital radiology services and their staff from
teleradiology companies securing reporting contracts.
2. To explore the possible long term occupational health and reporting accuracy
implications in the ever more competitive commoditised radiology reporting
market.
3. To discuss the potential implications for patients from current inadequate
medical regulation of teleradiologists.
A256 11:30
Teleradiology: more advantages than disadvantages
L. Donoso; Barcelona/ES (ldonoso@clinic.ub.es)
Teleradiology services, initially limited to consultations between smaller hospitals
and tertiary care centres for second opinions and patient transfer, have developed
substantially to include international reporting services. Although teleradiology
confers many advantages in many circumstances, it also has a number of in
herent limitations regarding the proper provision of imaging services and may
therefore increase risks for the patient. Teleradiology involves much more than
just technology. It is also important to optimize the workflow and communication
among radiologists and other medical specialists. It is time we were aware that
teleradiology procedures constitute medical acts with implications that go beyond
mere reporting. Teleradiology requires a technological infrastructure adapted to
distributed environments enabling collaborative networks to improve the efficiency
of radiology procedures and radiologists' work/life balance. This presentation will
highlight the advantages of using teleradiology and key parts of the guidelines
developed for the benefit of patient care.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with different scenarios where teleradiology can be used.
2. To anticipate the changes telemedicine will bring to radiology departments.
3. To appreciate how creating collaborative networks can improve the efficiency
of radiology procedures and improve radiologists' work/life balance.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S64 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
16:00 - 17:30 Room A
State of the Art Symposium
SA 11
Polytrauma in the golden hour: the key role of
emergency radiologists in the ED when time makes
the difference
A261 16:00
Chairman's introduction
U. Linsenmaier; Munich/DE (ulrich.linsenmaier@med.unimuenchen.de)
Emergency radiology is one of the fastest growing fields in modern radiology and
the delivery of advanced radiological diagnosis and interventional procedures for
patients after polytrauma in a 24-hour x 7-day setting remains a very challenging
task. Presently, many emergency departments rely much on height quality radio
logical diagnosis; an exponential increase in the use of MDCT could be observed
in recent years with an impressive annual growth rate of 15-20% and a doubling
time of only 4.7 years in many emergency departments. Trauma remains the lead
ing cause of death in people below the age of 45 years. Radiology became a key
player in the trauma teams worldwide and is today an integrated part of emergency
medicine services. Emergency radiology developed into a new subspecialty in
modern radiology and only recently a European Society of Emergency Radiology
(ESER) was founded. This state-of-the-art session summarises today's high-end
use of diagnostic imaging and radiological interventional therapy, as well as all
major aspects of patient handling after polytrauma. It is challenging to keep up
with technological developments and advanced use of imaging techniques and to
provide a well-trained staff for these critically injured patients.
Session Objectives:
1. To understand the key role of emergency radiologists in the management of
patients with polytrauma.
2. To become familiar with current state-of-the-art emergency radiology services
and future trends.
3. To learn about state-of-the-art logistics and the interdisciplinary approach of
modern polytrauma patient care.
A262 16:05
Ultrasound: why, when, how and by whom?
P.A. Poletti; Geneva/CH (pierrealexandre.poletti@hcuge.ch)
The term FAST (Focused Assessment with Sonography for Trauma) refers to
real-time sonographic scanning of four regions for depiction of intra-peritoneal
blood, which is generally performed at patient's admission. This method of exami
nation, which does not include direct visualisation of parenchymal injuries, gives
an immediate overview about a possible major intra-abdominal injury, especially in
haemodynamically unstable patients who may require immediate treatment. The
value of FAST in haemodynamically stable patients is more controversial since free
intra (or retro-) peritoneal fluid is not always found in patients with blunt abdominal
organ injuries, including potentially life-threatening injuries. Besides, the adequate
training schedule of FAST operators (radiologist or non-radiologists) is subject to
controversy; there is no consensus with regard to the number of examinations
an operator performs under supervision before being entitled to perform a FAST
examination alone. In spite of the fact that ultrasound achieves a poor sensitiv
ity (40 to 55%) for the direct depiction of parenchymal injuries, a full abdominal
sonographic examination, including solid organ analysis, may be useful for the
triage of patients towards CT or clinical observation, when time constraint is not
a major issue and CT not immediately available. Contrast-enhanced sonography
can be useful to improve the detection of solid organ lesions and for the detection
of vascular injuries, such as delayed splenic pseudoaneurysms.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the current use of ultrasound (US) in providing optimal manage
ment in patients with polytrauma.
2. To learn about where, when and by whom US should be performed.
3. To become familiar with US and CEUS findings associated with blunt trauma.
4. To become familiar with the limitations and pitfalls of ultrasound in assessment
of blunt traumatic injuries.
how the delineation of hypoxic target volumes within solid tumours could be used
to optimise the treatment efficacy either by delivering optimal radiation doses into
the resistant areas (dose painting) or by delivering an associated treatment for
potentiating the efficacy of radiation treatments (by alleviation of tumour hypoxia).
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with key factors of tumour haemodynamics determining
treatment response.
2. To understand how molecular imaging is able to monitor changes in tumour
microenvironment.
3. To learn how molecular imaging can help in individualising treatment and
optimising treatment response.
A259 12:50 
B. Molecular imaging of angiogenic characteristics of tumours
A.R. Padhani; Northwood/UK (anwar.padhani@stricklandscanner.org.uk)
Imaging of angiogenic characteristics of tumours in the clinic can be with and without
the administration of exogenous contrast agents. Modalities include perfusion CT,
microbubble US, dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI (DCE-MRI), blood oxygenation
level-dependent (BOLD), dynamic susceptibility contrast (DSC)-enhanced and
diffusion-weighted MRI. It is important to understand the biological basis for observa
tions, validation, limitations as well as the applicability of each of these techniques.
DCE-MRI and perfusion CT will be discussed in more detail including the need to
examine suitable lesions and to adopt robust data acquisition protocols that are
able to deal effectively with physiological motions. Kinetic parameter measures
must be clinically meaningful and if possible closely linked to underlying physi
ological processes. Measurement error and causes of variability should be known.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the biological basis, methods of data acquisition and
analysis techniques for perfusion MRI methods used clinically.
2. To learn about strategies to deal with respiratory motion, importance of arterial
input function and heterogeneity.
3. To appreciate the clinical roles of perfusion imaging.
A260 13:10
C. Targets for tumour characterisation and treatment response
F.A. Gallagher; Cambridge/UK (ferdia.gallagher@doctors.org.uk)
Imaging targets for tumour characterisation range from simple size measurements
of the tumour to more specific imaging biomarkers on functional, cellular, meta
bolic and molecular levels. The biodistribution of these specific biomarkers should
complement the morphological information acquired using traditional techniques.
This lecture will discuss current and emerging imaging techniques for tumour
characterisation: (1) Functional measures of tumour blood flow and vascular per
meability can be made using MRI, CT and ultrasound. (2) Cellular imaging targets
include measurements of water and fat content using MRI. Diffusion-weighted
imaging can be used to estimate tumour cellularity, which may decrease follow
ing successful chemotherapy or radiotherapy. Emerging techniques allow tumour
necrosis to be specifically probed. (3) Changes in the extracellular space can be
used to characterise tumours; for example the majority of tumours are acidic when
compared with the surrounding normal tissue and recent advances in PET and
MRI have been used to detect tumour pH. (4) On the molecular level, cell surface
expression of proteins and enzyme activity within the cell have been exploited as
imaging biomarkers. PET- and MRI-labelled probes have been developed which
can bind to these proteins or mimic endogenous tumour metabolites; for example,
fluorodeoxyglucose is a PET-labelled analogue of glucose that is widely used in
oncological imaging. In the future, functional and molecular imaging techniques will
be used in conjunction with anatomical imaging methods to aid cancer diagnosis,
as well as to detect early response to chemotherapy and radiotherapy.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the major imaging targets that are used to characterise
tumours.
2. To understand how these targets may be used to predict tumour outcome and
determine appropriate therapy.
3. To be informed about the use of imaging biomarkers in early treatment response
monitoring.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S65
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Saturday
16:00 - 17:30 Room B
Interactive Teaching Session
E 1120
Malignant pancreatic tumours
A265 16:00
A. Solid tumours
W. Schima; Vienna/AT (Wolfgang.Schima@khgh.at)
The most common pancreatic malignancy is ductal adenocarcinoma, with
neuroendocrine tumours (NET), lymphoma and metastases being important dif
ferential diagnoses. Non-neoplastic pitfalls include focal pancreatitis and focal
fatty infiltration. Multi-phasic hydro-MDCT is very effective in detection of hypoat
tenuating adenocarcinoma, with a sensitivity of up to 90%. In 5-11% of patients,
isoattenuating cancers will only show indirect tumour signs (duct dilatation, contour
deformity, or mass effect). MRI is a problem-solving tool in equivocal CT to depict
small cancers. Best pulse sequences for tumour detection are T1w 2D-GRE
fatsat, dynamic gadolinium-enhanced 3D-GRE fatsat and DWI. Important issues
in cancer staging are vascular involvement (celiac trunk, SMA, SMV, portal vein),
lymph nodes and liver metastases. 3D MDCT reformations (MIP, VRT, CPR) are
helpful to demonstrate vascular invasion, although minimal invasion may elapse
CT or MR imaging. NET tend to be hypervascular, which is best seen in the arterial
phase. RCC metastases to the pancreas are not uncommon. They are typically
hypervascular, mimicking NET at imaging. The most important non-neoplastic
solid mass is focal pancreatitis. The duct-penetrating sign at MRCP helps to dif
ferentiate focal inflammation from cancer, although multimodality imaging including
biopsy is often required to make a definitive diagnosis. Focal steatosis or lipoma
is easily diagnosed by chemical shift imaging (T1w GRE in- and opposed-phase).
In conclusion, multi-phasic hydro-MDCT is excellent for pancreatic cancer detec
tion. 3D reformations are helpful for demonstration of vascular involvement during
staging. For differentiation between cancer and tumour-simulating disease (focal
pancreatitis, steatosis), MRI is complementary to MDCT.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be able to differentiate tumours from other non-tumoural pathology.
2. To know how to choose the proper imaging technology.
3. To learn how to determine extension and resectability of the tumour.
A266 16:45
B. Cystic tumours
G. Morana; Treviso/IT (gmorana@ulss.tv.it)
Cystic tumours of the pancreas are less frequent than solid lesions, and quite often
they are occasionally recognised, as many of these lesions are small and asympto
matic, but they may be associated with pancreatitis or have malignant potential. An
accurate differentiation between different cystic tumours is important because they
require a different treatment according to their histological type and differentiation,
but due to the frequent lack of specific clinical and laboratoristic signs, the overlap
of imaging findings between different cystic tumours and between non neoplastic
and neoplastic cistic lesions of the pancreas, the management of these patients is
complex, and knowledge of symptoms of the patients, natural history and predictors
of malignancy for pancreatic cysts are important. When dealing with pancreatic
cysts, the aim of the imaging is to differentiate cystic tumour from tumour-like lesions
and to characterise cystic tumour, distinguishing benign tumour, which usually does
not require surgical excision, from border-line or malignant ones, which must be
resected whenever possible. On the basis of imaging criteria alone, it can be very
difficult to differentiate non tumoural cystic lesions from neoplastic ones; in order
to achieve a correct diagnosis it is important to correlate the imaging findings with
the clinical history of the patient, the presence or absence of symptoms and their
type. US, CT and MRI are excellent tools which permit to accurately evaluate these
lesions, making thus possible their correct management.
Learning Objectives:
1. To know how to choose the proper imaging modality.
2. To be able to describe the criteria of malignancy and benignity.
3. To know how to followup lesions.
A263 16:28
Whole body MDCT for trauma: protocols and findings
M. Korner; Munich/DE (markus.koerner@med.unimuenchen.de)
Diagnosis of trauma-related injuries is a key task in modern radiology. Early,
thorough and accurate detection of potentially life-threatening injuries is crucial
for fast and targeted initiation of treatment. Conventional radiography (CR) and
ultrasound (US) are well established and still represent the basic diagnostic tools
for trauma imaging. However, a number of studies have shown a lower detection
rate of injuries for radiography and ultrasound compared with computed tomography
(CT). Multi-detector CT (MDCT) with its shorter scan time and increased accuracy
has become the gold standard for most indications in trauma imaging. As MDCT
has a higher radiation dose, its use should be restricted and carefully indicated
especially when dealing with a younger patient population. Careful optimisation
of imaging parameters has to be performed to minimise exposure and maximise
diagnostic safety. Modern MDCT examinations produce a large number of images,
which have to be limited to a reasonable number for interpretation. This review
article focuses on optimisation of examination protocols and on how to handle the
flood of images for viewing and archiving.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about protocols for whole body trauma MDCT.
2. To appreciate typical findings and pitfalls in major trauma CT.
3. To become familiar with image quality and lower patient dose.
A264 16:51
Interventional radiology as life-saving procedure
G. Carrafiello, F. Piacentino, F. Fontana, M. Mangini, A. Ierardi, C. Fugazzola;
Varese/IT (carrafiello@uninsubria.it)
Arterial haemorrhage in polytrauma remains the leading cause of death. The aim
of this presentation is to evaluate interventional radiology as a life-saving proce
dure. Contrast-enhanced CT has been reported to be an accurate technique for
identifying ongoing arterial haemorrhage in polytraumatised patients. TAE may be
a rapid, safe and effective technique for treatment of haemorrhage. To increase
the efficacy of the method and to reduce complications, the trend is to combine
several materials for embolisation. Several embolisation devices are available: a
fibrin sponge is used for temporary embolisation (PVA) and microspheres are com
monly used for permanent embolisation, whereas detachable balloons, glue, coils
and plugs are used for definitive embolisation. Stent grafting permits the exclusion
of bleeding and obtaining the patency of the vessel. Different types and sizes of
stent grafts are available. The success rate, expressed in terms of haemorrhage
control and reduction in transfusion requirement, for pelvic haemorrhage, liver,
kidney and spleen is high. Stent grafting has different rates of success related to
the injury site. TAE should be performed as early as possible, because effective
embolisation must be achieved before severe systemic coagulopathy and multiple
organ failure develop. CT allows locating and characterising the haemorrhages,
which will reduce the diagnosis time and, above all, improve the embolisation
procedures. These features make it very useful in this setting, where the clinical
course and prognosis are related to the achievement of haemodynamic stability.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about different embolisation techniques for different organs (proximal
and distal embolisation).
2. To become familiar with different types of embolisation materials.
3. To become familiar with the use of endovascular procedures in the manage
ment of patients with polytrauma.
4. To understand which injuries are interventionally accessible and when diag
nostic radiologists should consult interventional radiology.
Panel discussion:
Is the emergency radiologist the `captain of the ship' in the
management of major trauma? 17:14
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S66 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
A269 17:00
C. Interactive case discussion
A.H. Freeman; Cambridge/UK (a.h.freeman@talk21
.com)
The patient presenting with an abdominal mass represents a common clinical
problem. Clearly, the differential diagnosis is large and obviously will depend on
the age and sex of the patient as well as location of the mass. Of course history
and clinical examination are mandatory, but formal diagnosis will usually rest on
radiological interpretation. Contrast examinations have now been replaced by
cross-sectional imaging and endoscopy and it behoves the clinical radiologist to
be aware of the advantages and limitations of these methods in order to reach a
diagnosis. Particular difficulty may be encountered when the mass is so large that
it is difficult to determine the organ of origin. The purpose of this interactive case
discussion is to explore the relative merits of ultrasound, CT, MR and Endoscopy
in establishing a diagnosis in two different cases. The cases concerned are 1.
a 21-year-old man who presents with a right iliac fossa mass, but is otherwise
asymptomatic. 2. A 54-year-old woman who presents with anaemia and a large
upper abdominal mass.Active audience participation will be encouraged by means
of key pads in order to respond to issues raised during the debate.
Learning Objectives:
1. To review typical cases illustrating the role of imaging modalities in the dif
ferential diagnosis of palpable abdominal mass cases.
2. To get involved in the diagnostic process by the use of electronic voting pads.
3. To understand the conclusion that may be drawn on the basis of the discussed
cases.
16:00 - 17:30 Room D1
Emergencies in Neuroradiology
CC 1119
Subarachnoid haemorrhage (`the worst headache
ever')
Moderator:
P.H. Nakstad; Oslo/NO
A270 16:00
A. Diagnosis of subarachnoid haemorrhage (SAH)
M. Soderman; Stockholm/SE (michael.soderman@karolinska.se)
Clinical presentation: patients with spontaneous (SAH) most often present with
severe, so-called thunderclap headache. However, the clinical picture can vary from
mild headache to abrupt death. Rupture of an intracranial arterial aneurysm (AA) is
the most common source; other non-aneurysmatic causes may be perimesencepa
hic haemorrhage or SAH secondary to cerebral vasculitis.Arteriovenous malforma
tions (AVM) and dural arteriovenous fistulae (DAVF) may also present with SAH.
Diagnosis of SAH is typically by non contrast CT, less often by lumbar puncture or
MRI. Intracranial AA that has ruptured carries a 50% chance of re-rupture the first
year, with 20% mortality. The risk for re-bleeding from an AVM or DAVF is 5-10%.
Imaging strategies to detect aneurysms: The aim of the neuroradiological investi
gation is to identify AA or other causes for the SAH. CT and CT angiography are
effective in findingAAand excluding some pathologies, such as cerebral vasculitis.
The sensitivity of MRI or MRA is less well documented. An arterial dissection, a
microAVM or a DAVF may not be visible on CTAor MRI/MRA. Thus further investiga
tion with conventional catheter angiography is warranted in all cases where there
are doubts about the source of the bleeding and for further anatomical assessment.
Different forms of aneurysms: Berry aneurysms comprise the majori
ty of the AA, the rest being partially thrombosed AA or dissecting AA.
Screening: Non-invasive screening is with MRI/MRA or CT/CTA and may be war
ranted in patients with two relatives having suffered from aneurysmal SAH or a
family history of AA.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the clinical presentation and acute findings in SAH.
2. To be familiar with imaging strategies for detecting aneurysms: CT angiogra
phy? MR angiography? Catheter angiography?
3. To appreciate the different types of aneurysms.
4. To learn how to perform non-invasive screening for cerebral aneurysms.
16:00 - 17:30 Room C
CLICK (Clinical Lessons for Imaging Core Knowledge): Common
Clinical Cases
CC 1118
Palpable abdominal mass
Moderator:
C. Matos; Brussels/BE
A267 16:00
A. Clinical considerations
D. Akata; Ankara/TR (dakata@hacettepe.edu.tr)
Finding of a palpable mass in the abdomen always raises the possibility of an im
portant clinical problem.Apotentially life-threatening process, especially malignancy
is the major concern. The list of differential diagnosis of "abdominal mass" is a very
long one. In the process of differential diagnosis the most common approach is to
evaluate the patient according to the gender, age, patient history and coexisting
clinical and laboratory findings. The accompanying symptoms and signs and the
location of the abdominal mass are the key indicators in the clinician's way of think
ing in the process of differential diagnosis. For instance, a palpable mass with acute
abdomen or intestinal obstruction will be assessed differently than a mass found
incidentally. Imaging is commonly required to confirm or ascertain the diagnosis.
Cross-sectional imaging is required to accurately evaluate a palpable abdominal
mass in most situations. Ultrasound and computed tomography have each been
used successfully in evaluating patients with palpable abdominal mass. Although
each modality is appropriate in most situations, the advantages and disadvantages
of each modality in certain situations will be addressed and the appropriateness
criteria will be reviewed in this lecture. Knowledge of a detailed clinical history is as
important to the radiologist as to the clinician. Its impact on the diagnostic accuracy
in the interpretation of the images will also be addressed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn more about the clinical conditions that cause abdominal space-
occupying lesions.
2. To be informed about the clinician's way of thinking in the process of differential
diagnosis.
3. To become familiar with the potential role of imaging in the establishment of
the final diagnosis and planning of therapy.
A268 16:30
B. Imaging techniques and typical findings
M. Prokop; Nijmegen/NL (M.Prokop@rad.umcn.nl)
A palpable abdominal mass has a long list of benign and malignant differential
diagnoses. These diagnoses may be as different as a hydatid cyst of the liver, a
volvolus, an aneurysm, or a giant renal cell carcinoma. The diagnostic approach is
based on two major steps: first, the affected organ must be identified. Second, the
differential diagnosis must be established based on imaging characteristics. The
choice of ultrasound, CT or MRI should be based on location and size of the mass.
Despite the fact that ultrasound is frequently used as a first step, the overview and
anatomic orientation in large masses may be hampered, making ultrasound a better
technique for image-guided biopsy than for primary diagnosis. In the vast majority
of cases, multidetector CT is the first technique of choice. A thin-section protocol
should be used to allow for high-quality multiplanar imaging. A pre-contrast scan is
usually not required but can be helpful in suspected haemorrhage. For most upper
and middle abdominal masses, biphasic imaging in the arterial and portal phase is
recommended in order to establish the relation of the mass to the vasculature and
to assess vascularity. In the small pelvis, MR is the superior imaging technique.
Otherwise, MRI is mainly used for problem-solving. This course will discuss how to
use the various imaging tools efficiently to narrow the differential diagnosis, decide
about the need for biopsy and establish a suitable therapy.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the available imaging modalities to be used for the evaluation
of patients with a palpable abdominal mass.
2. To become familiar with the technical imaging considerations and the proper
diagnostic algorithm.
3. To know more about the typical imaging findings.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S67
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Saturday
16:00 - 17:30 Room D2
Urogenital Imaging
CC 1121
Paediatric genito-urinary imaging
Moderator:
F. Papadopoulou; Ioannina/GR
A273 16:00
A. Normal findings and diseases of the male and female developing
genital systems
M.L. Lobo; Lisbon/PT (mluisalobo@gmail.com)
Normal genital anatomy varies with the age and the hormonal status of the pae
diatric patient. Knowledge of embryology is essential to understand congenital
anomalies of the male and female developing genital systems. Common congenital
anomalies include cryptorchidism in males and Mullerian duct anomalies and/or
obstructing vaginal anomalies in females. Abnormalities of sexual differentiation
result from non-accord of chromosomal, gonadal and genital sex. Dysplastic gonads
carry a high risk of gonadal malignancy. Acquired disorders include a variety of
acute and non-acute conditions such as testicular or ovary torsion, inflammatory
and infectious scrotal or pelvic disorders, ovarian cysts and genital neoplasms,
ectopic pregnancy and genital (scrotal) trauma. Ultrasound, including Doppler
tools, is the primary modality for imaging both male and female genitalia. A proper
and dedicated ultrasound technique examination is essential to obtain maximum
diagnostic information. Further genital system imaging, when needed, is preferably
accomplished with magnetic resonance such as in cases of complex urogenital
(female) malformations and oncologic conditions. Except for tumour spread as
sessment, computed tomography has a limited role in paediatric genital disorders
and should be avoided due to the associated high radiation burden. Plain films are
obtained to assess bone age in pubertal disorders, and genitography is usually
restricted to the evaluation of rare complex genital malformation.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand normal anatomy and congenital anomalies of the male and
female developing genital systems.
2. To be able to recognise the most common, and uncommon disorders.
3. To appreciate the most appropriate imaging techniques and to understand the
clinical relevance of imaging.
A274 16:30
B. Imaging urogenital tumours in children: what is different from
imaging in adults?
M.B. Damasio; Genoa/IT (beatrice.damasio@libero.it)
Genitourinary tumours in paediatrics usually present as a painless abdominal mass,
the patient's age being an important clue in the differential diagnosis. Neonatal renal
tumours are rare and mesoblastic nephroma is the most common tumour at this
age. In children older than one year, the most common intra-abdominal masses
in children are Wilms tumour and neuroblastoma. Wilms tumour represents ap
proximately 95% of paediatric renal tumours (peak incidence of 2-3 years); mainly
sporadic, it may occur in a small number of genetically predisposed children; it may
be unilateral or bilateral. Abdominal color Doppler-US and chest radiograph are
first-line tests; abdominal contrast-enhanced CT or MRI further delineates tumour
extension and excludes bilateral disease; the role of CT versus chest radiograph
to detect pulmonary lesion is still controversial. US surveillance is recommended
in predisposed children. Non-Wilms tumours may represent a significant proportion
of renal tumours in children (especially in children aged 12 years); preoperative
imaging, however, is of limited value in the differential diagnosis. The differential
diagnosis for a painless scrotal mass in a child includes primary testicular tumours,
rabdomyosarcoma, and leukaemia. Scrotal ultrasound remains the imaging modality
of choice. The presentation of adnexal masses in childhood differs from that in adult
women: children may present with poorly localised symptoms, precocious puberty
or with an acute abdomen due to torsion or haemorrhage within an adnexal mass.
Both imaging studies and the assessment of the patient's hormonal and pubertal
status should be considered in the differential diagnosis.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the classification and epidemiology of malignant and benign
tumours.
2. To learn about the available imaging modalities.
3. To become familiar with the technical imaging considerations, adequate
diagnostic algorithm and typical imaging findings.
A271 16:30
B. Endovascular treatment of aneurysms
M.H.J. Voormolen, T. Van der Zijden, T. Menovsky, O. d'Archambeau,
H. Fransen, P.M. Parizel; Edegem/BE (maurits.voormolen@uza.be)
Intracranial aneurysms are in most cases the cause of a subarachnoid haemorrhage
(SAH). Ideally, ruptured aneurysms should be excluded from the circulation as soon
as possible to prevent rebleeding and allow aggressive treatment of SAH complica
tions such as vasospasm. Endovascular treatment of intracranial aneurysms has
evolved in the twentieth century from parent vessel occlusion to selective occlusion
of the aneurysm sac with detachable microcoils ("coiling"). The first coiling was
performed twenty years ago in 1992. The endovascular approach to the coiling
of aneurysms has become an alternative to surgical clipping both due to the low
procedural morbidity and mortality, and to the possibility to treat aneurysms with
complex vascular anatomy and at locations not accessible to clipping. Compared
with clipping the disadvantage of coiling is the incomplete occlusion of aneurysms
(neck remnants). Therefore, coiled aneurysms need to be regularly followed by
angiography or magnetic resonance imaging. Recently, supportive techniques to
coiling have been optimised to help occlude the aneurysm and preserve the parent
artery. Compliant balloons can be used to temporarily support the introduction of
coils in the aneurysm sac. In wide-necked or dissecting aneurysms intracranial
self-expanding stents can be placed. Anticoagulants need to be taken after stent
placement complicating the post procedural care of recently ruptured aneurysms.
The most recent development is the use of flow-diverting stents that alter the
haemodynamics inside the aneurysm sac. Based on various patient and aneurysm
characteristics the treatment options need to be discussed with a neurovascular
surgeon, neurologist and interventional neuroradiologist.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn how to select patients for endovascular treatment.
2. To become familiar with currently available techniques (coils, stents, etc).
3. To learn about the limitations and complications of these techniques.
A272 17:00
C. Imaging after aneurysm treatment
J.P. Pruvo; Lille/FR (jeanpierre.pruvo@chrulille.fr)
At the subacute phase after surgical or endovascular aneurysm treatment, aneu
rysm rebleeding or intracranial vasospasm must be clinically suspected when the
neurological status suddenly worsens including increased headaches, neurologi
cal deficit or loss of consciousness. Doppler sonography and brain CT scan must
be performed in emergency to confirm the diagnosis and to discuss an additional
treatment in selective cases. In the mid- and long-term followup, non-invasive
imaging is needed to detect aneurysm recurrence, neck remnant regrowing or de
novo aneurysm. After endovascular treatment, the rate of aneurysm recurrence
may be estimated between 10 and 30% according to the aneurismal size with a
risk of rebleeding from 1 to 2% per year. Most of recurrences are detected during
the first 6 months after embolisation leading to an additional treatment in about
half of cases. MR angiography is the technique of choice including time-of-flight
technique and/or Gd-enhanced MR angiography at 6 months after the initial event
and then every year during the following 5 years and finally every 3 years in the
long-term followup. After surgical treatment, the rate of aneurysm recurrence and
the risk of rebleeding are much lower when the aneurismal neck has been clipped
in good technical conditions. CT angiography using 64-detector rows or more is
definitely the best technique to detect post-surgical aneurysm recurrence. CT is
usually performed at 3 years after the initial event and then every 5 years.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the signs of vasospasm or re-bleeding in the subacute
phase.
2. To learn what is the best technique for followup of these patients after treat
ment.
3. To understand the advantages and disadvantages of CT versus MR angiog
raphy after aneurysm treatment (endovascular coiling or surgical clipping).
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S68 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
equipment available which differ both as to conception and field intensity and the
various sequences must respond to precise technical indications. Basically, the
structures that are to be evidenced are represented by fibrous-connective tissue,
cartilage, synovial tissue and bone, and the modifications that may be caused on
these by the varying pathologies must be taken into consideration. Sensitivity,
specificity and multiplanarity are all fundamental elements to be considered when
evaluating a magnetic resonance of the articulation. The morphology of the struc
ture is best defined with the use of spin-echo sequences, in particular that of T1
weighted images. The sequences that exploit the suppression of fat, or fat--water
separation, do seem to be the most suitable for a panoramic and comprehensive
evaluation of the joint under study, as the various components may be observed
in such a way so as to make a primary diagnostic codification on the underlying
problem. Depending on the individual requirements, specific sequences may be
added, such as those that give more detailed information/evaluation of cartilage
damage, or a better view of flogistic synovial processes.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn the techniques used in standard MR.
2. To learn about the strengths/weaknesses of standard MR along with diagnostic
problems related to anatomical variation.
A278 16:28
B. CT arthrography
C.W.A. Pfirrmann; Zurich/CH
With modern multidetector CT scanners CT arthrography with multiplanar recon
struction in high resolution is possible. CT arthrography is performed with intra
articular injection of non diluted iodinated contrast material. CT arthrography of
virtually any joint from head to toe is possible. There are several indications and
advantages for CT arthrography: 1. Imaging time: imaging time with CT arthrogra
phy is much faster than MR. This is especially advantageous for anxious patients.
Also for patients with claustrophobia, CT is often a better option. 2. Cartilage: CT
arthrography has the advantage of high contrast between cartilage and contrast
material. Therefore, CT arthrography may be superior in defining cartilage defects.
3. Postoperative Imaging: in the postoperative patient, artefacts from metal may
be present in or near the joint. With CT arthrography these artefacts are often less
pronounced, compared with MR imaging. 4. Bone and calcifications: assessment of
bony structures may be easier with CT arthrography compared with MR arthrogra
phy. Small osseous fragments, such as glenoid rim fractures may be difficult to see
with MR arthrography. With CT these fragment or calcifications may be easily seen.
5. MR contraindications: CT arthrography is a valuable alternative in patients that
have a contraindication for MR imaging. For example, the diagnosis of a meniscal
tear is possible in the same way using CT arthrography as with MR imaging. In
the shoulder, CT arthrography is well suited for the assessment of labral lesions,
cartilage damage and rotator cuff tendons using the same diagnostic criteria as
with MR arthrography.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn the techniques used in CT arthrography.
2. To learn about the strengths/weaknesses of CT arthrography.
A279 16:51
C. MR arthrography
J. Kramer; Linz/AT (kramer@ctmri.at)
MR arthrography is an outpatient procedure, requires no anaesthesia and is es
sentially devoid of complications. It is relatively easy to perform, and is a definite
aid in patients when conventional MR exams cannot provide for exact information
which may be needed for sufficient therapy. MR arthrography, by virtue of its abil
ity to demonstrate accurately intra-articular structures and abnormalities of these
structures (e.g. labral lesions - shoulder, hip; partial articular-sided cuff tears), adds
an important component to the radiologists armamentarium.Although not appropri
ate for all patients, MR arthrography plays an important role in the evaluation of
patients with suspected intra-articular pathology who have equivocal clinical and
conventional MR imaging findings. However, even nowadays, clinical use of MR
arthrography is limited due to three main reasons: the conversion of a non-invasive
procedure into an invasive, albeit minimally invasive, procedure; increased cost and
time required to perform MR arthrography compared with conventional MR imaging;
and the need to obtain patients consent for performing a MR arthrography exam
since the use of intra-articular gadolinium compounds has not yet been approved
generally. MR arthrography is an outpatient procedure, requires no anaesthesia
and is essentially devoid of complications. It is relatively easy to perform, and is
a definite aid in patients when conventional MR exams cannot provide for exact
information which may be needed for sufficient therapy. MR arthrography, by virtue
of its ability to demonstrate accurately intra-articular structures and abnormalities
A275 17:00
C. Hydronephrosis and urinary tract obstruction in neonates and infants
M. Riccabona; Graz/AT (michael.riccabona@medunigraz.at)
The imaging algorithm and imaging examples for most common conditions in
neonatal obstructive uropathy (ureteropelvic junction obstruction, obstructive
megaureter, posterior urethral valve and stone disease) will be presented and
discussed. Imaging urinary tract obstruction is a common query in paediatric
uroradiology. The submitted infants have increased by fetal screening ultrasound
(US). With the advent of more conservative treatment approaches the task of
imaging is not only to establish the diagnosis, but also to identify those kidneys as
early as possible which will deteriorate and lose function and/or growth potential
and thus benefit from surgery. For these, however, there is at present no reliable
a-priori pro-futuro assessment in spite of all modern techniques such as diuretic
MR-Urography (MRU). Thus, often repeated followup imaging is necessary to moni
tor the development. Imaging usually starts with US, additionally complemented by
diuretic renal scintigraphy and/or MRU; voiding cystourethrography (VCUG) is used
for detection of vesicoureteral reflux (VUR). The frequency and timing of investiga
tions as well as the detailed protocol vary within institutions, partially also because
of different criteria used for indicating surgery. Intravenous urography (IVU) has
practically vanished for this query; apart from few exceptions, the "Whitaker test"
is today also seldom performed only for complicated cases (e.g., peri-operatively).
Obstructive uropathy is usually detected foetally and primarily assessed by US.
Once VUR is ruled out, further followup will include MAG3-scintigraphy or MRU.
CT and IVU are used only exceptionally, with the most common indication in the
work-up of complicated childhood urolithiasis.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the work-up of neonates and infants with prenatal diagnosis of
hydronephrosis.
2. To become familiar with the differential diagnosis.
3. To be aware of the tasks and restrictions of imaging in childhood obstructive
uropathy.
16:00 - 17:30 Room E1
Musculoskeletal
RC 1110
Intra-articular imaging
A276 16:00
Chairman's introduction
A.H. Karantanas; Iraklion/GR (akarantanas@gmail.com)
Intraarticular imaging is a difficult task because of the small size of the anatomic
structures and the curved shape of the articular surfaces. Technological advances
during the past two decades have improved our ability of imaging the joints. The
most important of them include high field MRI scanners and MDCT technology.
Common joint disorders afflicting wide age groups include degeneration, inflamma
tion and trauma. Early depiction of disease allows accurate treatment planning in
trauma, early suppression of inflammation in rheumatologic disorders, and monitor
ing of degeneration in osteoarthritis. Depiction of early signs of disease activity or
recurrence improves the efficiency of newer treatments. The importance of updated
imaging is highlighted by the fact that new surgical techniques are applied in the
cartilage and meniscus. Modern imaging allows clear depiction of the involved joint
structure: synovium, articular cartilage, labrum and subchondral bone. The high
spatial and contrast resolution provided currently with MRI and CT highlights find
ings which are clinically irrelevant. Radiologists should be familiar with the technical
prerequisites for achieving a high-quality examination, as well as the pitfalls and
variants that might simulate disease. Thorough knowledge of the above will allow
the application of the proper imaging technique in each individual clinical scenario.
A277 16:05 
A. Standard MR techniques
C. Faletti; Turin/IT (carlo.faletti@cto.to.it)
In the evaluation of the osteoarticular pathology, magnetic resonance has taken
on a particularly important role thanks to the characteristics of the methodology.
Indeed, it is essential that the magnetic resonance examination be modulated on
the basis of clinical requirements. That is the most suitable plane and sequence
to evidence the underlying mechanisms/alterations at the source of the symp
tomatology be chosen. Nowadays, there are various types of magnetic resonance
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S69
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Saturday
A282 16:28
From the surgeon's perspective
M. Gnant; Vienna/AT (michael.gnant@meduniwien.ac.at)
Breast surgery has significantly changed in recent years---from mastectomy to
breast conservation as a standard, from single discipline to inter-disciplinarity and
from mechanistic to biology-driven strategy. By virtue of all these changes, breast
surgeons today offer breast-conserving approaches for almost every breast cancer
patient, sentinel-node dissection for most and cure for the majority.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about different surgical options in the treatment of breast cancer
patients.
2. To understand the rationale behind current perioperative and adjuvant treat
ment approaches.
3. To consolidate knowledge about individualising treatment concepts according
to the biology of breast cancer.
A283 16:53
From the oncologist's perspective
G. Steger; Vienna/AT (guenther.steger@meduniwien.ac.at)
Primary breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease, thus requiring different
therapeutic approaches according to the biological subtype. Since in most cases
micrometastatic disease is present at time of diagnosis, systemic treatment after
(adjuvant) or before (neoadjuvant) surgical removal of the primary tumour is able
to reduce the potential risk for overt clinical metastasis resulting in a significant and
clinically relevant prolongation of relapse-free survival (RFS) and overall survival
(OS). The choice of the systemic treatment depends on predictive factors which
are detectable on the tumour tissue. The steroid receptors, the HER2-receptor
and most recently proliferation markers (e.g. Ki67) are used to select for hormonal
treatment depending on the menopausal stage, cytotoxic chemotherapy and anti-
HER2 treatment options. The neoadjuvant, preoperative treatment approach aims
for downsizing the primary tumour to allow for adequate, breast-conserving surgery,
but can induce a pathological complete remission (pCR, complete disappearance of
invasive tumour cells in the breast) which potentially leads to a further amelioration
of RFS and OS. Thus, systemic treatment options are currently explored to raise
the rate of treatment-induced pCR, and in some subgroups of patients with primary
breast cancer pCR-rates of 40-60% are currently observed. These neoadjuvant
and adjuvant systemic treatment concepts require a high level of interdisciplinary
collaboration and communication involving at least radiologists, pathologists,
surgeons, medical oncologists and radiotherapists, but other disciplines including
dedicated breast care nurses are necessary to deliver high-quality care to the
patients in order to alter the prognosis of the patients in an optimal way.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the current adjuvant medical treatment options and modalities.
2. To understand the indications for the neo-adjuvant treatment approach and
the appropriate modalities.
3. To understand the interactions of known predictive factors, current neoadjuvant/
adjuvant treatment options, and prognosis within an interdisciplinary treatment
concept.
A284 17:18
Case presentation and discussion
T.H. Helbich; Vienna/AT (Thomas.Helbich@meduniwien.ac.at)
16:00 - 17:30 Room F1
Special Focus Session
SF 11
How can I be sure that I'm dealing with HCC?
A285 16:00
Chairman's introduction
F. CaseiroAlves; Coimbra/PT (caseiroalves@gmail.com)
Hepatocellular carcinoma is a challenging tumour due to its variegated imaging
appearance. Knowledge and recognition of the stepwise carcinogenetic process in
the context of liver cirrhosis is of paramount importance for tumour detection and
characterisation. Leading imaging signs like hypervascularity and the wash-out
phenomena can only be correctly interpreted if the radiologist is able to set up the
of these structures (e.g. labral lesions - shoulder, hip; partial articular-sided cuff
tears), adds an important component to the radiologists armamentarium.Although
not appropriate for all patients, MR arthrography plays an important role in the
evaluation of patients with suspected intra-articular pathology who have equivocal
clinical and conventional MR imaging findings. However, even nowadays, clinical
use of MR arthrography is limited due to three main reasons: the conversion of
a non-invasive procedure into an invasive, albeit minimally invasive, procedure;
increased cost and time required to perform MR arthrography compared with
conventional MR imaging; and the need to obtain patients consent for performing
a MR arthrography exam since the use of intra-articular gadolinium compounds
has not yet been approved generally.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn the techniques used in MR arthrography.
2. To learn about the strengths/weaknesses of MR arthrography.
Panel discussion:
Which imaging technique in which clinical scenario? 17:14
16:00 - 17:30 Room E2
Multidisciplinary Session: Managing Patients with Cancer
MS 11
Breast cancer
A280 16:00
Chairman's introduction
T.H. Helbich; Vienna/AT (Thomas.Helbich@meduniwien.ac.at)
Breast cancer is the leading cause of cancer death among women worldwide.
Imaging plays a key role in the early detection of breast cancer. Beside imaging
accurate treatment is pivotal. It has been shown that cooperation between different
disciplines is the base for accurate patient management and improved treatment.
The audience will learn about the importance of multidisciplinary breast centres
and their effect on improved detection and treatment of breast cancer. We look
forward to welcome you all to get an updated information that could directly be
utilised in your clinical services.
Session Objectives:
1. To highlight the importance of multidisciplinary breast centres.
2. To introduce the EU guidelines for breast centres.
3. To introduce the `key disciplines' for a multidisciplinary breast centre.
A281 16:03
From the radiologist's perspective
T.H. Helbich; Vienna/AT (Thomas.Helbich@meduniwien.ac.at)
Breast cancer is the leading cause of cancer death among women worldwide.
Imaging plays a key role in the early detection of breast cancer. Mammography is
an accepted screening modality. It has been shown that additional imaging modali
ties like ultrasound and MR imaging of the breast can significantly improve cancer
detection and characterisation. An international classification system (BIRADS(R))
has been introduced and offers a global language for breast imager. In case of
BIRADS(R) 4 and 5 lesions imaging guided biopsies are recommended before
definitive surgery. The interpretation of imaging findings and pathologic results
(b-classification) is essential and should be performed in multidisciplinary team
conferences. It has been shown that such conferences have a strong impact on
overall survival because mismanagement and failures can be reduced significantly.
During this session the assembly will learn basics as well as about the importance
of guidelines and risk management (failure conferences), illustrated by case studies.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the role of different imaging modalities to detect and characterise
breast lesions precisely.
2. To understand the importance of needle biopsy in the management of women
with breast cancer.
3. To understand the pathologic `b-classifications' and its impact on patient
management.
4. To understand the role of a multidisciplinary approach based on case presenta
tion.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S70 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
A288 16:39
HCC staging and patient stratification: what's new?
C. Ayuso; Barcelona/ES (cayuso@clinic.ub.es)
Clinical management of patients with HCC is a decision-making process that
should be approached following evidence-based data. Staging is a relevant topic
in these patients because it determines the therapeutic approach. Tumoural exten
sion based on MRI or CT findings and prognosis assessment are critical steps in
the management of patients with HCC to indicate treatment, to predict response
to treatment and to predict survival. For optimal results any proposal has to take
into account liver function, tumour stage and physical status. Up to now, the
only proposal linking staging to prognostic prediction and treatment indication is
the BCLC approach. Updated BCLC staging in 2012, first presented in 1999 in
Seminars in Liver disease will be discussed and also the recent imaging features
supporting the tumoural extension. Genomic studies attempted to provide the basis
to identify the abnormalities that reflect a higher risk of cancer and the biological
profile will be discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about current guidelines for patient management.
2. To become familiar with imaging findings related to staging.
3. To understand the role of new biomarkers for tumour grading.
A289 16:57
Residual tumour and tumour recurrence: how to evaluate?
D.J. Breen; Southampton/UK (david.breen@suht.swest.nhs.uk)
In cirrhotic liver disease those unfit for surgery but with paucinodular (usually less
than 3 nodules of < 3 cm) or intermediate disease (more advanced) are increas
ingly amenable to locoregional therapies. Treatment in situ is, however, difficult
to assess for the purposes of treatment response and continued surveillance.
Modified RECIST criteria have been proposed more recently and these aim to
quantify and validate in situ tumour necrosis in the late arterial phase as a valid
surrogate endpoint, increasingly justified by clear survival benefit after ablation,
TACE and anti-angiogenic drugs. Optimised late arterial phase imaging is critical
in the diligent assessment of treatment effect and to ensure that residual disease
is not left untreated. There are, however, still typical patterns of residual and
recurrent disease that the radiologist must recognise whilst becoming familiar
with benign post-treatment features seen after ablation and radioembolisation,
for example. These can include marginal hyperaemia, portal tract oedema, arteri
oportal shunting, etc. Post-treatment assessment can be complex but recent work
suggests that diffusion-weighted MR and increased, mapped ADC values may
be useful in confirming treatment response. Careful subtraction MR (late arterial
phase - baseline) has also been shown to be a robust guide to residual disease.
PET/CT assessment has proved problematic due to the highly variable degree of
FDG-avidity in HCC. Changes in perfusion CT parameters have been observed
in different treatment response groups. With regard to ablation semi-automatic
volume segmentation processing is now permitting much more accurate assess
ment of treatment adequacy.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the concepts of residual and recurrent HCC.
2. To become familiar with interventional radiology options, indications and limits.
3. To learn about imaging criteria used for tumour response evaluation.
4. To be able to propose strategies for patient followup.
Panel discussion:
How far can we go with non-invasive imaging for diagnosis and
staging of HCC? 17:15
16:00 - 17:30 Room F2
Professional Challenges Session
PC 11
An epidemic spreading from West to East: medico-
legal challenges for radiologists
A290 16:00
Chairman's introduction
E. Breatnach; Dublin/IE (ebreatnach@mater.ie)
Medicolegal consequence is now recognised to be a major aspect of modern
radiological practice. Sins of omission and commission are the building bricks of
proper imaging technique in a multimodality perspective. Cirrhosis is a fertile soil
for the development of different focal liver lesions, and vascular abnormalities can
be now currently recognised by morphological and functional imaging including
the use of cell-specific MR contrast agents. Presently, imaging acts as the com
mon denominator in clinical decision-making, being instrumental in confirming the
presence and staging of HCC and heavily influencing patient management. Apart
from its diagnostic capabilities, radiology has special responsibilities in providing
minimally invasive treatment options and in assessing tumour response. The cur
rent session aims to provide an overall integrated approach of the modern role of
radiology in this clinical scenario, especially for all of those involved in providing
consultation in a multidisciplinary environment.
Session Objectives:
1. To understand the role of imaging for HCC detection and screening.
2. To became familiar with the clinical guidelines for patient management.
3. To appreciate how biomarkers can assess tumour aggressiveness.
4. To learn how to evaluate tumour response and residual tumour.
A286 16:03
Wash-in/wash-out: what do they represent?
L. Grazioli; Brescia/IT (lgrazioli@yahoo.com)
Although some authors still consider that fine-needle biopsy is safe, accurate, ena
bles final diagnosis of focal liver lesions and is essential for deciding the therapeutic
strategy, recent cohort studies have raised suspicions of its utility. The diagnosis
with fine-needle biopsy has several limitations: location and size of tumour, clotting
disorders or ascites interfere with needle insertion. False-negative results caused
by sampling error may occur at a higher rate. Moreover, needle biopsy of HCC may
carry a 2% to 5% risk of seeding tumour cells. Typical HCC is supplied mainly via
the hepatic artery and the portal flow is lacking or reduced within the tumour. The
characteristic HCC profile, including intense enhancement in AP (wash-in) and fol
lowed by contrast washout in PVP or EP (washout) on CEUS, MDCT and dynamic
MR images using ordinary extracellular agents, has been established. A prospec
tive study indicated a high PPV (> 95%) using these noninvasive imaging criteria
(wash-in and washout) for diagnosis of HCC (> 1 cm), which was comparable with
that of a liver biopsy. Identification of washout finding in PVP or EP is also crucial
for reliable diagnosis of HCC, in particular differentiation between non-neoplastic
early arterial enhancement (A-P shunt) and HCC. Based on these recent results,
AASLD and EASL recommended that the diagnosis of HCC in cirrhotic patients can
be made if these noninvasive imaging criteria are identified on contrast-enhanced
US, MDCT or MR imaging without the use of liver biopsy.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the angiogenetic process of HCC transformation.
2. To understand how wash-in/wash-out signs correlate with pathologic findings.
3. To learn how to set up imaging protocols to assess neoangiogenesis.
A287 16:21
Equivocal nodules: how to interpret and clinical implications
V. Vilgrain; Clichy/FR (valerie.vilgrain@bjn.aphp.fr)
Cirrhosis is a chronic liver disease defined by the presence of fibrosis and regenera
tive nodules. These regenerative nodules may either remain stable or enlarge, or
evolve to dysplastic nodules and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). This multistep
carcinogenesis explains why the diagnosis of small HCC remains challenging. Other
lesions such as perfusion disorders and confluent fibrosis are also often observed
in cirrhosis. Last, the prevalence of peripheral cholangiocarcinoma has been shown
higher than in normal livers. Therefore the goal of imaging is to provide clues which
enable lesion characterisation. The classical imaging findings are mostly based
on lesion size and lesion enhancement on arterial-dominant, portal venous and
delayed phases. Yet, both HCCs and other lesions may show atypical enhance
ment. This lecture will detail the input of functional tools. For instance, combination
of classical sequences and diffusion-weighted MR imaging increases distinction
between HCC and other lesions developed on cirrhosis. The role and limitations
of hepatospecific MR contrast agents will also be stressed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be aware of the differential diagnosis of focal liver lesions in the cirrhotic
liver in a multimodality perspective.
2. To understand the role of new strategies such as DWI, perfusion CT/MR, etc.
3. To learn about the role of hepato-specific MR contrast agents.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S71
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Saturday
is handicapped by these factors, the emergency radiologist responding to such a
patient is at an even greater disadvantage. In case of unconscious or irresponsible
patient, having a kind manner, offering adequate information to patients' relatives,
checking on the patient's comfort and trying to reassure the patients' relatives
are as important for the radiologist as for the physician more directly involved in
patient care. It is very important that family members or friends of the patients are
politely treated. Moreover, before providing information to the family of a patient
with cerebral death, clear communication between the emergency department
physician and the radiologist is crucial.
Learning Objectives:
1. To evaluate the difficult balance between emergency, safety of diagnostic
procedures and patient information.
2. To learn how to inform the patients' relatives in case of unconscious or ir
responsible patient.
3. To learn the criteria for cerebral death and the necessity of appropriate com
munication with the clinician before information is provided to the family.
Panel discussion:
Specific case scenarios illustrating medico-legal pitfalls in
communication skills, paediatric and emergency radiology 17:05
16:00 - 17:30 Room G/H
Neuro
RC 1111
Neuro paediatrics: imaging of the paediatric brain
Moderator:
N. Girard; Marseille/FR
A294 16:00
A. Systemised approach to inherited white matter disease in children
A. Rossi; Genoa/IT (andrearossi@ospedalegaslini.ge.it)
Paediatric white matter disorders can be distinguished into well-defined leucoen
cephalopathies, and undefined leucoencephalopathies. The first category may be
subdivided into (a) hypomyelinating disorders; (b) dysmyelinating disorders; (c)
leucodystrophies; (d) disorders related to cystic degeneration of myelin; and (e)
disorders secondary to axonal damage. The second category, representing up to
50% of leucoencephalopathies in childhood, requires a multidisciplinary approach
in order to define novel homogeneous subgroups of patients, possibly representing
`new genetic disorders''. An integrated description of the clinical, neuroimaging,
and pathophysiological features is crucial for categorising myelin disorders and
better understanding their genetic basis. A review of the MR imaging findings in the
main genetic disorders affecting white matter in the paediatric age, including some
novel entities, will be provided with a highlight on the concept of pattern recognition.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the most common inherited white matter disease in
children, and to understand the most relevant clinical and laboratorial features
that help differential diagnosis.
2. To learn the characteristic neuroimaging findings that may be useful in estab
lishing differential diagnosis.
3. To be aware of the importance of advanced MR imaging techniques for dif
ferential diagnosis.
4. To recognise the importance of a systemised imaging approach to the dif
ferential diagnosis of inherited white matter disease in children.
A295 16:30
B. Malformation of the posterior fossa
C. Hoffmann; Tel Hashomer/IL (chen.hoffmann@sheba.health.gov.il)
In this presentation the new classification of posterior fossa malformations will be
presented. This classification is based on embryology, making it easier to under
stand and remember. Embryology and radiological features will play together to
teach the audience how to differentiate and diagnose this malformations. Knowing
the features of these malformations is important, making it possible to look for them
in MR scans, done on the paediatric population, suffering from developmental
delay, and will lighten the way to the correct diagnosis. Developmental and ge
netic classification of mid-hindbrain malformations: 1. Malformations secondary to
early anteroposterior and dorsoventral patterning defects, or to misspecification of
mid-hindbrain germinal zone. 2. Malformations associated with later generalised
developmental disorders that significantly affect the brainstem and cerebellum. 3.
Localised brain malformations that significantly affect the brainstem and cerebel
lum. 4. Combined hypoplasia and atrophy in putative prenatal onset degenerative
disorders.
an ever expanding industry of regulation, legislation and litigation. It is important
for radiologists to recognise the implications of this development not only as an
ongoing consideration in daily practice, but also in an attempt to protect themselves
from unforeseen legal consequences. The personal impact of medicolegal litiga
tion on practicing radiologists cannot be under estimated, and though this is at its
infancy in certain countries, in many others it has gained significant momentum.
The presenters in this Session will address and advise an approach to medicolegal
avoidance in three clinical scenarios: when the radiologist has made a mistake,
specific challenges within paediatric practice and emergency radiology.
Session Objectives:
1. To learn appropriate responses following a clinical radiological mistake (miss,
inadvertant outcome).
2. To learn potential medico-legal dangers and responsibilities specific to pae
diatric radiology practice.
3. To learn appropriate responses to medico-legal issues specific to emergency
radiology practice.
A291 16:05
The correct conduct when you have just made a mistake
L. Berlin; Skokie, IL/US (lberlin@live.com)
Ethical standards, moral values and mandates of virtually all professional socie
ties call for full disclosure of medical errors to patients affected by them. However,
many radiologists are reluctant to divulge errors because of potential repercus
sions ranging from simple embarrassment, loss of face or professional standing, to
malpractice litigation or restriction of clinical privileges. Nevertheless, divulging the
mistake and offering an explanation and apology for it may diminish the patient's
pain, assuage the radiologist's guilt and recrimination and strengthen the physician-
patient relationship. All radiologists and non-radiological physicians must always
keep in mind that it is their fundamental obligation to act in the best interest of the
patient, not in their own personal interest.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand why facing the patient and complications is always better than
hiding.
2. To learn the appropriate words, recognising facts, but not responsibility.
3. To understand the difference between `normal' complications and malpractice.
A292 16:25
Medico-legal issues within paediatric practice: the history, the
challenges, and the future
C. Owens; London/UK (owensc@gosh.nhs.uk)
Aim and objective of this lecure is to introduce the attendee to the historical, clinical
and legal challenges which faced (and continued to face) health professionals deal
ing with child protection, with special reference and focus upon the unique issues
which occur in the paediatric environment. The attendee will have the opportunity
to hear a summary gleaned from opinions from those learned health professionals
involved with the difficult challenges in non accidental injury and all of the issues
arising and pursuing the medicolegal expert dealing in child protection. Specific
individual examples from high profile UK legal cases will be highlighted to allow the
listener to understand the harsh climate facing those involved in child protection
from the legal perspective.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand historical perspectives of the law in childrens' health.
2. To visit current high profile areas of litigation within paediatric imaging.
3. To contemplate the future directions.
A293 16:45
Case-based review of medico-legal aspects in emergency radiology
A. Pinto; Naples/IT (antopin1968
@libero.it)
Legal considerations relevant to emergency department radiology are significant.
Most patients seeking emergency care are acutely ill. Imaging examination must
be done promptly and interpreted without delay. Misdiagnosis is the most common
allegation lodged against emergency radiologists as a basis for liability. Missing an
abnormality on a radiograph performed in the emergency setting is never easy to
explain: it can occur for a variety of reasons. Trauma care creates a "perfect storm"
for medical and radiological errors: unstable patients, incomplete histories, time-
critical decisions, concurrent tasks and often junior personnel working after-hours in
busy emergency departments.Although good medical practice helps ensure against
claims, the value of effective communication is also important. The emergency
department regularly receives inebriated and uncooperative patients with whom
the physician has had no prior contact. If the emergency department physician
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S72 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
that intravenous contrast administration (presumably because of a relative but
temporary increase in capillary blood volume causing partial displacement of air)
can unpredictably increase lung density. Disease processes which lead to partial
filling of the air spaces, thickening of the interstitium, partial collapse of alveoli and/or
an increased capillary blood volume will also manifest as a pattern of ground-glass
opacification. In clinical practice, the recognised causes of ground-glass opacities
on HRCT include pulmonary oedema (cardiogenic or otherwise), infections (e.g.
pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia) and some of the idiopathic interstitial pneumonias
(e.g. non-specific interstitial pneumonia and respiratory bronchiolitis-associated
interstitial lung disease). The presentation will review and revise the causes of
physiological and disease-related ground-glass opacification on HRCT.
Learning Objectives:
1. To review different physiological conditions which might cause a GGO pattern.
2. To be informed about the associations and reversibility of physiology-related
GGO.
A299 16:28
B. Inflammatory and infectious GGO
K. MartenEngelke; Gottingen/DE (kmarten@med.unigoettingen.de)
Ground-glass opacity (GGO) is defined as increased attenuation of the lung paren
chyma without obscuration of the pulmonary vascular markings on CT images. GGO
may be the result of a variety of interstitial and alveolar infectious and noninfectious
inflammatory diseases. As an imaging finding alone GGO does usually not allow
a specific diagnosis. GGO in inflammatory disorders often will be present in the
company of other interstitial or alveolar findings. However, the number of diseases
that cause diffuse isolated GGO or GGO as the predominant finding is relatively
small and can be prioritised with clinical information. The most common cause of
diffuse isolated GGO in immunocompromised hosts are a variety of diffuse, oppor
tunistic pneumonias, e.g. Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia (PCP), cytomegalovirus
pneumonia (CMV) or herpes simplex pneumonia (HSV), that constitute the first
differential. Chronic onset disorders in immunocompetent patients include cellular
nonspecific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP), subacute hypersensitivity pneumonitis
(HP), organising pneumonia, air-space sarcoid and drug-induced lung disease.
In these disorders, ancillary findings such as an associated reticular pattern with
traction bronchiectasis/bronchiolectasis (NSIP), mediastinal lymphadenopathy
(sarcoidosis), superimposed nodularity or cysts may help to refine the diagnosis.
In patients with collagen vascular disorders, e.g. scleroderma, GGO secondary to
pulmonary involvement needs to be differentiated from drug-induced lung disease.
This refresher course will put GGO in the context of outpatients versus inpatients,
the acuity of clinical symptoms, e.g. fever, cough and dyspnoea, signs of massive
systemic inflammation, and the clinical situation such as inhalational history, pneu
motoxic drug administration, immunocompromisation, or bone marrow-suppression.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn more about the inflammatory conditions that cause GGO.
2. To review the histopathological correlates of inflammatory and infectious GGO.
3. To attempt to differentiate GGO in autoimmune and infectious lung disease.
A300 16:51
C. GGO in dysplasia and neoplasia
J. Goo; Seoul/KR (jmgoo@plaza.snu.ac.kr)
Ground-glass nodules (GGNs) or subsolid nodules detected on CT have been
reported to comprise a wide range of diagnoses from premalignant lesions such as
atypical adenomatous hyperplasia, or malignant lesions such as adenocarcinoma
in situ (formerly bronchioloalveolar carcinoma) or adenocarcinoma. In comparison
to transient GGNs which are mostly inflammatory and infectious in origin, persist
ent GGNs are frequently dysplastic or neoplastic. It has been reported that these
GGNs have higher malignancy rate than solid nodules. According to the presence
of solid portion within the GGNs, GGNs can be classified as part-solid or nonsolid
nodules. CT features of GGNs correlate well with the histological classification of
adenocarcinoma and the histological features of lepidic pattern, which exhibits
proliferation of cells along the alveolar walls and correspond well to the CT features
of GGNs. In addition to the presence and proportion of solid component within the
GGNs, larger size and a lobulated border of GGNs are predictive CT findings of
malignancy. The evolving features of GGNs on serial CT that suggest malignancy
include an overall increase in the size of a GGN, development of a solid component
within a GGN or an increase in the solid component of a GGN. Stable size with
increasing attenuation of GGN could also be a sign of malignancy. Like the propor
tion of lepidic pattern in lung adenocarcinoma, the proportion of GGO in lung nodule
is a positive prognostic factor. Despite the high probability of malignancy of GGNs,
the possibility of overdiagnosis should be considered in the management of GGNs.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the most important aspects of embryological and foetal
development that are essential for the understanding of the large spectrum of
posterior fossa malformations.
2. To become familiar with the classification of posterior fossa malformations.
3. To learn the imaging features of the most common posterior fossa malforma
tions in both pre and post-natal imaging.
A296 17:00
C. Phakomatosis
P.D. Griffiths; Sheffield/UK (p.griffiths@sheffield.ac.uk)
This lecture will introduce the neuroradiological findings of the three commonest
phakomatoses referred for neuroimaging in paediatric practice, namely Sturge-
Weber syndrome, Tuberous sclerosis complex and Neurofibromatosis type 1. I
will present the findings on the background of the suspected pathogenesis of the
conditions with the aim of making the imaging findings understandable.Appropriate
imaging protocols will be discussed for each of the conditions.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be aware of the epidemiology, genetics and clinical manifestations of
phakomatosis.
2. To learn the imaging features of the most common phakomatosis and its dif
ferential diagnosis.
3. To be aware of some specific imaging features of rare phakomatosis.
16:00 - 17:30 Room I/K
Chest
RC 1104
Patterns in chest radiology: are there subtype
patterns of ground glass opacity (GGO)?
A297 16:00
Chairman's introduction
A. Oikonomou; Alexandroupolis/GR (aoikonom@med.duth.gr)
Ground-glass opacity (GGO) is characterised on HRCT by the presence of a hazy
increase in lung opacity that does not cause obscuration of underlying bronchial
and vascular margins. Although a very common finding, it also constitutes a very
nonspecific term since it can be seen in a variety of different intraalveolar and
interstitial processes with different histology including inflammatory, infectious and
neoplastic diseases that have a common physiologic mechanism: partial displace
ment of air. Ground-glass opacity may even be seen in normal processes such
as poor ventilation in dependant lung areas and in expiration. Moreover, GGO
can represent either an ongoing, active and potentially treatable disease or an
irreversible process. In order to interprete correctly this highly nonspecific but very
significant finding it is crucial to attempt to further classify the different large main
entities in which this radiological finding appears. Are there specific radiological
and HRCT findings that can help us differentiate GGO in autoimmune-inflammatory
conditions from infectious and neoplastic processes?Are there associated findings
other than GGO - such as nodules, reticulation or focal disease and distribution of
findings that can narrow the differential diagnosis? Systematic evaluation of GGO
and associated findings as well as integration with clinical information (acute,
subacute or chronic symptoms) is essential in defining GGO subtypes in order to
improve radiological diagnosis.
A298 16:05
A. Ground glass opacification: why do we see it and what can it mean?
S.R. Desai; London/UK (sujal.desai@nhs.net)
Radiologists who regularly review high-resolution CT (HRCT) should be aware of
the range of patterns and, more importantly, their potential pathological meaning.
A pattern of ground-glass opacification is one of the more common HRCT findings
but, to the unwary, its interpretation can be problematic. An important underlying
principle is that a ground-glass pattern may be caused by any process - physiologi
cal or pathological - which partially displaces air. Physiological (i.e. non-disease-
related) ground-glass opacification is perhaps most commonly seen in subjects
who, for whatever reason (e.g. breathlessness, obesity), are unable maintain or
achieve a satisfactory inspiratory effort during scanning.Agenerally increased lung
density (in contrast to adults) is also a feature in infants and young children simply
because there are fewer alveoli in the developing lung. Finally, it is worth noting
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S73
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Saturday
can be conjectured that MRI beyond 3 T could have groundbreaking impact on the
diagnosis and characterisation of selected disease processes.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the need to control radio-frequency fields, particularly at high
B0.
2. To understand the principles of controlling radio-frequency fields by multiple-
channel transmission.
3. To become acquainted with methods of obtaining uniform and tailored excita
tion within SAR limits.
A303 17:00
C. Is 7T ready for clinical use?
S. Francis; Nottingham/UK (susan.francis@nottingham.ac.uk)
The number of 7T magnetic resonance (MR) scanners is growing rapidly, and 7T
has proved beneficial for MR imaging and spectroscopy. 7T provides the principal
advantages of higher image signal-to-noise ratio, changes in T1, T2 and T2*
contrast and increased blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) contrast for
use in functional MRI. These gains can be exploited to improve the spatial resolu
tion and/or temporal resolution of anatomical and functional images. Changes in
contrast can be exploited to enhance depiction of pathology such as lesions in
multiple sclerosis, and neurodegenerative conditions such as Alzheimer's and
Parkinson's disease. Whilst for MR spectroscopy, 7T provides the advantage of
increased spectral resolution. 7T has opened up novel contrast mechanisms includ
ing susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI) which provides information on the local
variation in magnetic susceptibility highlighting differences in iron concentration and
myelin. Ultra-high field provides increased longitudinal relaxation times, providing
increased signal changes for Arterial Spin Labelling (ASL). This presentation will
discuss the advantages of 7T and the applications which benefit from 7T over lower
field MR. The limitations of 7T in the clinical setting will be discussed, including the
issue of specific absorption rate (SAR), and B1 and B0 inhomogeneity. Technical
developments to overcome these limitations and enable the wider clinical use of
7T MR will be discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the advantages that 7T provides for magnetic reso
nance imaging and spectroscopy.
2. To be able to recognise the areas of clinical application where 7T already offers
significant benefits over lower fields.
3. To understand the barriers to clinical use of 7T.
4. To be able to recognise the technical developments that will help to overcome
these barriers and allow wider clinical use of 7T.
16:00 - 17:30 Room N/O
Interventional Radiology
RC 1109
Biliary interventions
A304 16:00
Chairman's introduction
A.A. Hatzidakis; Iraklion/GR (adamhatz@med.uoc.gr)
There are some basic IR techniques everybody needs to know before starting to
treat biliary diseases. hese are Percutaneous Transhepatic Cholangiography
(PTC) and Percutaneous Transhepatic Biliary Drainage (PTBD). PTC is the basic
procedure for opacification of the biliary tree. We puncture the liver with a 21G
Chiba needle entering the liver in the right middle axillary line targeting the xiphoid.
For the left biliary duct system we puncture the anterior abdominal wall just under
the xiphoid, aiming posterior and right lateral. After opacification, decision must be
made about the site of puncture for introduction of the drainage catheter. There are
two major techniques: A. the fine 22 G needle technique and B. the 18 G needle
technique. Advantage of the fine needle technique is that even multiple needle
passages may not cause complications. The drainage of the bile ducts is performed
with a plastic multiple hole pigtail 8-10 Fr catheter. Dilatation of stenosed parts of
the biliary system is performed after negotiation of the stricture or occlusion with
help of high-pressure angioplasty balloons of variant sizes. Balloons of 8- to 14-mm-
width can be used alone or two parallel to each other. Percutaneous lithotripsy with
or without cholangioscopic assistance is a widely used technique for clearance of
biliary stones or fragments. Extraction balloons or baskets and special lithotripsy
devices are commonly used for impacted or large calculi.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn more about the dysplastic and neoplastic conditions causing GGO,
e.g. semi-solid nodules.
2. To review the histopathological correlates of dysplastic and neoplastic GGO.
3. To attempt to estimate malignancy on the basis of GGO pattern.
Panel discussion:
How do we report and manage ground glass opacity? 17:14
16:00 - 17:30 Room L/M
Physics in Radiology
RC 1113
High field MRI: beyond 3 T
Moderators:
F. Schick; Tubingen/DE
S. Trattnig; Vienna/AT
A301 16:00
A. Challenges of high field MR
M. Bock; Freiburg/DE (michael.bock@uniklinik-freiburg.de)
Over the recent years the clinical MRI field strengths have gradually been in
creased to 3 Tesla; however, whole body MRI systems with higher fields of up to
9.4 Tesla have become available in experimental settings. Compared with clinical
field strengths, MRI at very high magnetic fields has several advantages but also
some unique challenges. With increasing field strength the signal-to-noise ratio
increases, which can be used to either increase the spatial resolution in the images,
or to acquire the images more rapidly. Unfortunately, the energy deposited in the
human body via the RF excitation scales quadratically with the field strength. Thus,
the specific absorption rate (SAR) is a critical factor in all rapid imaging protocols
and requires the design of RF pulses with low SAR, (e.g. VERSE pulses). Inhomo
geneities of the RF field which are induced by standing wave phenomena have to
be compensated and make the design of efficient spin echo pulse sequences very
difficult. At higher field also the field inhomogeneities become larger and stronger
imaging gradients are required to overcome the susceptibility-induced image distor
tion. Stronger gradient systems are difficult to manufacture, and the usable gradient
slew rate is limited by peripheral nerve stimulation thresholds. Furthermore, stronger
and faster gradients become very loud at high fields, and special measures for
sound protection are required. Despite these limitations, high field MRI offers image
with very high resolution, it provides unique contrasts, a better spectral separation
of the resonance lines and high signal for non-proton applications.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand how increased field strength affects exposure and image quality
characteristics.
2. To learn about MR imaging protocols developed for ultra-high field MRI.
3. To become familiar with technology for specific absorption rate reduction.
A302 16:30
B. A complicated solution to a complicated problem: transmit array
M.E. Ladd; Essen/DE (mark.ladd@uniduisburgessen.de)
MRI has become a vital tool for clinical diagnosis and research. A major current
trend is the introduction of more powerful static magnetic fields, in particular human
research magnets > 3 T. Advantages of higher magnetic fields include higher SNR
and unique tissue contrasts due to enhanced sensitivity to tissue susceptibility
differences. As field strength increases, the frequency of the RF fields used for
tissue excitation increases linearly according to the Larmor relation, leading to
correspondingly shorter wavelengths inside the tissue. Interference and penetra
tion effects make it quite difficult to achieve RF excitation uniformity, particularly
in body applications when a large cross-section is imaged, and lead to subject-
dependent signal dropouts according to body habitus. The inherent advantages of
higher magnetic fields can thus often not be leveraged to realise expected imaging
benefits. Preliminary research indicates that these effects can be addressed by
use of parallel transmission strategies such as RF shimming and Transmit SENSE:
in RF shimming a multi-element transmit coil array is driven with amplitude and
phase weightings optimised for a particular body region; Transmit SENSE is a
further generalisation in which different RF pulse waveforms are applied to each
element. These novel excitation strategies result in alterations of the RF energy
distribution in the tissue, making new demands on the prediction and monitoring
of SAR and concomitant tissue heating. Once these challenges are mastered, it
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S74 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
A307 16:51
C. In tandem with endoscopy
D.F. Martin; Manchester/UK (derrick.martin@uhsm.nhs.uk)
Most biliary intervention is performed endoscopically but endoscopy may fail and
the antegrade placement of a catheter into the bowel assists endoscopic access.
Previously, the primary management of malignant bile duct obstruction was with
the endoscopic placement of 10 F plastic stents. When ERCP failed, PTC using a
7 F catheter allowed the placement of an endoscopic 10 F stent but kept compli
cations low because of the avoidance of a 10 F trans-hepatic track. Now, with the
advent of 6 Fr trans-hepatic delivery systems for 10 mm diameter metal stents this
combined procedure has fallen into disuse. Endoscopic access for the manage
ment of stones can fail, most commonly because of a peri-ampullary diverticulum.
In this situation, a trans-hepatic approach can allow wire-guided sphincterotomy
leading to successful endoscopic management and the avoidance of open bile
duct surgery. This presentation will describe the technical aspects of this approach
together with illustrative case examples. The technique has a very high success
rate with complications of haemorrhage, bile leak and cholangitis in approximately
10% of patients. Polya-gastrectomy is declining in its incidence and experienced
endoscopists who can deal with these patients are becoming uncommon. A trans-
hepatic approach may allow a guide wire to be passed along the afferent loop
for endoscopic access. There is a small but growing experience of EUS-guided
biliary drainage for the management of biliary obstruction. Gastroenterologists
favour this approach because it appears to generate fewer complications than a
trans-hepatic approach and is certainly less uncomfortable for the patient. These
newer techniques will be illustrated and discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be aware of the indications for tandem use of percutaneous and endoscopic
approach.
2. To learn the tips and tricks of the tandem technique.
3. To learn about the results and complications of tandem treatment.
Panel discussion:
What are the new possibilities in this classic topic? 17:14
16:00 - 17:30 Room P
Radiographers
RC 1114
Radiographers' impact on dose optimisation and
radiation protection: the essential link in the chain
Moderators:
A.B. Aslaksen; Bergen/NO
A. Henner; Oulu/FI
A308 16:00
A. Dose optimisation - what more is there to be done? The role of
the radiographer
S. Mc Fadden; Newtownabbey/UK
The concept of reference dose levels was introduced in the UK to act as an aid
to radiation protection. Initially, DRL were calculated for common diagnostic x-ray
examinations and in more recent years the concept has been extended into interven
tional studies. The aim of DRL was to indicate abnormally high doses for common
x-ray examinations. Recent literature states that DRLs are still very variable across
Europe and Asia for common examinations using similar x-ray equipment. Hence,
patients are consistently receiving higher radiation doses in different countries. It
has also been reported that poor image quality results in unnecessary radiation
exposure to these patients. Simple measures can be put in place by the radiographer
to ensure that image quality is maintained and the ALARA principle is adhered to at
an international level. The use of anti-scatter grids, standardised techniques, DRLs
and the impact of digital imaging will be explored and recommendations for best
practice made. These simple modifications to technique can be easily implemented
into daily practice in the imaging department and have achieved dose reductions of
up to 49% with minimal loss of image quality during simulated experimental condi
tions. The session will conclude with a discussion on the concept of producing a
diagnostic image which is adequate for the purpose with a lower radiation dose,
rather than optimum image quality with a high radiation dose.
A305 16:05
A. Fistula and benign stenosis
M. Krokidis; London/UK (mkrokidis@hotmail.com)
Benign biliary stenoses may be due to postoperative injury (laparoscopic chole
cystectomy, gastric/hepatic resection and bilio-enteric anastomosis), post-liver
transplantation, post traumatic (blunt or penetrating trauma), inflammation as
sociated with lithiasis, congenital (usually in paediatric population), parasitic
and post radiation. Internal biliary fistulas occur due to acute inflammation with
obstruction that leads to adhesions, erosion of the bile duct or gallbladder wall and
eventual erosion with formation of a fistula. The most common causes of benign
fistulas are cholelithiasis, peptic ulcerartion and Crohn's disease of the duodenum.
Diagnosis of benign biliary strictures is usually performed with Ultrasound, Com
puted Tomography, Magnetic Resonance Cholangiopancreatography or Endocopic
Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), whereas biliary fistulas are difficult
to diagnose with non invasive methods and the diagnosis is usually made either
with Percutaneous Transhepatic Cholagiography, ERCP or even intraoperatively.
Percutaneous approach is an established method of treatment of benign stenosis,
particularly when they are a result of bilio-digestive anastomosis, either with the
use of multiple and prolonged balloon dilatations, or with the use of plastic or
metallic (bare or covered) stents. Biliary fistulas can be percutaneously treated
by correcting the reason keeping the fistula active (patent). A biliary stricture or
stone may be such a reason and can be dilated or removed, respectively, either
through the existing fistula or through a new transhepatic access. Embolisation of
the fistula tract or use of a metallic stent can be also discussed. In case of portal-
biliary fistula, embolisation of the portal branches or positioning of a covered stent
might be the solution.
Learning Objectives:
1. To know about the etiology of fistulas and benign stenoses.
2. To be familiar with the various imaging modalities and findings in benign fistulas
and stenoses.
3. To understand the techniques, results, and complications of interventional
treatment.
A306 16:28
B. Interventions after liver transplantation
P. Goffette; Brussels/BE (goffette@rdgn.ucl.ac.be)
Bile tract complications occur in 10-35% of liver transplants, with major incidence
in partial LT. The incidence is highest in the first few month after LT and 80% are
diagnosed within 6 months. Type of surgical anastomosis, cold and warm ischaemic
liver injury and pre-existing biliary diseases are all factors influencing the frequency,
type and severity of complications which include biliary strictures, bile leakage,
stone formation and bilomas. Screening sonography (38% sensitivity) may be
misleading due to false-negative results. Therefore, systematic PTC at 6 month
after LT is recommended in order to disclose biliary complications at early stage.
Main indications for percutaneous approach include 1. Early anastomotic strictures
unaccessible to endoscopy (segmental graft or hepaticojejunostomy anastomosis).
2. Late non-anastomotic strictures due to arterial occlusion, recurrent sclerosing
cholangitis, CMV infection (often a temporising measure before retransplantation).
3.Access for subsequent procedures such as lithotripsy, intrahepatic stones, sludge
or biliary cast removal. 4. Post-LT bile leaks. The conventional approach to biliary
strictures included 1. Repeated and prolonged (30 minutes) high-pressure balloon
bilioplasty (3X) at 2-3 weeks' interval. 2. Long-term drainage with large bore drains.
3. Chronic catheters left in place in patients with recurrent or diffuse strictures.
Long-term patency of bilioplasty is reported from 50 to 60% at 5 years after a 80%
6 months' patency. Cutting balloons with micro-surgical blades and metallic stents
may be useful to treat refractory strictures in non surgical candidates. Temporary
retrievable covered stent grafts for resistant stenosis is associated with an 50%
restenosis rate at 6-12 Mo. The management of biliary leaks (5-15%) includes
combined drainages of the injured biliary duct and biloma. Temporary insertion of
covered stent may be necessary to manage hilar or anastomotic leaks. Selective
embolisation of intrahepatic leaks or segmental portal vein embolisation is an
alternative to a surgical approach to manage refractory non-anastomotic leaks.
Learning Objectives:
1. To know about the appropriate imaging algorithm for the detection of biliary
complications after liver transplantation.
2. To be familiar with the techniques of interventional treatment of biliary com
plications after liver transplantation.
3. To understand the results and complications in comparison with surgical
management.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S75
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Saturday
16:00 - 17:30 Room Z
EuroAIM Session
Evidence-based radiology: ongoing projects and
perspectives
Moderators:
G.P. Krestin; Rotterdam/NL
F. Sardanelli; Milan/IT
A311 16:00
Evidence-based radiology 2001-2010: the authorship
F. Sardanelli; Milan/IT
A systematic literature search for secondary studies concerning diagnostic imag
ing or interventional radiology published from 2001 to 2010 was performed on
PubMed/EMBASE. Of 3,502 papers initially screened, 1,931 studies were selected
for evaluation. Up to November 24 2011, 1,664 papers were evaluated (86%) and
1,058 entered authorship analysis (64% of evaluated): systematic reviews with
meta-analysis 61%, systematic reviews without meta-analysis 35%, guidelines/
position papers 3%, cost-effectiveness and other 1%. Subspecialties: neuro
20%; cardiac 15%; abdominal-gastrointestinal 14%; vascular/interventional 12%;
musculoskeletal 9%; breast 6%; thoracic 4%; urogenital 4%; maternal/fetal 4%;
pediatrics 3%; head-neck 3%; oncology (general) 3%; and other 4%. For these
1,058 studies, a radiologist or a nuclear medicine (NM) physician resulted as first
author in 167 (16%), second author in 162 (15%), last author in 140 (13%). Notably,
the number of studies with a radiologist or a NM physician as first, second, or last
author was only 231 (22%): about four of five evidence-based secondary papers
had no radiologists or NM physicians in a relevant authorship position. Looking at
subspecialties for the rate of authorship representation compared to the overall rate,
oncology (general), urogenital, head-neck, abdominal-gastrointestinal, and breast
resulted relatively over-represented while pediatrics, maternal/fetal, neuro, thoracic
resulted relatively under-represented. Considering the large amount of secondary
imaging literature examined, imaging specialists, especially radiologists, seem
to play a minor role in determining evidence-based studies concerning their own
medical field. In other words, indications for diagnostic imaging and interventional
procedures are defined by teams mainly composed by other medical figures.
A312 16:25
State-of-the-art in medical imaging: a dynamic overview of current
evidence via modern media
M.G.M. Hunink; Rotterdam/NL
Context: Knowledge concerning sensitivity and specificity of medical imaging tests
is indispensible for choosing the appropriate imaging technique and interpreting
imaging results. The extensive number of publications hampers radiologists and
clinicians in their effort to keep their knowledge up-to-date. Objectives: (1) Provide
a systematic review of meta-analyses concerning the sensitivities and specificities
of MRI, CT, ultrasound, conventional radiography, PET, SPECT, and scintigraphy
for a range of clinical indications. (2) Launch a Wikipedia page with an overview
of the results. (3) Initiate a collective effort among clinicians and radiologists to
keep the review up-to-date. Data Sources: A Pubmed search was performed to
identify all meta-analyses published up until March 2011, analyzing the sensitivity
and specificity of the 7 imaging modalities. Study Selection: Studies were excluded
if (a) the imaging modality played only a marginal role in the analysis, (b) no spe
cific imaging indication was investigated, (c) the journal in which the article was
published was not assigned an impact factor in the JCR Science Edition 2010, (d)
sensitivity and specificity were not reported, (e) the meta-analysis was superseded
by a qualitatively better meta-analysis. Data Extraction: Two independent review
ers extracted year of publication, journal, imaging modality, clinical indication,
imaging protocol, study quality assessment, number of original studies, number of
patients, substudies, sensitivity, and specificity. Results: The search retrieved 343
publications. After excluding non-eligible studies we reviewed 39 MRI, 43 CT, 53
ultrasound, 9 conventional radiography, 21 PET, 10 SPECT and 16 scintigraphy
studies. An exponential increase in number of meta-analyses was found over
time. The overview will be available on Wikipedia. Conclusion: We are initiating
a collective effort to provide up-to-date information on diagnostic performance of
imaging tests in an accessible web-based system.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the importance of dose optimisation as a part of the everyday
work of the radiographer.
2. To consolidate knowledge in the area of dose and image quality optimisation.
3. To be informed about current and future opportunities in dose optimisation
and image quality.
A309 16:30
B. From screen-film to digital systems: how to implement an
optimisation process
J. Santos; Coimbra/PT (joanasantos@estescoimbra.pt)
The screen-film system has been the primary tool in radiology for over a century
and the radiation dose was a minor consideration during the early days. The tech
nology evolution for digital radiography provided a lot of advantages, like a better
workflow, a high image quality and when properly used can decrease the dose
per exam. It is mandatory for radiographer follow the whole process of transition
from screen-film to digital system and has thorough knowledge of new installed
technology. The technical system specifications are crucial to optimization. Digital
systems have high Detective Quantum Efficiency (DQE) and enable the reduc
tion of exposure complying ALARA (As Low As Reasonable Achievable) principle.
Exposure parameters have to be adequate to the digital reality and new presets,
for standard patients, should be established. Phantoms tests and quality control
tests must be performed, and the results should be compared with guidelines
and literature. The exposure parameters should be tested in different weight and
height phantoms. After this procedure dose values, image quality and dose index
should be controlled as daily routine to promote optimization.Contrary to what it
provides, technology advances has contributed to increase the dose per exam.
To counteract this phenomenon, education for dose reduction, establishment of
Diagnostic Reference Levels (DRLs) and periodic review of doses grant the best
way of achieving optimisation. Radiographers are the key player in the optimization
process and they should be permanently focused on it.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the implementation process when changing from conventional
to digital systems.
2. To be aware of the critical points in the optimisation process.
3. To understand the different considerations in dose optimisation between
conventional and digital imaging.
A310 17:00
C. The importance of education and training in the development of
the role of the radiographer in quality assurance and radiation protection
M.L. Butler; Dublin/IE (marielouise.butler@ucd.ie)
Internationally, medical radiation accounts for the majority of radiation exposure to
the public. With the increasing international focus on radiation protection in clinical
practice, there has never been a more appropriate time to promote education in
this area amongst the radiography community. With the advent of new technologies
and changes in working role, the radiographer`s role is ever developing. Because
radiographers are directly involved with the technology and patients on a daily
basis, their role in quality assurance (QA) and radiation protection is pivotal. This
presentation will focus on the current role of the radiographer in QA and radiation
protection from a European perspective and will explore the increasing role of QA
in the clinical department. The importance of appropriate education and training
and the types of education currently available for radiographers will be discussed
alongside current literature and guidelines available in this field. The experience
of an online radiation safety course and its impact on the role of the radiographer
will be reviewed. The future of the radiographer`s role in this field and deficiencies
in current practice will be examined and conclusions will be drawn.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the role of education in QA and radiation protection.
2. To be aware of the new perspectives in education for QA and radiation protec
tion.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S76 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
A313 16:50
Preoperative breast MRI: Multicenter International Prospective
Analysis of individual woman data
R.M. Trimboli; Milan/IT
Meta-analyses of studies (mostly nonconsecutive patient series) showed that
breast MRI detects otherwise occult ipsilateral and contralateral disease in 11% and
4% of women who had the test, respectively. The ongoing controversy regarding
preoperative breast MRI and the balance between potential advantages (reduction
in re-operation rate for positive margins and ipsi-/contralateral recurrence) and
drawbacks (overdiagnosis/overtreatment) persists given limited evidence.Associa
tion of increasing use of preoperative MRI and increased rate of mastectomies has
been suggested. Two recent randomized controlled trials did not show advantages
from preoperative MRI but have been criticized due to various limitations. Thus,
EuroAIM in cooperation with EUSOBI, designed an observational multicenter study
which will analyses individual women data: "Preoperative breast MRI multicenter
international prospective analysis (MIPA) study". Two concurrent consecutive co
horts of newly diagnosed breast cancer patients defined by receiving/not receiving
preoperative breast MRI will be compared matched for age/breast density.Analytical
adjustment will be performed for relevant covariates. All involved centers will be
high-volume breast imaging/care facilities. We plan to enroll about 2,600 women
from 18 to 80 years of age with newly diagnosed breast cancer: 1,300 for the MRI
group and 1,300 for the no-MRI group. Rate and type of changed surgical plan
ning in the MRI group will be assessed. Primary outcomes will be rate of primary
upfront mastectomy and re-excision rate for positive margins. Secondary outcome
will be ipsilateral recurrence rate, contralateral cancer rate, and distant metastasis
occurrence during 5-year followup.
Discussion 17:15
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S77
C D E F G H
A
Sunday, March 4
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S78 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
visualisation. The use of advanced 3D displays like virtual dissection or unfolding
techniques may reduce the interpretation time for primary 3D evaluation. Colonic
findings are characterised by their morphology, by their attenuation characteristics,
and by their mobility. Knowledge of CTC imaging features of common colonic le
sions and artefacts is necessary for characterisation of findings and to differentiate
between definite colonic lesions and pseudo-lesions. Computer-aided detection
(CAD) algorithms used as a 2nd reader have shown to reduce the number of
perceptual errors by pointing out possible abnormalities that might otherwise be
missed. Standardisation of CTC reporting facilitates classification and communica
tion of findings and the comparison with previous studies, thereby better assisting
physicians in making appropriate management decisions.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about a structured approach how to analyse CT colonography data
sets, based on 2D and 3D imaging techniques.
2. To become familiar with common interpretative pitfalls and strategies to avoid
them.
3. To emphasise on the role of CAD in CT colonography.
4. To learn how to create a structured CT colonography report.
A317 09:21
C. Step 3: setting up your service
B. Schaeffer1
, M. Kreis1
, T. Mang2
, A. Graser1
; 1
Munich/DE, 2
Vienna/AT
(Anno.Graser@med.unimuenchen.de)
Recent results show that CTC is an accurate test to detect colonic polyps and
masses. Although the CMS has declined reimbursement for screening CTC in the
United States in 2009, CTC is being used increasingly in the radiologic community.
Indications for CTC include examination of elderly and symptomatic patients as well
as examination of asymptomatic adults who select CTC as their screening option
for colorectal cancer. In the light of a lack of reimbursement certain steps have to
be taken to set up a successful CTC service. In many countries, ionizing radiation
cannot be used for screening examinations other than mammography. Therefore,
radiologists have to be well familiar with radiation exposure considerations in CTC.
Also, specialists have to know about indications, contraindications, and pitfalls that
have to be followed for succesful CTC. Furthermore, training strategies for CTC
interpretation will be discussed; in the beginning, expert double reading is recom
mended. In this presentation it will be outlined which steps have to be undertaken
to set up a succesful CTC program.
Learning Objectives:
1. To appreciate the need for training prior to CTC and understand the role of
training courses and double reporting.
2. To become familiar with ways of maximising service efficiency.
3. To appreciate the differences in approach between setting up a service for
older symptomatic patients and setting up colorectal cancer screening.
4. To learn how to formulate local polyp reporting guidelines and how best to
integrate the service with the needs of local clinicians.
5. To learn a basic audit framework.
Panel discussion:
What exactly do I need to do? 09:44
08:30 - 10:00 Room B
Interactive Teaching Session
E 1220
Common radiological problems: incidental
abdominal masses
A318 08:30
A. The incidental adrenal mass
R.H. Reznek; London/UK (r.h.reznek@qmul.ac.uk)
With the increasing use of abdominal cross-sectional imaging, incidental adrenal
masses are being detected more often. The important clinical question is whether
these lesions are benign adenomas or malignant primary or secondary masses.
Benign adrenal masses such as lipid-rich adenomas, phaeochromocytomas,
myelolipomas, adrenal cysts and adrenal haemorrhage have pathognomonic
cross-sectional imaging appearances. However, there remains a significant overlap
between imaging features of some lipid-poor adenomas and malignant lesions.
The nature of incidentally detected adrenal masses can be determined with a high
degree of accuracy using computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging
alone. Positron emission tomography is also increasingly used in clinical practice in
08:30 - 10:00 Room A
GI Tract
RC 1201
CT colonography: three steps to success
A314 08:30
Chairman's introduction
S.A. Taylor; London/UK (csytaylor@yahoo.co.uk)
CT colonography is widely considered as the radiological examination of choice for
the large bowel. It has a variety of indications including investigation of symptomatic
patients and potentially in screening of asymptomatic individuals. Radiologists un
dertaking CTC must be well versed in the technical protocol requirements as well
as how best to interpret the examination. Furthermore, they must have a thorough
understanding of the epidemiology of colorectal neoplasia, so reporting practices
are evidence based. This session will guide participants in a stepwise fashion
through the pre-requisites to high-quality CTC in 2012. Lectures will discuss how
to achieve a high-quality examination, how to interpret the examination and finally
consider the requirements for setting up and running a successful CTC service.
A315 08:35
A. Step 1: bowel prep and distension
A. Laghi; Latina/IT (andrea.laghi@uniroma1
.it)
Bowel preparation and colon distention represent two critical steps of CT colonog
raphy (CTC) examination. The ideal colonic preparation is still under debate. It is
general consensus that patients should undergo a low-residue diet before the exami
nation, and to ingest a cathartic agent the day before. Different cathartic agents are
available. In order to improve sensitivity and specificity, "tagging" of residual fluids,
in combination with the administration of a cathartic agent, is now routinely used.
It consists in the administration, prior to CTC, of water-soluble iodinated contrast
medium or alternatively diluted barium sulfate suspension. Since bowel cleansing
is consistently the most unpleasant part of colonic examination, minimally-invasive
preparation schemes (using mild or no laxatives at all), more comfortable and less
demanding for patients, are now available. For reduced bowel preparations the
combination with faecal/fluid tagging is mandatory. Gaseous colonic distention is
another critical step since collapsed bowel is a frequent cause of missed lesions
at CTC. The use of a rectal balloon catheter has been replaced by a thin rubber
tube in order to improve patient compliance and to minimise risks of perforation. To
further improve Patient comfort, automatic CO2 insufflation represents a possible
alternative to room air. The administration of a spasmolytic agent is particularly
useful in the case of colonic spasm, typically in sigmoid colon, and in patients with
severe diverticular disease. The use of a MDCT scanner is mandatory and dedi
cated scanning protocols need to take into account radiation exposure, especially
in individuals undergoing screening CTC.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the options available for bowel preparation, including
the use of tagging agents, and to learn three examples of a bowel preparation
regimen that `works'.
2. To learn a step-by-step evidence-based approach to distending the colon
(including spasmolytic agents, patient positioning, insufflation technique).
3. To appreciate optimum CTC acquisition parameters.
4. To become familiar with described complications (notably perforation) and
how the risk may be minimised.
A316 08:58
B. Step 2: analysis and how to avoid pitfalls
T. Mang; Vienna/AT (thomas.mang@meduniwien.ac.at)
The evaluation of CT colonograpy (CTC) studies is based on detection, interpreta
tion and reporting of colonic findings. It is performed on a workstation equipped
with dedicated CTC software by a primary 2D or a primary 3D approach. In either
case, the alternative viewing technique must be available for rapid correlation and
characterisation of suspicious findings. Primary 2D evaluation is based on "lumen
tracking" by interactively scrolling through the axial slices and multiplanar reformat
ted images, focusing only on the air-distended colonic lumen from one end to the
other. Primary 2D evaluation provides information about the attenuation of findings
during the search process and is time-efficient. Primary 3D evaluation is based on
3D virtual endoscopy in an antegrade and retrograde direction and increases both,
the conspicuity, especially of small- and medium-sized polyps, and the duration of
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S79
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Sunday
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn more about the clinical conditions causing focal neurological symp
toms.
2. To be informed about the clinician's way of thinking in the process of differential
diagnosis.
3. To become familiar with the potential role of imaging in the establishment of
the final diagnosis.
A321 09:00
B. Imaging techniques and typical findings
G. Rudas; Budapest/HU (grudas@mrkk.sote.hu)
Given the vast selection of possible imaging modalities and techniques, it is
practically impossible to detail all the imaging techniques and typical findings of
Neuroradiology in 25 minutes. It has become clear lately, that except for politrauma
patients - where CT is still the first method of choice - MRI is the gold standard for
Neuroradiology examinations and thus my talk will focus on MRI. In the first part
of the talk I will give a short introduction to the MRI techniques used in the evalu
ation of focal neurological disorders and discuss their utility and possible pitfalls.
In the second part I will highlight some hot topics of diagnostic Neuroradiology,
starting with recent changes in diagnostic guidelines, e.g. in acute stroke, where
MRI become the first modality of choice. Then I will continue with lesser-known
but nevertheless important diseases: the acute disseminated encephalomyelitis
(ADEM), the posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) and the neo
natal asphyxia. I will detail the up-to-date MRI protocols, the differential diagnostic
questions and the possible pitfalls.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the available imaging modalities for the evaluation of patients
with focal neurological disorders.
2. To become familiar with the technical imaging considerations and the proper
diagnostic algorithm.
3. To know more about the typical imaging findings.
A322 09:30 
C. Interactive case discussion
G. Krumina; Riga/LV (gaida.krumina@apollo.lv)
Original clinical cases illustrating the importance of appropriate imaging modalities in
the right interpretation of neurological symptoms and evaluation of correct diagnosis
are presented. The role of clinical history and disease course are accented. The
spectrum of pathologies includes vascular, inflammation, metabolic, degenerative
diseases and tumours of the central nervous system. Each case story is described
shortly in a standard form followed by demonstration of typical CT and/or MRI im
ages. In some cases conventional MRI is supplemented by MR spectroscopy, DTI
and MR tractography images. Followup images are presented where appropriate.
Several diagnostic options are offered for attendants. The audience will be asked to
participate in the diagnostic process by the use of voting pads. After highlighting of
final diagnosis the basic differential diagnostic considerations will be summarised
and emphasised from the clinical and imaging point of view for each presented case.
Learning Objectives:
1. To review typical cases illustrating the role of imaging modalities in the dif
ferential diagnosis of focal neurological symptoms.
2. To get involved in the diagnostic process by the use of electronic voting pads.
3. To understand the conclusion that may be drawn on the basis of the discussed
cases.
characterising incidentally detected lesions in patients with cancer. The performance
of the established and new techniques in CT, MRI and to a lesser extent PET, that
can be used to distinguish benign adenomas and malignant lesions of the adrenal
gland will be reviewed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To appreciate the range of adrenal pathology that can present incidentally and
recognise their imaging features.
2. To appreciate the need to characterise these lesions in the clinical context of
the patient's management.
3. To become familiar with CT and MRI for characterising an incidental adrenal
mass.
A319 09:15
B. Renal mass
M. Prokop; Nijmegen/NL (M.Prokop@rad.umcn.nl)
With the increasing use of imaging, incidentally detected renal masses are very
common. While masses detected by CT or MR usually can be properly classified,
renal masses detected by ultrasound frequently require further workup. The follow
ing considerations determine the diagnostic workup: simple cysts are very common
but may present atypically. Renal cell carcinomas may be cystic but usually display
at least a small solid component. Renal cell carcinomas have a bad prognosis
when metastasized but metastases hardly every develop before the tumour has
reached 3 cm in diameter. Differentiation between solid tumours by imaging alone
is exceedingly difficult, save for the identification of angiomyolipomas in adults. This
course will discuss suitable diagnostic algorithms based on the initial presentation
of the mass. Typical imaging findings of various benign and malignant renal masses
will be presented. The role of the Bosniak classification will be illustrated. Newer
developments such as a wait-and-see approach or primary biopsy for small solid
renal masses will be discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn how to detect and characterise a renal mass.
2. To understand how to apply appropriate protocols according to the clinical
situation.
08:30 - 10:00 Room C
CLICK (Clinical Lessons for Imaging Core Knowledge): Common
Clinical Cases
CC 1218
Focal neurological disorders
Moderator:
M. Golebiowski; Warsaw/PL
A320 08:30
A. Clinical considerations
D. Baleriaux; Brussels/BE (dbaleri@ulb.ac.be)
When dealing with "focal neurological disorders", what kind of neuroimaging should
we apply and what should be the optimal diagnostic work-up? What pathological
condition must be searched for in function of the focal neurological signs? When
is imaging playing a vital role? The radiologist must and should remain first of all
a Medical Doctor: he/she should keep close contact with the clinical world and
always keep an active dialogue with the referring clinician. As medical imaging has
become more and more sophisticated and also more expensive, it should not just
be a "screening procedure" for brain pathology but should be performed in order to
confirm a clinical, suspected diagnosis. The radiologist must answer precise ques
tions about the patient's suspected pathological condition and if necessary, discuss
the imaging findings with the clinician in order to narrow the differential diagnosis.
Each MRI or CT must be performed with a clear knowledge of the clinical question
and the suspected pathology. Symptoms and clinical history may already strongly
orient towards lesion location and even the nature of the pathology. Still, similar
symptoms may be present in multiple and very diverse pathological conditions
such as infectious, neoplastic, haemorrhagic, vascular diseases. Therefore, the
radiologist should make the proper choices of imaging techniques, especially with
MRI, where imaging sequences have become numerous: by knowing the clinical
history, and what the focal neurological disorders are, a good, "clinically conscious"
radiologist will undoubtedly be of greater "added value".
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S80 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the different types of traumatic haemorrhage (epidural,
subdural, intracerebral, subarachnoid).
2. To understand the difference between primary and secondary traumatic brain
lesions.
3. To understand how the brain can be severely damaged in closed head injuries
(deceleration trauma, diffuse axonal injuries).
A325 09:30
C. Spine trauma
A. Cianfoni; Charleston, SC/US (acianfoni@hotmail.com)
The role of imaging in acute c-spine trauma is to assess the spinal injury, deter
mine the stability and instability of the injury, evaluate integrity of neural elements,
to direct appropriate management, and to predict neurological outcome. A set
of clinical and/or amnestic criteria can be very useful in identifying patients who
need acute spinal imaging. Underdiagnosis should absolutely be avoided, due to
potentially devastating sequelae. Awareness of the strengths and limitations of
plain radiography, MDCT and MRI in the diagnosis of spinal injuries is fundamental.
Traumatic spinal lesions are represented by fractures, dislocations, ligamentous
disruption, disc injury, acute disc herniations, and epidural haematomas, often
combined, with variable involvement of neural structures. Fractures and dislocations
usually occur based upon a single predominant mechanism of injury. The six major
mechanisms of injuries are hyperflexion, simultaneous hyperflexion and rotation,
hyperextension, simultaneous hyperextension and rotation, vertical compression or
lateral flexion. The cranio-vertebral junction and the mid-lower cervical spine have
different anatomy and different pattern of injuries. This lecture will review the role
of different imaging modalities clinically used to assess the cervical spine in acute
trauma patients and the various injury patterns. Elements of imaging diagnosis
in paediatric patients will be presented. Imaging pitfalls will be also discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn how to image the patient with spine trauma.
2. To understand the role of plain radiographs in spine trauma patients.
3. To learn what is the role of MDCT in spine trauma.
4. To learn what is the role of MRI in spine trauma.
08:30 - 10:00 Room D2
Urogenital Imaging
CC 1221
The female pelvis
Moderator:
V. Gazhonova; Moscow/RU
A326 08:30
A. Diagnosis of endometriosis with imaging
K. Kinkel; CheneBougeries/CH (karen.kinkeltrugli@wanadoo.fr)
Endometriosis is defined by ectopic endometrial glands and stroma and sensi
tive to changes in estrogen leading to peri-menstruel bleeding causing pain and
adhesions. Ultrasound is the first imaging method to diagnose endometriosis of
the ovary and the bladder. Posterior localisations of endometriosis pelvis include
utero-sacral ligaments, the retrocervical region, the posterior vaginal fornix and the
recto-sigmoid wall. Those lesions can be diagnosed by trans vaginal ultrasound
but include difficulties due to a limited field of view, pain during mobilisation of the
probe and absent bowel or vaginal distension. MRI of the pelvis has an excellent
sensitivity for all pelvic localisation of endometriosis. Endometrioma is typically
hyper-intense at T1 fat-suppressed sequences and of variable signal intensity
at T2-weighted imaging. Other localisations are displayed by focal thickening
of ligaments/walls or a T2 hypo-intense nodule. Vaginal or bowel wall distention
due to ultrasound gel filling, thin slice sections and slice orientation perpendicular
to the main direction of the organ helps identification and diagnosis of extent of
deep localisations of endometriosis. Intra-venous contrast injection details depths
of wall invasion and adnexal mass characterisation. Rare lesion sites such as the
abdominal wall, the round ligament, the sciatic nerve or the parametrium can also
be detected with MRI. A delayed contrast-enhanced URO-MRI might be useful
to display ureteral lesions and the urinary tree. According to lesion localisation,
extent and clinical symptoms additional imaging methods might include CT of the
abdomen for small bowel endometriosis and hysterosalpingography to check tubal
patency in infertility patients.
08:30 - 10:00 Room D1
Emergencies in Neuroradiology
CC 1219
Radiological management of traumatic emergencies
Moderator:
D. Goldsher; Haifa/IL
A323 08:30
A. Maxillofacial trauma
B.F. Schuknecht; Zurich/CH (imagesolution@ggaweb.ch)
Maxillofacial injuries may occur in isolation or in conjunction with cranio-cerebral
trauma. The goal of imaging is to depict the presence, location, and displacement
of fractures, to delineate compromise of airways, ocular motility, and dental oc
clusion and to recognise concomitant skull base and intracranial injury. A concise
imaging strategy employs MDCT with thin multiplanar reformations to delineate
and classify fractures, to assess stability and to provide a basis for surgical
midface restoration. 3D techniques add information in complex fractures and in
perception of fracture displacement. In isolated mandibular trauma, panoramex
and pa radiographs maintained a certain role, which is challenged by superiority
of CT or Digital volume tomography (DVT) for condylar fractures as well. MR in
maxillofacial trauma serves as an adjunct to CT in case of injury to cranial nerves,
dura, vessels, orbital contents and brain parenchyma. Late complications of
maxillofacial trauma related to sinus drainage, ocular motility and dural integrity
require a combination of MR and CT as well. Maxillofacial fractures are classified
into mandibular, zygomatico-maxillary fractures including LeFort I and II fractures,
centrolateral Lefort III fractures and nasoethmoid fractures. Mandibular fractures
comprise dento-alveolar, subcondylar, condylar neck and condylar head fractures.
Orbital fractures are divided into inferior and medial blowout fractures, orbital trap
door and roof fractures. Orbital penetrating injuries are an indication for both CT
and MR to recognise the type_organic versus nonorganic_and the location of a
foreign body and to depict potential retro-orbital, optic nerve and intracranial brain
and vascular involvement.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn what is the preferred imaging technique.
2. To learn how to report maxillofacial injury and fracture patterns (Le Fort fracture
lines).
3. To become familiar with the different types of orbital fractures.
4. To learn how to manage foreign bodies or penetrating objects on imaging.
A324 09:00
B. Craniocerebral trauma
P.M. Parizel; Antwerp/BE
Neuroimaging techniques constitute an essential part of the diagnostic work-up
of patients with traumatic brain injury (TBI). In the acute setting, imaging findings
determine patient management and influence clinical course. CT remains the first
choice technique to determine the presence and extent of injury, and to guide
surgical planning. Multi-detector CT allows simultaneous assessment of head and
cervical spine, obviating the need for plain radiographs. From a clinical point of
view, it is important to understand the difference between primary and secondary
TBI. Primary injuries occur as a direct result of the impact with damage to brain
tissue. Examples include fractures, different types of traumatic haemorrhage (epi
dural, subdural, intracerebral, subarachnoid), cerebral contusion, diffuse axonal
injury (DAI). CT-angiography is useful to document traumatic blood vessel injury.
Whenever there is a discrepancy between the patient's clinical status and imaging
findings, MRI is indicated. Secondary brain injuries are caused by systemic fac
tors such as increased intracranial pressure, edema, brain herniation, decreased
cerebral blood flow, excitotoxic damage. These lesions can be documented with
multiparametric MRI including diffusion, perfusion, and susceptibility-weighted
imaging. Diffusion tensor imaging with fractional anisotropy mapping may show
microstructural abnormalities in patients with mild TBI, even when traditional MRI
sequences appear normal. Neuroimaging also plays a role in the chronic stage
of TBI, identifying sequelae, determining prognosis, and guiding rehabilitation. In
conclusion, advances in neuroimaging improve our understanding of the patho
physiology of craniocerebral trauma and allow us to detect abnormalities, even in
patients with mild TBI, when routine imaging studies appear normal.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S81
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Sunday
4. To learn about expected clinical and imaging outcomes after HIFU and UAE.
08:30 - 10:00 Room E1
Musculoskeletal
RC 1210
Sports injuries: US or MRI?
A329 08:30
Chairman's introduction
G.M. Allen; Oxford/UK (georgina.allen@gtc.ox.ac.uk)
US and MR are excellent imaging techniques for studying tendons and muscles.
During this integrated session we will review the advantages and disadvantages
of US and MR for the diagnosis and followup of sports injuries. Tricks of both
techniques will be addressed, together with some useful guidelines for specific
sports injuries. Ultrasound is being used at the pitch side and in sports medicine
practice as an adjunct to clinical practice. With this in mind there are a number of
questions that will be answered in these talks: 1. when are US and MRI the primary
imaging and when are they complimentary? 2. What advances have there been
in US and MRI imaging to help advance our use of these techniques in tendon
and muscle injury? 3. Should we be aspirating haematomas and using autologous
blood injections or PRP to treat tendon or muscle disease? 4. Can we predict the
athletes return to sport?
A330 08:35
A. Muscle and US
C. Martinoli; Genoa/IT (carlo.martinoli@libero.it)
Muscle imaging is inherently complex and presents unique morphological chal
lenges and continuing integration of dynamic, physiological and functional ca
pabilities as imaging technology progresses. In sports medicine, high-resolution
ultrasound (US), which is now available not only in high-end equipments but also
in portable machines, has proved to be an excellent tool to evaluate muscle strain
and contusion injuries in athletes, providing good correlation with clinical findings.
In the acute phase, US has nearly equal sensitivity to MR imaging to diagnose
muscle strains, except in the first few hours after the injury, when fresh haemor
rhage and oedema have similar echogenicity to normal muscle and strains may
go unnoticed. Later in the process, US has been shown to be a useful tool in as
sessing the sequential stages of muscle repair. Local complications, such as vein
thrombosis, irritation of adjacent neurovascular bundles, chronic haematoma and
myositic ossificans can be demonstrated with this technique as well. However, US
tends to underestimate the extent of injury and the abnormalities seen disappear
more quickly when compared with MR imaging.At least in elite athletes, MR imaging
seems, therefore, to play a more significant role in management of muscle injury,
particularly when decisions regarding the time at which the patient can return to
play are needed. By contrast, US is quicker, more accessible and cheaper than MR
imaging. In most clinical settings, US should be regarded as the first-line imaging
choice for assessing skeletal muscle injury.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the mechanism of injury of muscles in athletes.
2. To understand the role of US in the diagnosis of muscle injuries.
3. To recognise the imaging pattern of abnormalities in athletes.
4. To understand how US might be used for diagnosis and followup in the
management of sports injuries.
A331 08:58
B. Tendon and US
A. Klauser; Innsbruck/AT (andrea.klauser@imed.ac.at)
Sports activity can affect tendons due to chronic overuse or acute injury. Both can
result in complete tendon rupture. US is helpful not only in precise assessment
of rupture severity and extent, but also in assessment of tendon degeneration,
where rupture of individual collagen fibres stimulates a chronic cycle of reparative
response caused due to repetitive microtrauma. In chronic tendinopathy histopatho
logical changes, such as hypoxic, mucoid, calcifying, or lipoid degenerations are
present. US enables differentiation of partial tears, tendinosis, tenosynovitis or
paratendinosis because of active and passive dynamic examination possibilities
and high-resolution capability when using high-frequency probes. US develop
ments as power Doppler US, sonoelastography and contrast-enhanced US allow
further new insights into tendinopathy. With the use of US, tendon changes can be
Learning Objectives:
1. To appreciate the proposed mechanisms of pathogenesis of endometriosis
and the relationship with the distribution of disease.
2. To be able to identify the most common imaging findings of endometriosis and
to discuss the differential diagnosis.
3. To be familiar with the unusual manifestations and complications of the disease.
A327 09:00
B. The acute female pelvis
E. Sala; Cambridge/UK (es220
@radiol.cam.ac.uk)
Imaging plays a crucial role in diagnosis and management of female patients
presenting with acute pelvic pain. The combination of transabdominal and trans
vaginal US is the study of choice for initial evaluation of acute female pelvis. Colour,
power and spectral Doppler provide additional information regarding associated
vascularity which is of particular importance when evaluating for presence of ovar
ian torsion. US is very accurate in determining the specific cause of acute pelvic
pain; common causes include ovarian cyst rupture, persistent corpus luteum cysts,
ectopic pregnancy and endometriosis. US can reliably demonstrate the presence
of a pyosalpinx or tubo-ovarian abscess complicating pelvic inflammatory disease.
US is the initial modality for evaluating patients with a pelvic mass with or without
suspected torsion. It can confirm the presence of the mass, establish its organ of
origin and demonstrate its internal consistency (endometrioma versus dermoid
versus complex/solid mass) as well as complications such as torsion, rupture,
etc. US is also the first imaging modality for assessment of lost intra-uterine coil
devices which can present with acute pelvic pain. CT may be performed after US
to visualise the full extent of disease in severe cases of tubo-ovarian abscess.
It is also indicated if clinical symptoms mimic appendicitis and is very useful in
detection of post-operative complications. MRI is a problem-solving modality. It
helps differentiate benign processes that necessitate specific immediate therapy
from those that can be managed expectantly. This triage is particularly important in
pregnant patients presenting with acute pelvic pain or indeterminate pelvic mass.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the role of US as the primary imaging modality in the evaluation
of the acute female pelvis.
2. To be able to recognise the added value of CT and MRI in the assessment of
acute female pelvis.
3. To understand the role of MRI in evaluation of acute pelvic conditions in
pregnant patients.
A328 09:30
C. Imaging and image-guided therapy of uterine leiomyomas
T.J. Kroencke; Berlin/DE (thomas.kroencke@charite.de)
Uterine artery embolisation (UAE) is a non-surgical intervention for treating symp
tomatic uterine leiomyomas and represents an alternative to surgical removal
(hysterectomy, moymectomy, hysteroscopic resection). The indication for uterine
artery embolisation crucially relies on the pre-interventional assessment of symp
tomatology and burden of disease. Especially the location, size, and number of
leiomyomas are important to determine the treatment options of the patient. As
a rule, both single and multiple fibroids can be treated by UAE. However, the
clinical outcome of UAE does not primarily depend on the number and location of
the individual tumours (subserosal, intramural, transmural, submucosal) but the
infraction rate of fibroids. MR guided high-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFUS)
is a non-invasive treatment option for symptomatic leiomyomata. In contrast to
UAE and surgery it lacks the invasiveness of these procedures since the targeted
leiomyoma is ablated by energy transmitted through the skin by focused ultrasound
while exact delivery is monitored online by MR Imaging. Size, location and number
of fibroids are limiting factors for the application of HIFUS. Magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) is superior compared to ultrasound in delineating the extent of
fibroid disease and excluding other pathologies or disease processes that may
mimic fibroid-related complaints. Further advantages of MRI result from the use
of MR angiography and contrast-enhanced imaging in assessing outcome and
complications following UAE. This presentation summarises the current role of
UAE and ultrasound ablation (HIFUS) for uterine leiomyomata as well as the role
of imaging before and after the procedure.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the role of US and MRI prior to image-guided therapy of leio
myoma.
2. To learn typical and atypical MR imaging features of uterine leiomyomas.
3. To understand the basic principles of high-intensity focused US (HIFU) and
uterine artery embolisation (UAE), indications and contraindications, advan
tages and disadvantages.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S82 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
of normal of 10 mm is universally applied. However, size criteria alone are unreli
able: CT for lung cancer staging has a pooled sensitivity of 51% (i.e., false-negative
diagnoses of metastatic deposits in nodes < 10 mm), and a specificity of 86% (i.e.,
false-positive diagnoses due to enlarged benign nodes). With MRI the same size
criteria apply. However, additionally, imaging features such as central necrosis
on T2w fatsat or gadolinium-enhanced images are suggestive of metastasis (or
suppurative infection). Lymph node-specific USPIO MR agents can depict tumour
deposits in subcentimeter pelvic nodes. Unfortunately, they did not receive market
approval. DWI is helpful in identifying in lymph nodes as they exhibit high SI with
higher b-values. However, diffusion pattern of benign and malignant nodes overlap,
so that measurement of ADC values do not aid in characterisation. Despite the
use of modern MDCT and MRI techniques, lymph node characterisation needs
further improvement.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be familiar with the current criteria.
2. To learn the imaging features that are highly specific to nodal disease.
3. To understand the diagnostic performance of cross-sectional imaging.
A335 08:58
B. MRI techniques: what do they contribute?
H.C. Thoeny; Berne/CH (harriet.thoeny@insel.ch)
Up to date lymph node staging is based on size and shape criteria only; however,
micrometastases can also be present in normal sized lymph nodes and nodes
can be enlarged due to inflammatory changes. New contrast agents in MRI such
as ultrasmall particles of iron oxide have substantially improved the diagnostic
accuracy of lymph node staging compared with conventional MRI. Unfortunately,
USPIO is not commercially available and therefore new approaches to differentiate
benign from malignant lymph nodes are required. Diffusion-weighted MRI (DWI)
is a noninvasive method that provides microstructural information on the underly
ing tissue. Up to date several studies mainly in the pelvis have shown promising
results to detect lymph nodes and also to allow differentiation between benign
and malignant nodes with reported sensitivities of 79-87% and specificities of 74-
93% based on the underlying mean apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) value. In
these studies any size of lymph nodes has been included with the smallest short
axis diameter of 5 mm. There is an overlap between ADC values of benign and
malignant nodes; therefore, further studies with histopathological correlation are
needed to reduce the high rate of false-positive nodes. Combination of USPIO
and DWI might facilitate and improve lymph node staging in the future provided
that USPIO will be available.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the principles of DWI of nodes.
2. To be able to recognise the imaging appearance of nodes on diffusion weighted
MRI.
3. To be introduced to the studies evaluating the diagnostic performance of dif
fusion weighted MRI.
A336 09:21
C. Nuclear medicine: PET and other techniques
W. Weber; Freiburg/DE (wolfgang.weber@uniklinikfreiburg.de)
Currently, nuclear medicine uses sentinel node scintigraphy and PET with the
glucose analogue fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG-PET) to detect lymph node metas
tases. Sentinel node scintigraphy images the lymphatic drainage of a tumour. A
radiolabelled colloid is injected at the site of the tumour and the drainage of the
colloid to the regional lymph node is imaged with a gamma camera. Intraoperatively,
lymph nodes are identified with a handheld gamma probe. Lymph nodes that have
accumulated the radiolabelled colloid are resected and analysed histopathologi
cally. Randomised studies have shown that in patient with breast cancer sentinel
node biopsy significantly reduces the rate of complications as compared with
systematic axillary dissection. Conversely, the risk for axillary recurrence is not
increased. FDG-PET imaging can detect metastases in lymph nodes that are not
pathologically enlarged. Furthermore, many unspecifically enlarged lymph nodes
do not demonstrate increased FDG uptake. However, it is important to note that
false-negative cases can occur in very small lymph node metastases, in mostly
necrotic lymph node metastases or in tumour types with low metabolic activity.
False-positive findings occur in active inflammation. Despite these limitations,
studies have clearly documented that FDG PET significantly improves the ac
curacy of lymph node staging in several malignant tumours. In non-small cell lung
cancer randomised trials have shown that FDG-PET significantly improves patient
management by avoiding unnecessary surgery. Ongoing preclinical and initial
clinical studies evaluate radiolabelled amino acid analogues that are potentially
diagnosed before they become symptomatic and a reduction of tendon load and
initiation of treatment before the condition becomes chronic seem to gain important
place in therapeutic regimes. Furthermore, US-guided therapies are advisable
over blinded-guided injections to minimise side effects and to allow an accurate
targeted therapeutic approach.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the mechanism of injury of tendons in athletes.
2. To understand the role of US in the diagnosis of tendon injuries.
3. To recognise imaging patterns of abnormalities in athletes.
4. To understand how US might be useful for diagnosis and followup in the
management of tendon injuries.
A332 09:21
C. Muscle and tendon by MRI
U. Aydingoz; Ankara/TR (uaydingo@hacettepe.edu.tr)
MRI is an excellent tool in depicting sports-related muscle and tendon injuries. Most
sports-related muscle injuries are located in the lower extremities and some are
quite deep-seated, thereby somewhat harder for US to show. Another advantage
of MRI over US in this setting is that concomitant bone injury is readily displayed.
US is admittedly a high-resolution, well-tolerated and readily available tool for
musculoskeletal soft tissue injuries. On the other hand, considerable expertise is
needed for musculoskeletal US, which is also quite time consuming. During the time
needed for a single musculoskeletal US to be performed and reported by an expert
musculoskeletal radiologist, several MRI studies may well be reported. Overall,
considering reimbursement constraints, fee-for-service" healthcare systems favour
MRI over US for evaluating sports-related musculoskeletal injuries. Myositis os
sificans, which is usually readily displayed by plain radiographs, is a caveat in MRI
of the muscles, may be overlooked or mistaken for more sinister conditions, and
is a case in point highlighting the need for evaluating musculoskeletal MRI exams
along with plain radiographs. Muscle herniations are better depicted by US, given
dynamic imaging capabilities of this modality.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the specific role of MRI in the evaluation of muscle and tendon
injuries in athletes.
2. To recognise imaging patterns of tendon abnormalities in athletes: acute and
over-use injuries.
3. To learn about the different mechanisms of muscle injuries: direct and indirect.
4. To understand how MRI might be used in the management of athletes.
Panel discussion:
What is the best imaging modality for diagnosing sports injuries? 09:44
08:30 - 10:00 Room E2
Oncologic Imaging
RC 1216
Lymph node imaging: where are we now?
A333 08:30
Chairman's introduction
R.G.H. BeetsTan; Maastricht/NL (r.beets.tan@mumc.nl)
Positive lymph node status is an important predictor for a poor prognosis. Accu
rate nodal staging often influences the choice of treatment and outcome of these
patients. However, detection of nodal infiltration by non-invasive imaging has been
challenging and to date FNAor biopsy has remained important to dictate treatment.
Nowadays, the combination of morphological and functional or metabolic informa
tion with modern imaging technology offers us new perspectives. In this session
we will learn about the present status of lymph node imaging using new generation
CT, MRI or PET and become familiar with the strength and weaknesses of each.
A334 08:35
A. The current criteria for nodal involvement on CT/MRI
W. Schima; Vienna/AT (Wolfgang.Schima@khgh.at)
Lymph node involvement in metastatic spreading and benign lymph node enlarge
ment are common in a variety of diseases. Thus, lymph node characterisation
is an important issue. It is based on size (short axis diameter) and morphologic
criteria such as shape, homogeneity and contrast enhancement. For abdominal
nodes, location-specific size criteria apply (upper limit of normal: lower paraaortic
11 mm, upper paraaortic 9 mm, gastrohepatic ligament 8 mm, portocaval space
10 mm, retrocrural space 6 mm; pelvic nodes 10 mm). In chest CT, an upper limit
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S83
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Sunday
the network. The advantages of these two solutions will be reviewed and existing
functioning examples will be presented and discussed. Additional considerations
regarding patient confidentiality and data security are also important aspects of
mobile device applications that need to be secured. It is, however, undeniable that
portable devices will become a major component of our life and will significantly
change workflow and clinical practice. Examples of clinical applications and use
of portable devices will be presented and discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with recent developments in mobile computing.
2. To understand the technical aspects of secure data communication techniques.
3. To be aware of the technical and workflow aspects.
4. To review practical examples of new technical solutions.
A340 09:21
Legal issues of teleradiology and portable reporting
R. FitzGerald; Wolverhampton/UK (richardfitzgerald@nhs.net)
A legislative proposal to modernise the EU Professional Qualifications Directive is
planned for December 2011. Its likely adoption is expected in 2013 with implementa
tion by Member States after that. The revised Directive should include provisions for
comprehensive medical regulation of all those who provide telemedicine services
for patients in EU Member States, identical to those applied for those in use for
non-electronic healthcare provision. The issue of ghost teleradiology reporting
needs to be addressed. The European Society of Radiology has requested that the
revised directive increase the minimum duration of training in Radiology from 4 to 5
years. The ESR has made clear to the European Commission the need for formal
EU recognition of European diplomas, e.g. the European Diploma of Radiology,
as a supplemental proof of fitness to practice. Many consider the wording of the
current directive on language skills is too weak and compromises patient safety. The
modernised directive may include provisions on demonstration of competence, and
continuing professional development. The current lack of legal duty on EU Medical
regulators to proactively share registration and fitness to practice information needs
to be addressed. The revised directive may establish European Professional Cards
for each speciality. Teleradiologists need to be aware of medico-legal vulnerability if
they work excessive hours, report too fast, and/or do not review previous relevant
imaging. Interrogation of electronic patient data of some patients may become the
accepted standard of care in radiology in the next few years.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be updated on current European medical regulation of teleradiologists.
2. To be prepared about changes in the next five years.
3. To review legal precedents.
4. To understand how to avoid litigation in teleradiology.
Panel discussion:
How will we be viewing images in 20 years' time? 09:44
08:30 - 10:00 Room F2
Breast
RC 1202
Breast interventions: from diagnosis to treatment
Moderator:
S.H. HeywangKobrunner; Munich/DE
A341 08:30
A. Practical tips for a successful needle biopsy procedure
L.J. Pina Insausti; Pamplona/ES (ljpina@unav.es)
Breast interventional procedures are performed using Ultrasound (US), Stereotaxis
(Stx) or Magnetic Resonance (MR) guidance. US is the most widely used guidance
and the preferred one for lesions that can be detected on US. In fact, US should
be performed for all suspicious lesions detected on mammography, MR (second
look) or even palpation. In this lecture several tricks to perform a biopsy will be
shown: how the local anaesthesia can be injected under US guidance to move
a lesion to a more convenient location, tricks to perform a biopsy of a skin lesion
or a very deep seated lesion close to the chest wall, tricks to perform a biopsy
under stereotactic guidance in posterior lesions or in very thin breasts and tricks
to optimise the biopsies under MR guidance.
Learning Objectives:
1. To consolidate knowledge of needle selection for successful biopsies.
2. To understand the guidance technique for successful biopsies.
3. To learn about possible solutions to increase accuracy in needle biopsies.
more tumour specific than FDG. Furthermore, tracers that image tumour-induced
lymph angiogenesis are being developed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with which tumours are typically FDG-avid.
2. To understand the factors that contribute to the diagnostic performance of
FDG-PET.
3. To be introduced to other nuclear medicine imaging techniques for lymph node
imaging.
Panel discussion:
When and how will imaging make diagnostic biopsy unnecessary? 09:44
08:30 - 10:00 Room F1
Special Focus Session
SF 12
Radiology on the road: working when you are away
from home
A337 08:30
Chairman's introduction
L. Donoso; Barcelona/ES (ldonoso@clinic.ub.es)
Telemedicine is an increasingly important element in health care management. In
fact, in the past 10 years, teleradiology has been consolidated for the provision
of radiology services and has proven effective in different scenarios. In this ses
sion, we review the current role of teleradiology in the diagnostic process and try
to predict likely changes in the coming years in Europe. We anticipate significant
changes from the organisational point of view, with the emergence of distributed
imaging departments and/or collaborative networks of radiologists, as well as
technological developments that will enable visualisation in new mobile devices.
All these changes will have legal implications.
Session Objectives:
1. To appreciate the implications of teleradiology in healthcare management.
2. To become familiar with different scenarios where teleradiology is used.
3. To understand the importance of proper workflow management.
4. To learn about the e-health regulatory initiatives at the European level.
A338 08:35
Teleradiology in 2012: growing or shrinking in importance
E.R. Ranschaert; sHertogenbosch/NL (ranschaert@telenet.be)
In Europe a clear evolution has taken place regarding the implementation of
various teleradiology scenarios. Not only the difficulties and risks but also the
advantages of using teleradiology will be addressed, based upon the experience
of a decade with this technique. An attempt will be made to predict a future role
of teleradiology in Europe.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the current role of teleradiology in the diagnostic process.
2. To review different teleradiology scenarios.
3. To be aware of problems encountered with intensive use of teleradiology.
4. To anticipate the changes due to telemedicine in radiology departments.
A339 08:58
Use of PDAs and other hand held devices in radiology: beyond the head?
O. Ratib; Geneva/CH (osman.ratib@hcuge.ch)
Mobile devices such as smart phones and touch screen tablets have taken the
market by storm and are becoming major players in medical informatics providing
convenient solution for physicians on the move. The resolution and processing
power of these devices allow nowadays displaying medical images with sufficient
resolution for image review and analysis in clinical practice. While they may not be
adequate for routine diagnostic tasks they provide a convenient mobile solution for
on-call and remote consultations. There are, however, different types of software
solutions that can be implemented for such tasks. Two major different design are
(1) online web-based applications where the device serves as a "thin-client" to
display images rendered and manipulated on a remote computer and (2) local
applications that reside on the mobile device and can run independently after
images have been downloaded on the device. The first solution requires the user
to be constantly connected to the network to be able to display and manipulate
images, while the second solution can continue to function after disconnecting from
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S84 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
08:30 - 10:00 Room G/H
Genitourinary
RC 1207
How I report
Moderator:
D. Negru; Iasi/RO
A344 08:30
A. Female pelvis MRI
C. Del Frate; San Daniele del Friuli/IT (iaiacdf@hotmail.com)
For MR imaging optimisation for ultimate reporting, the radiologist needs to not
only understand pelvic MR imaging but also be aware of what the surgeons /
oncologists / radiotherapists need to know to plan the correct therapy. The
MR imaging report should start with clinical information and requirements,
followed by the technique used. Patients with uterine and cervical cancer
undergo MR imaging after diagnosis for staging purposes. MR imaging may
detect accurate findings regarding the T and the N stage. The report should be
focused on this findings and the radiologist should give an estimation of stage.
Patients with adnexal masses undergo MR imaging for characterisation purposes.
MR imaging findings need to be correlated with clinical information and blood tests
to be as accurate as possible. The report should be focused on the features of the
adnexal mass and offer a possible diagnosis to the clinician.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn the tips for MR imaging optimisation for ultimate reporting.
2. To learn what should be reported in uterine and cervical cancer staging.
3. To learn what should be reported in adnexal masses.
A345 09:00
B. Prostate MRI
J.J. Futterer; Nijmegen/NL (j.futterer@rad.umcn.nl)
In this presentation a standardised reporting system for multiparametric prostate
MRI examinations will be presented. Furthermore, the imaging assessment
of prostate cancer, with emphasis on information useful for surgical and focal
treatment planning, will be discussed. Emphasis will be placed on functional MR
imaging techniques in conjunction with clinical staging nomograms and tumour
localisation. The major teaching points of this exhibit are knowledge of the role of
multi-parametric MR imaging in the detection, localisation, and characterisation
of prostate cancer. Knowledge of standardised reports will enable us to overcome
current limitations in communication with the referring physicians.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn tips for MR imaging optimisation for ultimate reporting.
2. To learn the most essential points and details to be reported in prostate cancer
patients.
3. To understand the major weaknesses of a prostate MR report.
A346 09:30
C. CT urography
N.C. Cowan; Oxford/UK
Technological advances in computed tomography (CT) have improved the diagnos
tic imaging of the urinary tract, surpassing ultrasound and the intravenous urogram.
CT urography is defined as CT examination of the kidneys, ureters and bladder
with at least one imaging series acquired during the excretory phase of contrast
enhancement. In adults, CT urography is now the preferred initial examination for
patients with haematuria at high risk for upper urinary tract urothelial cell cancer
(UUT-UCC). A practical method for risk stratification will be discussed. Technical
aspects of image acquisition and processing will be explored and technical tips
relating to protocol design given to optimise CT urography for ultimate reporting.
The principal reason for the existence of CT urography is for diagnosing UUT-
UCC. Examples of the typical and atypical upper urinary tract urothelial tumours
and bladder cancers will be demonstrated. A method for reporting CT urography
will be demonstrated. For patients with haematuria, early and accurate diagnosis
helps optimise prognosis but conventional investigative pathways are complicated
and lengthy, utilising multiple imaging tests and many diagnostic algorithms ex
ist without rigorous evaluation. CT urography offers a single imaging test of high
diagnostic accuracy with the potential to replace multiple alternative imaging tests
in the diagnostic pathway, improve patient experience, improve diagnostic perform
ance and accelerate diagnosis. A system for imaging haematuria involving use of
A342 09:00
B. Underestimation of disease in needle biopsies
S.C.E. Diepstraten, H.M. Verkooijen, M.A.A.J. van den Bosch; Utrecht/NL
Breast biopsy has developed from an open surgical to an image-guided, minimally
invasive approach. Two large prospective studies, COBRAand COBRA2000, have
shown that large core needle biopsy (LCNB) is less costly and better tolerated by
the patient than open surgical biopsy, while still achieving high diagnostic accuracy,
i.e. 98%. A disadvantage of minimally invasive breast biopsy is malignancy under
estimation, defined as less severe pathology in the biopsy specimen than in the
subsequent surgical excision specimen. Consequently, these patients might receive
insufficient treatment or need to undergo additional surgery. Improvement of breast
biopsy methods to reduce malignancy underestimation is ongoing. Vacuum-assisted
large core needle biopsy (VACNB) enables removal of larger tissue volumes from
the target region with a single needle insertion.Arecently introduced biopsy method,
the Breast Lesion Excision System (BLES), allows image-guided, percutaneous
removal of an intact lump of the target lesion. Malignancy underestimation in
breast biopsy specimens is addressed in two recent meta-analyses. Brennan et
al. report pooled DCIS underestimation rates of 30.3% for LCNB and 18.9% for
VACNB. Specifically for stereotactic breast biopsy, Bruening et al. report pooled
DCIS underestimation rates of 24.4% (LCNB) and 13.0% (VACNB), and pooled
high-risk underestimation rates of 43.5% (LCNB) and 21.7% (VACNB). Reported
DCIS underestimation rates for BLES vary from 3.2% to 21.3%, and high-risk
underestimation rates from 0% to 9.4%. In conclusion, malignancy underestima
tion is an important issue in minimally invasive breast biopsy. With BLES, further
reduction of underestimation rates may be realised.
Learning Objectives:
1. To realise the risk of a false negative result in needle biopsies.
2. To understand the performance standards needed to minimise the risk of
underestimation.
3. To be aware of the importance of radiologic-pathologic correlation prior to
definite diagnosis.
A343 09:30
C. New developments: therapeutic interventional procedures
G. Manenti; Rome/IT (guggi@tiscali.it)
Breast cancer management has been evolving toward minimally invasive ap
proaches. With the improvements in imaging techniques that have allowed the
earlier detection of smaller breast cancers and the desire for improvements in
cosmetic outcome, a number of minimally invasive techniques for the treatment of
early stage breast cancers are being investigated. Breast conservation therapy has
become the treatment standard for early-stage breast cancer. The next challenge
is to treat primary tumors without surgery. For this purpose, several new minimally
invasive procedures, including radiofrequency ablation, cryotherapy, interstitial laser
ablation, microwave ablation, focused ultrasound ablation and percutaneous tumor
excision, are currently under development and may offer effective tumor manage
ment and provide treatment options that are psychologically and cosmetically more
acceptable to the patients than are traditional surgical therapies. In this course, we
give an overview of minimally invasive approaches for the therapeutic management
of benign breast lumps and early-stage breast cancer. It is cautiously optimistic that
these therapies can be used as a routine adjunct in the treatment of selected breast
cancers. The challenge will lie in the ability to identify multifocal disease and in situ
carcinoma as well as to ensure complete and effective eradication of the breast
cancer. Actually, breast conserving surgery remains the standard of care for breast
malignancies and additional research is needed to determine the efficacy of these
techniques when they are used as the sole therapy and to determine the long-term
local recurrence rates and survival associated with these treatment strategies.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about current therapeutic interventional procedures for malignant
lesions.
2. To learn about current therapeutic interventional procedures for benign lesions.
3. To learn about the possible role of therapeutic interventions in the future.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S85
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Sunday
Several cardiomyopathies will be reviewed such as ischaemic cardiomyopathy
and hypertropic cardiomyopathy, including their appearance on regular chest CT.
Several valve disease entities such as mitral valve stenosis and prolapse, heavily
calcified aortic valve disease/stenosis, bicuspid aortic valves and infective endo
carditis will also be reviewed on regular chest CT. Several different types of cardiac
shunts such as ASD, VSD, PAPVR-with sinus venosus ASD and interatrial septal
aneurysm will also be discussed and their appearance evaluated on routine chest
CT. A spectrum of coronary anomalies/fistulas that may be detected on standard
chest CT will be discussed. The talk will also review the typical pulmonary changes
seen in heart failure, both in the lung parenchyma and the heart and its vessels.
Finally, the cardiopulmonary manifestations of smoking will be discussed including
the appearances and implications of coronary artery disease.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about incidental cardiac findings to be reported on a regular chest
CT.
2. To review typical pulmonary findings in heart failure.
3. To review typical cardiopulmonary findings associated with smoking.
A350 09:21
C. Pulmonary hypertension and right ventricle function
K.F. Kreitner; Mainz/DE (kreitner@radiologie.klinik.unimainz.de)
The causes of pulmonary hypertension (PH) are diverse and include a wide variety
of diseases. There is increasing recognition that PH is---besides acute and chronic
thromboembolism---associated with diseases such as connective tissue disease,
COPD and interstitial lung disease. Emphysema is visualised by a decrease in mean
lung density; the characteristic findings of fibrotic changes include honeycomb
ing, reticular opacities, ground-glass attenuation, and traction bronchiectasis and
architectural distortion. Both changes go along with chronic, progressive hypoxia
leading to hypoxic vasoconstriction of the peripheral pulmonary arteries as well
as parenchymal destruction. The introduction of fast rotation speed and dedicated
cardiac reconstruction algorithms has opened new possibilities for thoracic imag
ing: besides the better delineation of peripheral pulmonary arteries; there is the
possibility of integrating cardiac functional information into a diagnostic CT scan of
the chest. Assessment of right ventricular function and analysis of the distensibility
of the right pulmonary artery provide insights not only of right heart imapairment
but also enable recognition of patients with elevated pulmonary arterial pressures.
Furthermore, it is possible to assess the severity of coronary artery disease to
determine left vetricular function parameters as well as to depict the sequelae of
ischaemic heart disease such as postinfarct aneurysms or wall-thinning due to
myocardial infarction. Last but not least, imaging of lung perfusion either by using
colour-coded maps of lung density without or without subtraction technique or us
ing dual energy imaging will further widen the clinical applications of thoracic CT.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the different etiologies of pulmonary hypertension and their
specific imaging findings.
2. To learn about a comprehensive concept for imaging and reporting pulmonary
hypertension.
3. To become familiar with the dedicated evaluation of right heart function.
Panel discussion:
Ready for routine reporting of cardiovascular findings on CT scans
of the chest? 09:44
08:30 - 10:00 Room L/M
Physics in Radiology
RC 1213
Diagnostic radiology and pregnancy
Moderators:
H. Ringertz; Linkoping/SE
W.J.M. van der Putten; Galway/IE
A351 08:30
A. Conceptus doses and risks from maternal diagnostic x-ray
examinations
J. Damilakis; Iraklion/GR (damilaki@med.uoc.gr)
Whenever a diagnostic x-ray examination of a pregnant patient is considered to be
necessary, conceptus dose estimation is an important step in assessing the risks
to the unborn child. Accurate estimation of conceptus dose is also needed after
inadvertent irradiation of a pregnant patient from a diagnostic x-ray procedure.
CT urography, unenhanced CT of the kidneys, ureters and bladder, urinary tract
ultrasound and cystoscopy will be proposed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn how to optimise CT urography for ultimate reporting.
2. To learn how to perform and report CT urography in the clinical setting of
possible urothelial cancer.
3. To learn how to perform and report CT urography in the clinical setting of
haematuria.
08:30 - 10:00 Room I/K
Chest
RC 1204
When CT sees both the heart and the lungs
A347 08:30
Chairman's introduction
M. RemyJardin; Lille/FR (martine.remy@chrulille.fr)
Before the advent of fast-scanning multidetector-row CT (MDCT) technology,
thoracic CT studies were exclusively used for the morphological assessment of
thoracic organs but concurrent examination of the heart has traditionally been
hampered by image degradation from cardiac motion artefact. The introduction of
fast rotation speed and dedicated cardiac reconstruction algorithms exploiting the
multislice acquisition scheme of the data has opened new possibilities for chest
imaging, starting with the possibility to integrate cardiac functional information into
a diagnostic CT scan of the chest. Initiated with 16-slice MDCT, this concept of
integrating morphology and function has been further simplified with 64-slice and
dual-source CT scanners, thus allowing the radiologists to provide vital information
in the management of patients with a wide variety of acute or chronic respiratory
disorders. Because this CT technology offers the possibility of generating high-
resolution and motion-free images of the coronary arteries, evaluation of the
coronary arteries during CT examinations of the chest should further widen the
clinical applications of CT for respiratory patients, keeping in mind that cigarette
smoking is a shared risk factor for both impaired lung function and cardiovascular
events. The purpose of this session is to review practical aspects of this new
concept in thoracic imaging.
A348 08:35
A. Anatomic cardiac details that every radiologist should know
J. Bremerich; Basle/CH (jbremerich@uhbs.ch)
Increasing temporal, contrast and spatial resolution of modern imaging techniques
is paralleled by improved conspicuity of cardiac structures, even when examina
tions are not focused to the heart. This requires thorough knowledge of cardiac
anatomy which is crucial for all Radiologists in order to identify relevant pathology
and to avoid overcalling normal anatomy or normal variants resembling pathology.
Systematic review of cardiac structures is required on all plain or cross-sectional
images of the thorax. Detailed assessment may require reconstruction in specific
planes similar to echocardiography or along coronary arteries for further analy
sis. Knowledge of cardiac anatomy enables identification of pathology such as
thrombi, infarcts, aberrant coronary arteries, masses and ventricular enlargement
or hypertrophy. On the other hand such knowledge is required to avoid overcalling
of normal structures such as the crista terminalis as mass or pericardial recessus as
lymphadenopathy. Moreover, it is important to identify variants of coronary anatomy
and to distinguish benign from malignant variants. Thorough knowledge of cardiac
anatomy and systematic review of all cardiac structures on plain and cross-sectional
images of the thorax is relevant to identify pathology and to distinguish pathology
from normal anatomy and normal variants.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn more about cardiac anatomy and anomalies.
2. To review the clinical relevance of cardiac details: what has to be reported?
3. To become familiar with the interaction between anatomic details of heart and
lung.
A349 08:58
B. Incidental findings and their clinical relevance
J.D. Dodd; Dublin/IE
The main outline of this talk will cover cardiac incidental findings, pulmonary find
ings in heart failure and the cardiopulmonary findings associated with smoking.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S86 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
exposure in MRI will also be discussed including the following situations: the pa
tient may not be aware that she is pregnant, likely to be in the first trimester; the
mother is referred for direct foetal imaging after ultrasound (normally second or
third trimester); the expectant mother may need diagnosis; research on pregnant
volunteers. The exposure for pregnant staff working in MRI is also an essential
consideration. Finally, how to minimise the exposure for the foetus during MR
imaging will be discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the risks to the foetus in MRI from static and time-varying
magnetic fields, with particular reference to the radiofrequency field.
2. To be informed about the exposure of the foetus to noise during MRI.
3. To understand how to minimise the exposure of the foetus during MR imaging.
08:30 - 10:00 Room N/O
Interventional Radiology
RC 1209
Expanding the role of interventional radiology in
hepatocellular carcinoma
A354 08:30
Chairman's introduction
G. Maleux; Leuven/BE (Geert.Maleux@uzleuven.be)
Although surgery, including hepatic segmentectomy, hemihepatectomy and
orthotopic liver transplantation, remains the only curative treatment option for pa
tients suffering from hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), locoregional interventional
procedures increasingly play an important role in the preoperative and palliative
management (and potentially even in the curative management) of HCC. First,
the technique and clinical value of portal vein embolisation prior to hemihepatec
tomy will be discussed. Next, the role of radiofrequency (RF) ablation and other,
new ablative interventional technologies will be highlighted for the palliative and
potentially also for the curative treatment of HCC. Finally, an overview of different
transcatheter procedures will be given, including bland and chemo-embolisation
with or without drug-eluting beads as well as Y90-radioembolisation, to target HCC
lesions. Results of technical and clinical outcome will be discussed as well as the
potential of combination therapies.
A355 08:35
A. RF ablation
V. Valek; Brno/CZ (vlvalek@med.muni.cz)
RFA is recommended as a technique for the treatment of early stage (Child A or
B, solitary HCC or up to 3 nodules < 3 cm in size) HCC. The best outcomes have
been reported in Child-Pugh A patients with small single tumour, commonly less
than 2 cm in diameter. When the patient is considered inoperable, RFA can be
indicated also in huge tumours, even in combination with other procedures. RF is
coagulation induction from electromagnetic energy sources with frequencies less
than 30 MHz For tumour ablation purposes the frequency is usually in the 375-
500 kHz range. Even if there exist optimistic data concerning survival of the patients
with HCC treated by RFA, RFA is "only" palliation with therapeutic potential. After
correctly indicating and performing RFA we can expect 5-yr survival in 40-70%
and curative treatments in 30% patients. Major complications after percutaneous
ablation such as severe pain, neoplastic seeding, intrahepatic abscesses, intestinal
perforation, pleural effusion and peritoneal bleeding after RFA have been reported
in up to 6% of patients and mortality related to RFA up to 0.3%. The most com
mon complications are abdominal haemorrhage, abscess, biliary tract damage,
liver failure, pulmonary complications and ground pad burns. Followup imaging
studies should be aimed at detecting local tumour progression, the development of
new hepatic lesions, or the emergence of extra hepatic disease. A recommended
followup protocol includes CT or MR examinations at 3-, 6-, 9-, and 12 months
after the treatment and at 6-month intervals thereafter for the subsequent 3 years.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand indications for RF ablation.
2. To learn about the technique and devices for RF ablation.
3. To learn about results, complications and followup strategies.
Several methods have been developed to estimate conceptus dose from radiologic
examinations. When the uterus is remote from the directly exposed tissues, the
conceptus is exposed to scattered radiation and its dose is negligible (< 1 mGy).
Examinations involving the abdomen-pelvis may deliver higher dose to the child.
Variations in maternal body size and uterus position should be taken into account
to obtain accurate conceptus dose estimation. Multidetector CT (MDCT) scanners
have replaced conventional CT technology. Conceptus doses from abdominal
MDCT range from about 13 to about 31 mGy during the first post-conception
weeks for a scan acquired at 120 kVp, 200 mAs with a pitch of 1.0, depending on
maternal body size and uterine position. Multi-phase abdominal CT examinations
may deliver relatively high doses to the unborn child. Doses to the conceptus below
100 mGy should not be considered a reason for termination of pregnancy. The risk
to the embryo/fetus for stochastic effects is assessed on the basis of dose using
appropriate risk factors. Although these risks from a single diagnostic procedure
are low for the majority of diagnostic x-ray examinations, it is important to ensure
that doses are kept as low as reasonably achievable.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn how to manage and counsel pregnant patients in case of (a) intentional
and (b) accidental exposure.
2. To learn how to estimate conceptus radiation dose from diagnostic x-ray
examinations.
3. To learn how to assess the radiogenic risks to the embryo/foetus from diagnostic
x-ray examinations.
A352 09:00
B. X-ray imaging and pregnancy: justification and optimisation of
exposure
P. Vock; Berne/CH (peter.vock@insel.ch)
As outside pregnancy, justification and optimisation are the main steps to be
done when an imaging examination using ionising radiation is considered during
pregnancy. However, the risk concerns the embryo/foetus in addition to the mother
which means that justification has to be more critical whenever the uterine dose
is not neglectable. The practical approach to an examination in any woman of
child-bearing age starts by ruling out pregnancy, whether by taking history or by
a laboratory test. When pregnancy cannot be ruled out, further steps will depend
on the type of examination needed and the urgency of diagnostic clarification.
Ultrasound is the alternative to be preferred when it can answer the clinical ques
tion. But even among x-ray examinations, the uterine dose is varying widely which
asks for a careful selection, optimisation and, maybe, for postponing the test. Once
pregnancy is confirmed, the major question is whether the specific type of diagnostic
examination will include the uterus in the primary radiation field. Examinations not
involving the uterus by direct radiation - despite a potentially significant exposure
by scattered radiation - can usually be performed without a relevant risk to the
embryo/foetus. The situation is more critical when the uterus is within the exami
nation field and when therapeutic interventions are considered. The presentation
will discuss the practical approach to these different situations, the influence of
the stage of pregnancy, optimisation methods and the choice between alternative
methods in some frequent clinical situations.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the radiologist's practical approach to justification
during pregnancy.
2. To learn how to optimise imaging protocols for x-ray examinations performed
on pregnant patients.
3. To understand the role of imaging modalities in the evaluation of pregnant
patients.
A353 09:30
C. Pregnancy and MRI: risks to the unborn child
J. De Wilde; Edinburgh/UK (jdewilde@staffmail.ed.ac.uk)
This paper explores the risks to the foetus when magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) is used. MRI uses three main components to produce images from inside the
body: a static magnetic field; a pulsed radio-frequency (RF) field and time-varying
gradient electromagnetic field. The exact frequencies of these fields depend on
the MRI system purchased; for example, a 0.5T scanner uses 21 MHz RF, a 1.5
T system uses 63 MHz and a 3 T system uses 127 MHz RF. There is also a wide
range of options for gradient strengths and slew rates to be considered as well.
The overall exposure for the foetus depends ultimately on the imaging sequence
used and the area being scanned. This paper will discuss particular hazards that
need to be addressed for pregnant women including biological effects of the static
and time-varying magnetic fields, heating effects of the RF pulses and acoustic
noise generated by the spatial encoding gradients. The circumstances for foetal
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S87
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Sunday
08:30 - 10:00 Room P
Radiographers
RC 1214
Changing era of radiography education in Europe:
new perspectives for students and staff
Moderators:
G. Paulo; Coimbra/PT
H.M. Zonderland; Amsterdam/NL
A358 08:30
A. The change from diploma to bachelor's degree: new perspectives
for students and staff
M. Rosenblattl; Wiener Neustadt/AT (michaela.rosenblattl@fhwn.ac.at)
In Austria the education for radiological technologists was first established by law
in 1961. At this time the `Matura' entrance-level standard for university education
was implemented. In 1992 a special law was introduced. Professional academies
were considered eligible for European programmes such as Erasmus-Socrates.
This law still offers the basis for professional qualification. In 1994, Universities of
Applied Sciences were founded in Austria in addition to universities. The students
of both university types were equal and they received an academic degree. The
structure was similar to our professional academies. As a consequence of this, the
professional association (RTaustria) also joined in the task of converting academies
into the university sector. The first bachelor study programme "Radiological Tech
nology" started in 2005. The students finish with a BSc degree in health studies in
Radiological Technology. The demands on teaching staff and students are already
very large.ABachelor' Degree is recognised as a university sector. Master's Degree
programmes can be pursued immediately, e.g. MedTech (Master or Engineering
for Functional Imaging, and Conventional Ion Radiotherapy), or Master of Science
in Radiological Technology. This technology offers radiographers a starting point
for medical computer science. Doctoral programmes for molecular and functional
imaging, medical physics and computer science are well established and alumni are
admitted. The strategic influence on the profession is a social benefit. If Radiological
Technologists attain even more profound knowledge that more deeply penetrates
their specialisation, the better their future patients will be treated.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the change from the diploma to bachelors degree in Austria
and the implications of this change.
2. To understand the implications of this change from the perspectives of the
students and the staff.
3. To understand the strategic influence of this change on the students, staff and
profession.
4. To be informed about how the change was implemented in Austria.
5. To be able to compare this change in Austria to the same change in other
countries.
A359 09:00
B. Strengthening radiography education through European networks
V. Challen; Lancaster/UK (Val@valchallen.wanadoo.co.uk)
Across Europe radiography education is now firmly embedded into the Higher
Education (HE) sector with only a very few exceptions at present. Variations in the
nature, coverage and length of radiography bachelor programmes in Europe see
graduates emerging with either separate or combined imaging and radiotherapeu
tic competencies. In some European countries curriculum responses to service
needs has also meant that a number of radiographers now graduate with those
skills, knowledge and competencies once thought as being solely within the remit
of the medically qualified. Radiography networks enable practitioners, educators,
students and researchers to co-operate, share, support and assist each other in
the opportunities and challenges that confront radiography thus strengthening
its professional ethos. This presentation examines the political, educational and
professional factors that may be addressed through the presence of European
radiography networks.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the current status of European educational networks.
2. To understand the ongoing challenges faced by radiography education
throughout Europe.
3. To understand the main advantages and potential for radiography networks
to continue to improve radiography education in the future.
A356 08:58
B. Intra-arterial procedures
F. Orsi; Milan/IT (franco.orsi@ieo.it)
While resection and ablation are still the gold-standard for curative local treatment
of the early stage HCC, several effective intra arterial procedures have been devel
oped for advanced HCC stage. There is still no consensus on the best intra arterial
local therapy; however, it offers great promise based upon the premise that HCC
are fed mainly, if not exclusively, by arteries. Bland embolisation, chemoemboli
sation and radio-embolisation are some of the most common local treatments for
patients with HCC and several embolic agents have been specifically developed
for that purpose. Both TACE and TAE may shut-down the arterial blood flow to the
tumour, leading for tumour ischaemia and, eventually, tumour cell death, if anoxia
is induced. Association of local chemotherapy to the embolic effect represents the
rationale for TACE. For this purpose, new embolic particles, which may precisely
elute drugs, have been introduced (DEB-TACE= Drug Eluting Beads TACE). For
Radioembolisation, micro-particles are injected into the feeding arteries as vehicles
for delivering interstitial sources of radiation therapy. Small and precisely calibrated
micro-particles have been introduced for a deeper a more effective TAE. Because
hepatic tumours are supplied by several arterial feeders, complete tumour death
may be obtained only if the entire vascular network supplying the tumour is treated.
If even small feeding arteries are be missed, tumour mass will be not completely
treated and it will relapse. For this reason, the knowledge of possible vascular
abnormality is mandatory for a better outcome.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be familiar with the indications for intra-arterial treatment of HCC.
2. To learn the techniques of intra-arterial treatment (TACE, DC beads TACE,
radioembolisation).
3. To learn about results, complications and followup strategies.
A357 09:21
C. Portal vein embolisation before surgery
T.J. Cleveland; Sheffield/UK (trevor.cleveland@sth.nhs.uk)
Surgical resection remains one of the few treatments considered to be "cura
tive" for malignancy contained within the liver (both primary and secondary). For
resection to be effective all of the segments containing tumour must be removed.
For a patient to survive such a procedure the remaining hepatic function must be
sufficient to sustain life. In some circumstances so much of the liver is removed
that the remaining segments are too small (or they were small in the first place).
Pre-operative portal vein embolisation (POPE) is designed to stimulate enlargement
in the segments that are intended to remain, so that when the cancer is removed,
survival is improved. POPE is a technique where the portal venous supply to the
diseased segments is blocked, so that growth factors are diverted to the healthy
segments. Over a period of 4-6 weeks prior to surgery, these segments enlarge
so that the diseased segments can be removed more safely. POPE is performed
percutaneously, and a variety of embolic materials are used to occlude, usually
the right portal vein. After POPE the liver is scanned to assess for hypertrophy
of the healthy segments, and surgery scheduled to coincide with enlargement
but before time has elapsed which would allow for tumour progression (local or
distant). Surgery can usually be planned for 4-6 weeks after POPE (this time may
vary depending upon factors such as the presence of cirrhosis and diabetes).
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about imaging strategies and indications for embolisation.
2. To learn about embolisation methods.
3. To learn about results, complications and followup strategies.
Panel discussion:
How to select the ideal treatment in a patient with HCC 09:44
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S88 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
A362 08:35
A. Renal and adrenal tumours in children
A.M.J.B. Smets; Amsterdam/NL (a.m.smets@amc.uva.nl)
Primitive malignant renal tumours comprise 6% of all childhood cancers. Wilm's
tumour (WT) is the most frequent type accounting for more than 90%. Imaging
alone cannot differentiate between these tumours with certainty but it plays an
important role in screening, diagnostic workup, assessment of therapy response,
preoperative evaluation and followup. The outcome of WT after therapy is excel
lent with an overall survival around 90%. This allows for a risk-based stratification
maintaining excellent outcome in children with low-risk tumours while improving
quality of life and decreasing toxicity and costs. The imaging issues for WT from
the European perspective will be discussed as well as the characteristics of other
paediatric malignant renal tumours. Primary adrenal malignant tumours can be
categorised according to their origin. Adrenocortical neoplasms are rare in chil
dren. A size greater than 5-10 cm suggests malignancy as well as signs of local
invasion or distant metastasis. The most frequent malignant medullary tumour is
neuroblastoma. It accounts for 7-10% of all childhood cancers and has a survival
rate between 5 and 80% depending on age at diagnosis, tumour spread, genetic
markers, etc. It is related to borderline malignant ganglioneuroblastoma and benign
ganglioneuroma. Imaging cannot distinguish between these tumours but it is es
sential in the diagnostic workup and during followup. Currently, two systems are
used to stage neuroblastoma: The International Staging System (INSS) is based on
surgery; the International Neuroblastoma Risk Group (INRG) has developed image-
defined risk factors (IDRF) used for staging. Both staging systems will be discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To appreciate the role of US, CT, MRI and scintigraphy.
2. To become familiar with the imaging findings and the main differential diagno
ses.
3. To learn about the imaging strategies for diagnosis and staging.
A363 08:58
B. Paediatric liver malignancies
D. Roebuck; London/UK (roebud@gosh.nhs.uk)
The role of imaging: The main aims of imaging are confirmation of the he
patic origin of the tumour, diagnosis and staging. Differential diagnosis is
facilitated by combining imaging findings with clinical parameters, such as
serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP). Children with malignant liver tumours of
ten require three modalities (US, chest CT and MRI) for optimal imaging.
Differential diagnosis: It is important to identify vascular tumours of infancy and
mesenchymal hamartoma on imaging grounds if possible. These lesions rarely
require biopsy. The major malignant primary tumours are hepatoblastoma, hepa
tocellular carcinoma, rhabdoid tumour, undifferentiated (embryonal) carcinoma and
hepatocellular carcinoma variants (transitional liver cell tumour and fibrolamellar car
cinoma). Malignant vascular tumours (epithelioid haemangioendothelioma and an
giosarcoma) are rare. The distinction between multifocal primary liver tumours and
metastases from an extrahepatic primary tumour (or multifocal infantile haemangi
oma) can almost always be made on a combination of imaging and clinical features.
Staging: There are two major staging systems in current use. The Children's Oncol
ogy Group (COG) uses a surgical staging system, in which the main role of radiology
is the detection of extrahepatic spread and preoperative surgical planning. The
other major trials group, SIOPEL, uses the PRETEXT system, in which the role of
imaging is much more important because surgery is delayed and chemotherapy
is stratified according to clinical and radiological risk factors. Because COG now
also collects data using the PRETEXT system, there is a global consensus that
the ideal radiology report should include a description of each of its parameters.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the role of US, CT and MRI.
2. To become familiar with the imaging findings and the main differential diagno
ses.
3. To learn the imaging strategies for diagnosis and in staging.
A364 09:21
C. Oncologic imaging in the paediatric brain
G. Hahn; Dresden/DE (gabriele.hahn@uniklinikumdresden.de)
Brain tumours of children account for 15% to 20% of all primary brain tumours.
Posterior fossa tumours and supratentorial tumours occur in nearly equal frequency.
However, supratentorial tumours are more common in the first two to three years of
life, whereas infratentorial tumours predominate from ages 4 to 10. The symptoms
of children with brain tumours depend upon the age at the time of presentation and
the location. MR is today the study of choice for diagnosis of intracranial neoplasms
A360 09:30
C. Exploring the benefits of European radiography networks: a
personal and professional perspective of the Erasmus radiography group
J. Portelli; Msida/MT (jonathan.portelli@um.edu.mt)
Since its advent in 1987, ERASMUS has become the EU`s leading education and
training programme - enabling more than 2.2 million students to benefit from study
and work experiences in different European countries. Furthermore, ERASMUS
has also encouraged co-operation and staff mobility between higher education
institutions across Europe and over the past 15 years about 250,000 higher
education teachers and other staff have embarked on teaching exchanges and
training opportunities abroad. The ERASMUS Radiography Group (ERG) was born
from an initiative taken up by three European universities in 1990, who wanted to
create a network that would facilitate the exchange of undergraduate radiography
students. Ever since the success of the first student exchanges in 1994, the ERG
has evolved considerably and today it is formed by 16 higher education institutions
from 14 European countries. To date, more than 1,200 radiography students have
successfully participated in ERASMUS exchange programmes organised by the
different ERG institutions and more are expected to do so in the future. In this
context, one may note just how such networks and groups can help bridge and
strengthen the radiography profession across Europe. Apart from providing some
historic details about the ERG and is underlying aims, this presentation will also
seek to outline the benefits and opportunities that the ERASMUS programme may
bring about on an individual and professional basis, as highlighted by the personal
experience of a past ERASMUS student who today is one of the ERG coordinators.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the history, structure, aims and objectives of the Erasmus
radiography group.
2. To gain an insight into the Erasmus radiography group from a student-cum-
coordinator's perspective.
3. To explore the potential for such groups or networks to strengthen the radiog
raphy professionals of the future.
4. To be aware of threats and opportunities in student and staff mobility in Europe.
08:30 - 10:00 Room Q
Paediatric
RC 1212
Oncologic imaging: how to image, followup and
report
A361 08:30
Chairman's introduction
R.R. van Rijn; Amsterdam/NL (r.r.vanrijn@amc.uva.nl)
In the field of oncology, childhood cancer makes up only a minor amount of cases
with less than 2% of all cases occurring in children. However, these 2% of cases
do constitute, after trauma, the second most common cause of death in children.
In the past five decades the survival rate of children with cancer has increased
significantly. In the beginning of the 1960s approximately 30% of children survived
whereas this figure is approaching 80% nowadays. This will also have an impact on
adult radiology as survivors of childhood cancer have shown to have an estimated
10% increased incidence of subsequent neoplasms. Paediatric radiology plays an
important role in the diagnosis, staging, treatment (interventional radiology) and
followup of childhood cancer. In order to fullfil its role the radiologist should have
clinical knowledge about the epidemiology, presentation and treatment of childhood
cancer. From a radiological point of view he/she should have knowledge of state-of-
art imaging techniques and the implication of these techniques on cancer staging.
The paediatric radiologist should play a pivotal role in imaging protocols, not only
on a local level but also on an international level through, e.g. the International
Society of Paediatric Oncology. With respect to reporting childhood cancer there is
an ongoing debate on which measurements should be used. Historically paediactric
cancer response assessments are based on 3-D measurements. However, with
the introduction of new European guidelines it is expected that pharmaceutical
companies will insist on the use of RECIST criteria in trials.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S89
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Sunday
structural changes in time and the multidisciplinary team management of cirrhotic
nodules. Multislice CT evaluation of cirrhotic nodules involved a nonenhanced and
enhanced multiphase CT during the arterial, portal and parenchymal phases to
highlight early hypervascular lesions and for the analysis of time washout curve.
MRI evaluation of the cirrhotic liver included conventional sequences without
contrast (T1 and T2w, chemical shift artifact sequences, diffusion) in combination
with multiphase dynamic 2D and 3D acquisition after iv. administration of liver-
specific contrast agents including the hepatobiliary phase. From the total number
of patients, 280 had "uncomplicated" liver cirrhosis, 578 patients had liver nodular
regenerative cirrhosis and portal hypertension, 112 patients had regenerative and
dysplastic nodules and 437 patients had hepatocellular carcinoma (multiple tumours
in 278 cases and single tumour in 159 cases). Cross-sectional imaging with CT
and MRI plays an important role in the evaluation and followup of patients with
cirrhotic liver disease and its complications. Multidisciplinary dialogue between
the clinician (gastroenterologist, surgeon, and oncologist), radiologist, medical
laboratory scientist and anatomo-pathologist allows finding the optimal solutions
concerning the monitoring and correct therapeutic approach of hepatic nodules
developed in the cirrhotic liver.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the particularities of CT and MR imaging techniques in liver
cirrhosis.
2. To consolidate knowledge of CT and MR imaging appearance of regenerative
nodules, dysplastic nodules, and hepatocarcinoma in cirrhosis.
3. To become familiar with the differential diagnosis in liver cirrhotic focal lesions
considering the various enhancement patterns.
4. To discuss the importance of clinical, biochemical information and followup of
small nodules by the same imaging modality that may be helpful in differential
diagnosis of these lesions.
A367 10:55
Interlude: The beginning of Romanian radiology
M. Buruian; TarguMures/RO
A368 11:00
Interventional treatment in liver malignancies
B. Popa, M. Popiel, L. Gulie; Bucharest/RO (valeriu.popa@yahoo.com)
Interventional treatment in liver malignancies is a very important alternative to
surgery. In this lecture we present our experience in liver endovascular treat
ment applied on patients with both primary and secondary malignant tumours in
a period of 3 years, trying to underline the efficacy's interventional treatment and
post-intervention followup. Our retrospective study was designed to evaluate the
clinical outcome in patients treated with chemoembolisation, local chemoinfusion
or loaded microspheres.The evaluation before and after interventional treatment
included CT measurements of hepatic tumours. The lesions size was assessed
by Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumours (RECIST). Total number of
interventions assessed was 551, in the period 2009-2011.The patients had one
single lesion up to seven lesions (in both lobes), and we appreciated the patient
response at 6 and 12 months (complete response, partial response, stable disease
or progressive disease) using RECIST criteria. The majority of our patients did not
show progression. The patients with liver metastases from colorectal cancer were
treated with 5-FU 1000 mg/m,Adriablastine (Doxorubicine) 60-90 mg and Lipiodol.
An objective tumour response to interventional treatment was observed in 76 %
of patients with HCC and in 68% of patients with metastatic disease. The most
common adverse events were mild nausea and vomiting (35%) and occurrence
of gastroduodenal ulcers (15%). Haematological toxicity was minimal. The median
survival time was 23.7 months in patients with HCC and 13.5 months in patients
with metastatic disease.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about indications and limits of interventional treatment in hepatic
nodules.
2. To evaluate the efficacy of different interventional methods in the liver.
3. To become familiar with the procedures used as endovascular treatment of
liver tumours.
4. To know the main complications of interventional procedures in liver malignan
cies.
because the multiplanar imaging capability is extremely useful in determining the
exact extent of the tumour and its relationship to surrounding normal structures.
For MR evaluation the standard sequences are T2-, T1-, FLAIR-sequences in
axial, sagittal and coronal planes. Neuronavigation sequences are important for
planning tumour surgery. The most common posterior fossa tumours of childhood
are medulloblastomas, astrozytomas and ependymomas. Brainstem tumours
should be separated into four separate major categories with different diagnostic
pathway, prognosis and therapy. Supratentorial tumours involve the parenchyma
of the brain or grow intra- or suprasellar, intraventricular and in the pineal region.
Tumours arising from the calvarium are rare in childhood.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the role of CT, MRI and MRS.
2. To become familiar with the imaging findings and the main differential diagno
ses.
3. To learn about the imaging findings of post chemo/radiation therapy conditions
and complications.
Panel discussion:
How far the radiologist can go in suggesting tumour recurrence or
post treatment complications? 09:44
10:30 - 12:00 Room B
ESR meets Romania
EM 4
Oncology imaging: breast and liver
Presiding:
L. Bonomo; Rome/IT
G. Iana; Bucharest/RO
A365 10:30
Introduction: Romanian radiology today
G. Iana; Bucharest/RO (george_iana@yahoo.com)
History and use of x-ray began in 1895 with the discovery by W.C. Roentgen and
his publication in 1896, without forgetting P. Lenard who built ray tube in 1892 and
allowed the study of cathode rays outside the tube in which they were produced.
One year later, the Romanian scientist Prof. S.D. Hurmuzescu, who was working
in a physics research laboratory in Paris (Sorbonne) with Professor Benoit began
to study the properties and effects of x-rays. On June 10, 1896 Prof. Hurmuzescu
gave a lecture on Rontgen x-rays and in the same year the Hospital Coltea began
to make the first radiography in our country. In 1976, under the leadership of Prof.
Dr. D. Radulescu radiological investigation has widened horizons by participating
in various symposia, conferences and congresses. There have also been remark
able radiogenetics research, angioseriografic diagnosis, urinary exploration etc.
Nowadays, exceeding the period 1990-2010, we can say a lot about radio-imaging
application development in Romania. Because access to the latest equipment
and diagnostic possibilities has been extended, new areas of radiology and medi
cal imaging to meet the needs have been developed. Many subspecialties have
been established in the last years for example the Sectional Imaging Society, the
Magnetic Resonance Society and the Senology Society. The latest established
society (2009) is the Neuroradiology and Interventional Radiology Society which
successfully combines interventional radiology with medical imaging. Romanian
radiology benefited from the contribution of outstanding personalities and also from
the support of the scientific societies from other countries, especially from France.All
these factors contributed to the return of the Romanian radiology where it belongs.
Session Objectives:
1. To underline the algorithm of diagnostic and interventional treatment in liver
tumours.
2. To explain the types of interventional treatments (vascular and non-vascular)
applied in liver malignant nodules.
3. To highlight the complexity of breast cancer diagnosis and imaging.
A366 10:35 
Hepatic nodules in cirrhosis
I.G. Lupescu; Bucharest/RO (ilupescu@gmail.com)
Liver cirrhosis is a major public health problem. The purpose of this work is to
present our last 10 years of experience regarding CT and MR imaging of benign
and malignant nodules developed in liver cirrhosis. It is based on 1407 patients
explored in our radiology department and focused on the CT and MRI techniques,
semiology of cirrhotic nodules (regenerative, dysplastic, hepatocarcinoma), their
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S9 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn more about the clinical conditions that cause pain in the female pelvis
without an apparent origin.
2. To be informed about the clinician's way of thinking in the process of differential
diagnosis.
3. To become familiar with the potential role of imaging in the establishment of
the final diagnosis and planning of therapy.
A372 11:00
B. Imaging techniques and typical findings
B. Brkljacic; Zagreb/HR (boris@brkljacic.com)
Many gynaecologic and nongynaecologic conditions causing pelvic pain are
grouped according to the anatomic origin; after determining whether the patient is
pregnant imaging work-up is tailored to establish potential causes within and outside
of pelvis. Transabdominal and transvaginal ultrasound (TVUS) with color duplex-
Doppler are first imaging modalities. Examination technique will be discussed. Most
patients with pelvic pain and normal US findings have improvement or resolution
of symptoms; normal TVUS has negative predictive value of 92%. US findings
are often inconclusive, some diseases are hard to diagnose, and appearance of
benign and malignant conditions may overlap. CT is performed when US and/or
clinical findings are equivocal or indicate pelvic abscess, haematoma, postpartum
complications, complications of pelvic inflammatory disease, and when GI or urinary
diseases need to be excluded.Advantage is availability in emergency, but CT lacks
precise definition of pelvic structures and includes exposure to ionising radiation,
problematic in young or pregnant women. Examination technique and protocols
will be presented. MRI has the highest accuracy. Fast MRI considerably shortened
imaging time. Fat-suppression sequences help to establish fat-containing lesions
and increase the conspicuity of inflammatory lesions. Different sequences will be
discussed. MR is rated below US and CT for evaluation of acute pelvic conditions,
but is excellent alternative when administration of iodinated contrast media or
radiation exposure is undesirable, especially in young or pregnant patients. Long
imaging times, limited access and cost are major drawbacks of MRI. Imaging
findings of various gynaecologic and nongynaecologic conditions causing female
pelvic pain will be presented.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the available imaging modalities for the evaluation of female
patients with pelvic pain.
2. To become familiar with the technical imaging considerations and the proper
diagnostic algorithm.
3. To know more about the typical imaging findings.
A373 11:30
C. Interactive case discussion
A.G. Rockall; London/UK (andrea.rockall@bartsandthelondon.nhs.uk)
This case-based lecture will present typical clinical cases of pelvic pain as well as
some unusual but important causes. Cases of acute and of chronic pelvic pain and
benign, as well as malignant disease will be included. The audience will have the
opportunity to participate in case discussion by the use of interactive voting pads.
The selection of imaging modality for each clinical presentation and the impor
tance of knowing the clinical findings at the time of the radiological interpretation
will be discussed. For each case, the key radiological features will be illustrated.
The essential elements of the radiology report and the key information required
by the clinician will be discussed. In each case, the differential diagnosis and the
need for followup imaging will be considered. The key teaching points for each
diagnosis will be reviewed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To review typical cases illustrating the role of imaging modalities in the dif
ferential diagnosis of pelvic pain in female patients.
2. To get involved in the diagnostic process by the use of electronic voting pads.
3. To understand the conclusion that may be drawn on the basis of the discussed
cases.
A369 11:20
Interlude: Ten reasons to see Romania
D. Negru; Iasi/RO
A370 11:25
Imaging and guided biopsy in breast malignancies
M. Lesaru; Bucharest/RO (mlesaru@hotmail.com)
The past decade in Romanian breast imaging was a time of progress. Training in
breast imaging began to be organised systematically in 2001. Standards in quality
assurance were set according to European standards in 2004 and 14 mammogra
phy centres were trained and equipped with materials in order to have consistent
quality in mammography. For sustaining our perspective, we used the experience
of two major centres in breast imaging, Cluj-Napoca and Bucharest, which initiated
together the breast imaging journey" in Romania. These centres at this moment
account for over 13.000 breast examinations every year (mammography, ultrasound
and MRI). The final result is a growing number of infraclinical breast carcinomas.
The main challenge we encountered along this period were the BIRADS 3 lesions
and the number of these cases is analysed. In detected BIRADS 4 or BIRADS 5
lesions, the imaging methods were used for the inventory of the lesions and biopsy
guidance. The biopsy performed by radiologists for these lesions is always done
under imaging guidance obtaining histology specimens. The number of needle core
biopsies done by radiologists was zero before 2001 and reached 757 in 2010. The
clinical impact was high as we discovered cases other than breast carcinoma, i.e.
haematological malignancies. In conclusion, we believe that Romania is able to
prove at this moment its ability to have an appropriate radiological practice in breast
imaging and breast biopsy, in line with the European standards.
Learning Objectives:
1. To appreciate the improvements in breast cancer diagnosis in Romania.
2. To discuss the experiences of major breast imaging centres in Romania
concerning protocols, difficulties and practical approaches to achieving the
European standards.
Panel discussion 11:45
10:30 - 12:00 Room C
CLICK (Clinical Lessons for Imaging Core Knowledge): Common
Clinical Cases
CC 1318
Female pelvic pain
Moderator:
V. Logager; Copenhagen/DK
A371 10:30
A. Clinical considerations
G. Restaino; Campobasso/IT (gennares@hotmail.com)
Pelvic pain is an important part of clinical practice for any clinician who provides
health care for women. Pelvic pain may be acute, recurrent or chronic.Acute pelvic
pain (APP) rarely lasts more than one month without crisis, resolution, or cure. Pain
of more than 1 or 3 or 6 months of duration is considered as chronic pelvic pain
(CPP) and in many settings may be considered and treated as an illness itself.
Women who present with APP frequently exhibit nonspecific signs and symptoms.
Diagnostic considerations encompass multiple organ systems, including obstetric,
gynaecologic, urologic, gastrointestinal, and vascular aetiologies. As the first pri
ority, urgent life-threatening conditions (e.g. ectopic pregnancy, appendicitis and
ruptured ovarian cyst) and fertility-threatening conditions (e.g. pelvic inflammatory
disease and ovarian torsion) must be considered. Adolescents and pregnant and
postpartum women require unique considerations. CCP is a common and significant
disorder of women, with a prevalence of 3.8-12%. Many disorders of the repro
ductive tract, gastrointestinal system, urological organs, musculoskeletal system,
and psychoneurological system may be associated with CCP, the most common
being endometriosis, adhesions, irritable bowel syndrome, and interstitial cystitis.
Ultrasonography should be the initial imaging test because of its sensitivities across
most aetiologies and its lack of radiation exposure. Computed tomography (CT)
serves an important role in patients with nonlocalising symptoms, an indeterminate
US evaluation, or in patients who require a wider search beyond the field of view
available with US. Magnetic resonance imaging is an extremely useful second-line
modality for problem solving after US or CT.
0
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S91
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Sunday
A377 11:30
What and how should we teach undergraduates?
S. Pedraza; Girona/ES
Detection of intestinal inflammatory lesions is crucial for management of patients
with Crohn's disease (CD). Awareness of the shortcomings of mere clinical evalu
ation for assessment of disease activity has grown. Ileocolonoscopy has been the
gold standard for evaluation of lesions in the colon and terminal ileum. However,
ileocolonoscopy cannot always be complete, there exist lacks in the evaluation
of the complete small bowel and there are several drawbacks related to the inva
siveness. Over the past few years, cross-sectional imaging techniques, including
ultrasonography (US), computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imag
ing (MRI) have been increasingly used for evaluation of patients with CD, allowing
objective assessment of location, extension and severity of CD-related lesions.
Imaging techniques are also the accepted reference for detection of complica
tions including strictures and penetrating lesions such as fistulas and abscesses.
Objective assessment of inflammatory lesions is required for guiding therapeutic
interventions and for assessing the efficacy of these interventions. The choice
between imaging techniques is often determined by local availability, expertise
and technical details of these examinations which are also subject to considerable
variation, which may affect accuracy.
Learning Objectives:
1. To comprehend the essential radiological knowledge and interpretational skills
that undergraduates should achieve.
2. To understand the models of radiology curriculum during pregraduate medical
education.
3. To become familiar with modern education methods.
4. To understand the clues of problem-based learning (PBL) applied to radiology.
11:00 - 12:00 Room Z
The Beauty of Basic Knowledge: Interpretation of the Chest
Radiograph
MC 27D
Pleura and chest wall
A374 11:00
Pleura and chest wall
J. Caceres; Barcelona/ES (josecac@gmail.com)
Free pleural effusion tends to accumulate in the dependent parts of the pleural
space. The erect PA and lateral radiographs are especially suitable for detecting
pleural fluid and to help obtaining a sample for diagnostic purposes. Extrapleural
lesions are easily detected in the chest radiograph and characterized with cross-
sectional imaging. Detection of calcium in a pleural lesion does not necessarily
imply that the lesion is benign or inactive.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be able to recognise the typical and atypical appearance of pleural effusion.
2. To learn to recognise extrapleural disease.
3. To be able to identify pleural calcification and its probable causes.
12:12 - 12:45 Room A
Plenary Session
HL 3
Wilhelm Conrad Rontgen Honorary Lecture
Presiding:
L. Bonomo; Rome/IT
A378 12:15
In search of venous thromboembolism: the first 2,912 years
L.R. Goodman; Milwaukee, WI/US (lgoodman@mcw.edu)
Past: The search for venous thromboembolism (VTE) spans three millennium and
several continents. Although deep venous thrombosis (DVT) was first described
in India in 600 BCE, there was little discussion of VTE in western medicine until
the eighteenth century. Virchow (1846) was the first to link pulmonary embolism
(PE) to DVT and propose his famous triad mechanism for venous thrombosis.
Present: The diagnosis was clinical and pathological until VTE imaging developed
10:30 - 12:00 Room Studio 2012
ESR Undergraduate Working Group Session
Undergraduate teaching: the future of radiology
Moderator:
D.E. Malone; Dublin/IE
A375 10:30
Why teach undergraduates radiology?
S.J. Golding; Oxford/UK (stephen.golding@nds.ox.ac.uk)
Today the pressures - clinical, managerial and academic - on radiologists may
be extreme, with the pressure to meet acceptable productivity criteria usually the
most prevalent. Despite this, radiologists need to maintain a broad vision of the
life of their subject and resist pressures that threaten the future at the cost of the
present. The current session results from the recommendations of a Working Group
set up by ESR to advise on this subject. The series of presentations promotes the
view that teaching is an essential task for any radiologist who comes into contact
with undergraduates and that departmental and personal timetables should allow
radiologists adequate opportunity to teach. The objectives perceived to justify
this view are 1. To ensure that junior doctors are equipped to practice safely and
effectively. 2. To ensure newly qualified doctors are aware of their legal responsibili
ties. 3. To provide an understanding of the importance of resource management.
4. To provide awareness of how developments in Radiology will influence future
practice. 5. To support students' learning across their curriculum. 6. To raise the
profile of Radiology as a career choice. The radiologist who undertakes this work
makes a valuable contribution to the future of medical practice and the schedule
of Departments of Radiology should be so ordered to facilitate this work.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the importance to radiological practice of undertaking teaching
to undergraduates.
2. To understand the learning needs of newly qualified doctors as they relate to
radiology.
3. To understand what aspects of a student's learning are assisted by teaching
from radiologists.
4. To understand the role of undergraduate teaching in supporting recruitment
into radiology.
A376 11:00
The European scene: lessons from the 2010 survey
K. Verstraete; Gent/BE (koenraad.verstraete@ugent.be)
Purpose: To analyze undergraduate teaching in Europe. To pro
vide tips and tricks for undergraduate education in radiology.
Methods and Materials: 1. A questionnaire was sent to > 200 teaching centers
in Europe to investigate how undergraduate teaching is performed in Europe. 2.
Teachers should have clear learning objectives on "interpretation skills" and "radio
logical knowledge": what do students have to know and what should they be able
to recognize on imaging studies? How can we achieve these learning objectives?
Results: 1) Results of European survey: 1. How is undergraduate teaching done?
2. In what medical school year (s) do students encounter radiology and what
proportion of the curriculum focuses on radiology or radiology topics? 3. What
type of staff and how many teachers are responsible for radiology education? 4.
What radiology topics are examined and how are they being examined? 2) Based
on the results of this survey, tips and tricks for undergraduate teaching include: 1.
Be present in the whole curriculum (in basic years with radiological anatomy and
radiological techniques; in advanced years with radiology of diseases, guidelines).
2. Provide handbook, notes and exercises in all forms (video streaming, e-learning,
web based teaching and exercises with immediate feedback). 3. Restrict number
of teachers to few, dedicated teachers. 4. Have separate exams (not together with
other disciplines). 5. Organize visits and clerkships to the department of radiology.
6. Have a policy to attract potentially interested students.
Conclusion: 1. Undergraduate teaching in radiology is not uniform throughout
Europe. 2. Optimal undergraduate teaching in Radiology improves knowledge
and interpretation skills of our future colleagues, who will make a better use of
radiology. Moreover, investment in education will attract more and better students
for a radiological career.
Learning Objectives:
1. To comprehend how undergraduate teaching is done in Europe.
2. To understand the heterogeneity of undergraduate teaching in Europe.
3. To understand how undergraduate teaching can be improved and students
can be attracted for a radiological career.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S92 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
may be addressed in the future. Another aspect this lecture deals with is to what
extent imaging of extracellular matrix changes can be used to monitor treatment
responses. Here a distinction will be made between approaches that are expected
to remain at the stage of experimental studies in basic research and approaches
that show promise of being translated to clinical use in the medium term.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the components of the extracellular matrix, i.e. structural ele
ments and enzymes.
2. To understand the role of extracellular matrix changes in diseased tissue.
3. To become familiar with some concepts of imaging extracellular matrix changes.
A381 13:10
C. Structural and molecular imaging of fibrotic process
B. Van Beers; Clichy/FR (bernard.vanbeers@bjn.aphp.fr)
Chronic liver diseases represent a major public health problem. Their prognosis
and management greatly depend on the amount and progression of liver fibrosis.
Liver biopsy, traditionally considered as the reference examination, is currently
less performed because of the development of non-invasive biological and imaging
biomarkers. Serum biomarkers of liver fibrosis are neither very sensitive nor specific.
Imaging biomarkers have the potential to more specifically quantify hepatic fibrosis.
Anatomical imaging of liver fibrosis is hampered by its limited spatial resolution.
Functional imaging is very promising because fibrosis is accompanied by changes
of perfusion, diffusion, mechanical properties and metabolism that can be quanti
fied with ultrasound or more comprehensively with MRI. Indeed, functional MRI
can be used not only to stage liver fibrosis, but also to grade steatosis, necrosis
and inflammation occurring in chronic liver diseases. Molecular imaging can be
performed by targeting collagen or metalloproteases in fibrogenesis. However,
molecular imaging remains currently an experimental tool. In conclusion, imaging
biomarkers obtained at ultrasound and MRI are increasingly used to assess liver
fibrosis. Functional MRI offers the opportunity of a global assessment of fibrosis,
steatosis, necrosis and inflammation in chronic liver diseases.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the need for imaging biomarkers of liver fibrosis.
2. To be able to appreciate the comparative value and limitations of anatomical
and functional methods to assess liver fibrosis.
3. To learn about the potential value of molecular imaging of fibrogenesis.
14:00 - 15:30 Room A
New Horizons Session
NH 14
New insight into vascular wall
A382 14:00
Chairman's introduction
M.F. Reiser; Munich/DE (Maximilian.Reiser@med.unimuenchen.de)
Atherosclerosis is a slow, progressive disease involving multiple if not all vascular
territories and potentially results in disastrous events, such as myocardial infarc
tion, stroke and renal failure, respectively. Frequently, more than one vascular
territory is affected. Due to the demographic changes within developed countries
and the dramatic increase in obesity and metabolic syndrome, atherosclerosis and
its sequelae play an ever increasing socioeconomic role. Until recently imaging
techniques have focused on depicting the degree of luminal stenosis. However,
luminal stenosis occurs late in the atherosclerotic disease process, and several
recent studies have shown that knowledge of luminal stenosis alone is insufficient
to predict vulnerability of plaques. Thus, recent developments in imaging technol
ogy have focused to assess the vessel wall. With these techniques, qualitative and
quantitative information of plaque composition and morphology can be obtained non
invasively. Moreover, functional and molecular imaging techniques have emerged
that allow assessing the biological activity of atherosclerotic plaques. While some of
these methods are still in the realm of basic research, others are entering the field
of clinical application. For radiologists and nuclear medicine specialists, as well as
for imaging scientists knowledge and expertise in this important field has become
mandatory. In the future, these techniques will most likely contribute to a personal
ised medicine by helping to tailor drug selection to an individual's atherosclerotic risk
and to enable to assess an individual's response to therapy. Non invasive imaging
of the vascular wall could transform clinical management for diagnosis, risk strati
fication, selection and efficacy assessment of anti-atherosclerotic therapeutics. If
in the mid twentieth century. Much of our current understanding, and misunder
standing, of VTE, however, stems from the era before definitive imaging diagnosis
was possible. The first definitive in vivo imaging diagnosis for VTE was lower
extremity venography in the 1930s and pulmonary angiography in the 1960s.
Since then, scintigraphy, CT, ultrasound and MRI have been developed. Each
occupies a specific niche in the workup. CT currently has the largest role because
of its sensitivity, specificity, availability and ability to provide alternative diagnosis.
The first CT report of pulmonary infarction was in 1978 (Sinner) and the first use
of helical scanning direct visualisation of central PE was in 1992 (Remy-Jardin).
Future: Many diagnostic and clinical challenges remain. How do we better screen
patients prior to imaging? How do we minimise or eliminate radiation? How do we
decrease costs?Are we overdiagnosing VTE? Do all VTEs require similar therapy?
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the evolution of our understanding of VTE - the truths,
the half-truths, and the fallacies.
2. To understand our current imaging techniques and to optimise their use.
3. To comprehend the impact of imaging on the clinical understanding of VTE.
4. To highlight controversial issues and future directions.
12:30 - 13:30 Room Z
Molecular Imaging
MC 23D
From inflammatory to fibrotic processes
Moderator:
T.F. Massoud; Cambridge/UK
A379 12:30
A. Imaging inflammation in organs and vessels
X. Montet; Geneva/CH (xavier.montet@hcuge.ch)
`Classical' imaging is used every day in clinics to guide diagnosis and therapy,
but only gives access to anatomical and/or structural information. Molecular
imaging will give access to the activity of a protein, the fate of a biomolecule and
even to molecular pathways. The role of molecular imaging in the diagnosis of
inflammation will be discussed in this lecture. Molecular imaging agents are clas
sically designed as activatable or targeted agents. Activatable agents consist of
chemically engineered substrates that undergo a physicochemical change after
interaction with their intended target. This results in the activation of the contrast
media. We will use the recruitment of monocytes/macrophages to the location of
myocardial infarct to illustrate the concept of activatable probes. As monocytes/
macrophages are known to produce a substantial amount of myeloperoxidase, an
activatable agent capable of imaging myeloperoxidase will be discussed. Imaging
the recruitment of monocytes/macrophages with iron oxide-based MR contrast
agent will also be illustrated in the case of inflammatory lesions. Lastly, MR-targeted
probes consisting of nanoparticles with added targeting moieties will be discussed.
Adding targeting moieties on the surface of probes allows to specifically target a
receptor over-expressed by cells. To illustrate this specific targeting, neo-vessels
over-expressing integrin and selectin will be used.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the benefit of a multimodal approach to imaging inflammation.
2. To learn about anti-inflammatory treatment efficacy by imaging.
3. To learn about the potential role of imaging inflammation in clinics.
A380 12:50
B. Molecular imaging of extracellular matrix changes
M. Taupitz; Berlin/DE (matthias.taupitz@charite.de)
Most pathologic processes are accompanied by changes in the extracellular matrix.
Cases in point are sites of tumor development and tumor invasion as well as inflam
mtory conditions such as progressive atherosclerotic lesions, inflammatory bowel
disease, or multiple sclerosis. This lecture provides an overview of the nature of
extracellular matrix changes in various diseases. A variety of targets in the altered
extracellular matrix can theoretically be exploited for imaging. These include both
structural and functional components of the extracellular matrix, on the one hand,
and enzymes involved in pathologic matrix changes, on the other hand. Examples
of probes for noninvasive imaging are fluorescent agents for optical imaging and
magnetic probes for MRI (Gd-containing probes, magnetic nanoparticles). At the
end of this lecture, participants will have gained insights into the role of extracellular
matrix changes in the progression of diseases but also in their cure and have an
overview of the targets that are currently used in different imaging modalities or that
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S93
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Sunday
A385 14:51
Atherosclerosis: a reversible disease?
T. Saam; Munich/DE (Tobias.Saam@med.unimuenchen.de)
Atherosclerosis is a chronic disease of the vessel wall which accounts for > 25% of
ischaemic strokes and for the majority of myocardial infarctions and sudden cardiac
deaths. Until recently little was known about the natural history of atherosclerosis
due to difficulties to image the arterial wall. However, several new imaging methods,
such as intravascular ultrasound (IVUS), high-resolution black blood magnetic
resonance imaging (hr-bb-MRI) and Positron Emission Tomography / Computed
Tomography (PET/CT) have emerged on the horizon. These techniques are able
to depict the full vessel wall and are able to provide detailed information of plaque
composition, morphology and activity non-invasively. In this lecture natural pro
gression studies of atherosclerosis will be discussed and it will be demonstrated
that certain plaque features, that develop over the years, such as thin-cap fibrous
atheromas, intraplaque haemorrhage and inflammation, are associated with an
increased risk of cerebro- or cardiovascular events. Data will be shown which
demonstrate the effects of common atherosclerotic risk factors on the progression
of the disease. In addition studies will be shown which suggest that certain plaque
factors, such as intraplaque haemorrhage or plaque inflammation, accelerate the
atherosclerotic disease process. Furthermore, the effects of anti-atherosclerotic
drugs on plaque progression and plaque morphology will be discussed. Last but not
least the pharmacological possibilities will be discussed to reverse or to decelerate
the anti-atherosclerotic disease process.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the imaging modalities that enable study of athero
sclerosis progression and regression.
2. To consolidate knowledge of the natural history of the atherosclerotic disease
process.
3. To understand factors that accelerate or decelerate plaque progression.
4. To learn how to answer the question `is atherosclerosis a reversible disease?'
Panel discussion:
Predictive values of imaging markers of atherosclerosis: where do
we stand? 15:14
14:00 - 15:30 Room B
Interactive Teaching Session
E 1420
Lung cancer
A386 14:00
A. Detection
S. Diederich; Dusseldorf/DE (s.diederich@marienhospital.de)
Lung cancer most often presents as a pulmonary nodule or mass, less commonly
as a hilar mass or endobronchial lesion. Most small tumours radiologically present
as pulmonary nodules. Chest radiography (CXR) is limited in demonstration of small
nodules and even lesions as large as 3 cm may be missed. Digital tomosynthesis
has been shown to markedly improve sensitivity for pulmonary nodules as compared
with CXR but is not yet widely available. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also
is more sensitive for nodule detection than CXR, but is not routinely performed in
most cases due to limitations in cost and availability. The gold standard for detection
of pulmonary nodules as small as 1-2 mm is multidedector-computed tomography
(MDCT). Technically, MDCT is able to demonstrate pulmonary nodules with sen
sitivity close to 100%; however, sensitivity of individual radiologists is much lower
due to the task of analysing several hundred images, confusion between nodules
and vessels imaged in cross section and other errors. Computer-assisted detection
(CAD) software can improve sensitivity but may be limited by false-positive findings.
Positron emission tomography (PET)-CT using 18 F Deoxyglucose (18 FDG) has
a high sensitivity for lung cancer; however, false-negative findings may be due
to well-differentiated adenocarcinoma, carcinoid and nodules < 10 mm, whereas
false-positive findings may be due to inflammatory lesions. This interactive ses
sion will include examples of manifestations of lung cancer as well as data on the
accuracy of different imaging methods for lung cancer detection.
Learning Objectives:
1. To know what imaging techniques are appropriate for detecting lung cancer.
2. To learn the most relevant imaging findings in lung cancer.
3. To understand the behaviour of lung cancer related to imaging.
methods are optimised, we may be able to decide which patients harbour high-risk
atherosclerotic plaques that will ultimately cause myocardial infarction or stroke.
Session Objectives:
1. To discuss new concepts of evolvement of atherosclerotic plaques and mecha
nisms resulting in complications.
2. To give information concerning risk factors of atherosclerotic plaques in dif
ferent vascular territories.
3. To understand the impact of imaging in primary and secondary prevention.
A383 14:05
Molecular imaging of atherosclerosis: ready for prime time?
M. Schafers; Munster/DE (schafmi@unimuenster.de)
The majority of cardiovascular diseases arises from atherosclerosis resulting in
coronary heart disease and its principal manifestations, angina pectoris, myo
cardial infarction, sudden cardiac death and heart failure or stroke. A hallmark of
atherosclerosis is vascular inflammation initiated by an endotheial injury and driven
by various noxes such as hypercholesteremia. The most dangerous lesions are
unstable and prone to rupture. These plaques are often of lesser stenosis severity
and thus would sometimes not impair blood flow at rest or during exercise. Unstable
plaques are characterised by activated macrophages, mast cells and other cells
being localised in the plaque shoulder which secrete a variety of matrix-degrading
enzymes such as metalloproteinases (MMPs). Non-invasive molecular imaging
of MMP activity in patients could help identify patients at high risk of major acute
cardiovascular events. SPECT and PET provide the most sensitive and selective
means for imaging molecular interactions non-invasively in the living body and
could therefore prove a potent approach to the identification of the metabolically
active plaque that is vulnerable to rupture. New radiopharmaceuticals addressing
relevant targets in plaques, improvement in image acquisition and processing
(e.g. motion correction), preclinical imaging in models and the first translational
approaches will be discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about potential targets for molecular imaging of atherosclerosis.
2. To become acquainted with molecular imaging studies which have assessed
atherosclerosis.
3. To understand the role of molecular imaging in current clinical practice and its
potential role in the future.
A384 14:28
Non-invasive imaging of the vulnerable atherosclerotic plaque
J.H. Gillard; Cambridge/UK (jhg21
@cam.ac.uk)
Until recently the risk of carotid disease in symptomatic patients was determined by
simple luminal measurement-based conventional angiography, all on more subjec
tive changes in Doppler ultrasound measurements which would establish whether
a patient should undergo carotid endarterectomy or optimal medical therapy.
Developments in MR and CT over the past decade have given us alternative tools
to measure luminal stenosis which have reduced risks when compared with con
ventional X ray angiography. The current goal is to be better able to characterise
plaque risk, whether it is in the carotid, coronary or peripheral vasculature. MR
imaging of the carotid is feasible due to its size and superficial position, equivalent
reproducible imaging of the coronary arteries being considerably more challenging.
Although the carotid artery may be viewed as a surrogate for disease in the coro
naries, this is probably an oversimplification. Nevertheless it remains an important
and practical target. Whilst the assessment of risk is aided by the quantification of
individual morphological components in plaque viewed with MR, it has been dif
ficult to image true plaque function. We can use MR to assess the contribution of
local flow dynamics and the individual components of plaque to produce maps of
stress in a specific patient. MR contrast media can contribute additional informa
tion with regard to plaque function. We are also able to image not only individual
plaque structure, but also function allowing an improved understanding of why two
patients with identical degrees of luminal stenosis may have completely different
degrees of vulnerability.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the morphological components of plaque associated with risk
of rupture.
2. To understand the concept of functional/cellular imaging in atherosclerosis.
3. To learn the role of macrophage-specific MR imaging in diagnosis and monitor
ing of atherosclerotic disease.
4. To get an outlook on future developments in assessing plaque risk using MR
techniques.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S94 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
and midgut volvulus or with a water-soluble contrast enema in newborns with
suspected meconium plug or microcolon. Ultrasound plays a complementary role
in the neonates, but in all other ages US becomes the method of choice in the
vomiting child because of its high sensitivity and specificity (e.g. in hypertrophic
pyloric stenosis) and offers the advantage to avoiding exposure to the potential
harmful radiation of x-rays. Computed tomography and/or magnetic resonance
imaging in diagnosing the vomiting child will be reserved for less common causes
such as intracerebral abnormalities or intracranial pressure.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about useful and applicable imaging techniques, including their specific
adaptations and the needs when applied in infants and children.
2. To become familiar with the respective imaging algorithms in applicable typical
childhood scenarios.
3. To become familiar with the common imaging findings and their differential
diagnoses and common pitfalls.
A390 15:00
C. Interactive case discussion
R.R. van Rijn; Amsterdam/NL (r.r.vanrijn@amc.uva.nl)
The vomiting child can present the paediatrician and paediatric radiologist with a
difficult diagnostic problem. As discussed in the previous lectures the differential
diagnosis is based on age specific diseases. Both gastrointestinal as non-gastroin
testinal diseases of childhood can cause vomiting in a child. During this interactive
session a broad range of cases, the usual and unusual, will be presented. Each case
will be introduced by a short summary of the clinical information. The question will
not only be which diseases should be included in the differential diagnosis but also
which imaging modality and protocol should be used in this case. The importance
of choosing the correct imaging technique and protocol is of importance not only
from a perspective of patient satisfaction but even more from an ALARA point of
view. In paediatric radiology avoiding unnecessary (repeat) exams and choosing
the right technique and protocol has the biggest impact on radiation reduction.
Learning Objectives:
1. To review typical cases illustrating the role of imaging in infants and children
with unclear vomiting.
2. To get involved in the diagnostic process by the use of electronic voting pads.
3. To understand the conclusion that may be drawn on the basis of the discussed
cases.
14:00 - 15:30 Room D1
Emergencies in Neuroradiology
CC 1419
Oncologic emergencies in neuroradiology
Moderator:
J. Walecki; Warsaw/PL
A391 14:00
A. Acute paraparesis
M. Essig; Erlangen/DE (mediag@me.com)
Paraparesis is clinically defined as a weakness of the lower extremities. It is usually
caused by an injury of the spinal cord in the thoracic, lumbar or sacral part of the
spine or by toxic effects. An acute onset is a neurologic emergency, which requires
an immediate clarification - mainly by an imaging study. There are several conditions
in oncology that may cause an acute paraparesis. These include acute myelogenous
leukaemia, metastasis, Hodkins disease, lymphomatosis meningitis, cervical or
lumbar spinal cord tumour or metastasis, multiple myeloma, primary myelofibrosis/
myeloid metaplasia or metabolic and treatment-associated changes in the spinal
cord. As the paraparesis starts in this context without a traumatic background, MR
imaging is the method of choice in the workup of these patients. In this overview
we will classify and describe the different oncologic conditions which may cause
an acute paraparesis and highlight typical imaging findings in both intramedullary
and extramedullary causes.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the preferred examination technique in a patient with sudden
onset on acute paraparesis.
2. To understand how and when to perform the examination.
3. To learn what are the signs of spinal cord compression on CT and MRI.
A387 14:45
B. Followup
F. Gleeson; Oxford/UK (fergus.gleeson@orh.nhs.uk)
Whilst the pathways for the detection and staging of lung cancer are well known,
the use of imaging for the detection of disease relapse are less well established.
Detection of relapse is now more complex, due to the use of multimodality therapy,
including surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy and new ablative techniques. Each
of these therapies may affect the site and appearance of recurrent disease. Ad
ditionally new techniques such as PET-CT and diffusion-weighted imaging have
not yet been fully evaluated in this context. This presentation will focus on the
timing of repeat imaging post treatment, the features of recurrent disease and
suggest followup protocols, paying particular attention to imaging in the context
of retreatment of disease relapse.
Learning Objectives:
1. To know the common features of recurrence of lung cancer.
2. To learn how to establish followup protocols after treatment of lung cancer.
14:00 - 15:30 Room C
CLICK (Clinical Lessons for Imaging Core Knowledge): Common
Clinical Cases
CC 1418
The vomiting infant and child
Moderator:
M. Riccabona; Graz/AT
A388 14:00
A. Clinical considerations
L.S. OrdingMuller; Tromso/NO (lilsofie.ording@unn.no)
Vomiting is a common symptom in childhood and can be caused by numerous
conditions. In children we not only face difficulties in defining the conditions that
may cause vomiting but also in differentiating true vomiting from physiological
regurgitation, especially in younger children. In this session the clinico-radiological
approach to a vomiting child will be discussed and illustrated by different clinical
scenarios. This session will focus on the most common age-specific entities that
may cause vomiting and how the approach to imaging in a vomiting child differs
from in adults. It emphasises the importance of a good collaboration between the
paediatrician and the radiologist to improve the diagnostic pathway. In detail, a
multi-disciplinary approach is needed to avoid unnecessary diagnostic tests. The
role of imaging not only in establishing the final diagnosis, but also in excluding
underlying conditions that may need intervention will be discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn more about the difficulties in clinically defining a condition that causes
vomiting in an infant or young child and to learn about different clinical sce
narios.
2. To become familiar with important and common entities in childhood vomiting
of unclear origin, and to be informed about potential underlying conditions that
might be a reason for imaging.
3. To become familiar with the potential role of imaging in the establishment of
the final diagnosis and planning of therapy in infants and children, particularly
the different approaches to adult imaging.
A389 14:30
B. Imaging techniques and typical findings
H.J. Mentzel; Jena/DE (hansjoachim.mentzel@med.unijena.de)
This paper reviews the use of imaging techniques for the assessment of the vomiting
infant and child. The differential diagnostic workup for the common clinical presen
tations of vomiting in the different age groups will be described and illustrated for
age-specific diseases. Nausea and vomiting are common sequelae of multitude
of disorders that can range from mild, self-limited illness to severe, life-threatening
conditions. Bilious vomiting in the newborn is considered a radiological emergency
and requires quick and exact diagnosis, whereas vomiting in children often is associ
ated with gastroenteritis which not requires any imaging. In neonates with bilious
vomiting, the first step in the imaging evaluation is the abdominal plain film which
may reveal evidence of upper gastrointestinal tract obstruction. Direct imaging of
the stomach and small bowel using the upper contrast gastrointestinal series or
fluid-aided ultrasound answers the question if there is a mechanical obstruction.
X-ray contrast enema may play a role in the evaluation of suspected malrotation
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S95
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Sunday
14:00 - 15:30 Room D2
Urogenital Imaging
CC 1421
Tumours of the female pelvis
Moderator:
M.M. OteroGarcia; Vigo/ES
A394 14:00
A. Imaging of the ovarian mass: is US enough?
J.A. Spencer; Leeds/UK (johnaspencer50
@hotmail.com)
The simple answer to this question is "yes" for most situations: and notably when
surgery is not planned. The complicated answer is that US relying on morphology-
based systems supplemented by Doppler evaluation cannot reliably provide the
information used to direct women with a complex ovarian mass to appropriate
surgery unless there are clear secondary signs of disseminated malignancy. The
difficulty is in deciding when to use CT or MR imaging after US. That is the topic
to be discussed in the context of new ESUR guidelines.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the strengths and limitations of US in assessment of an adnexal
mass.
2. To be able to recognise the complementary roles of US, CT and MR in the
imaging pathway.
3. To become familiar with the clinical goals of imaging of an ovarian mass.
A395 14:30
B. Imaging and staging of endometrial tumours: putting guidelines
into clinical practice
H. Hricak; New York, NY/US
Most women diagnosed with endometrial cancer are postmenopausal (~25% are
premenopausal). Endovaginal ultrasound is widely used for initial assessment in
menopausal patients, especially if bleeding is present. Measurement of the thick
ness of the endometrial stripe can help determine the need for D&C.After diagnosis,
MRI is the best imaging modality for locoregional staging and detecting recurrence
(preliminary data suggest FDG-PET may also be useful for followup). Surgery
remains the primary treatment modality, but radiotherapy and chemotherapy are
being used for advanced disease and patients at high risk of recurrence. In 2009,
FIGO staging guidelines were revised. MRI is especially helpful for distinguishing
stage IAfrom stage IB ( 50% myometrial invasion), which is associated with a 40%
incidence of lymph node metastasis and a need for lymph node dissection and for
identifying stage II (invasion of the cervical stroma, calling for radical hysterectomy).
While pretreatment knowledge of these findings is helpful, cost-effectiveness
studies are lacking, and routine use of MRI is controversial. MRI should include at
least two T2-weighted sequences showing the short and long axes of the uterus
(sagittal, axial oblique or coronal oblique). High-resolution imaging 2 min 30 s
post-contrast injection is optimal for diagnosing myometrial invasion. If cervical
invasion is suspected, an additional slice perpendicular to the endocervical channel
is recommended. Pre-contrast sequences up the renal hilum enable retroperitoneal
lymph node screening. Indications for MRI include high-grade, serous or clear-cell
adenocarcinoma; suspicion of stage IB; detection of enlarged nodes for sampling;
inability to perform D&C or surgical staging.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn how to adapt a standard MRI staging protocol to high imaging quality.
2. To understand the impact of imaging results for treatment options.
3. To learn what should never be missing in the imaging report.
A396 15:00
C. Imaging and staging of tumours of the uterine cervix: putting
guidelines into clinical practice
B. Hamm; Berlin/DE (bernd.hamm@charite.de)
MR imaging is the method of choice for primary staging of cervical cancer. The
backbone of staging cervical cancer is T2-weighted imaging with high spatial
resolution performed in two imaging planes. Invasion of the parametrium can thus
be assessed with a high degree of accuracy. Especially in staging cervical cancer,
MR imaging can replace numerous other diagnostic tests and thus improve pre
therapeutic staging while at the same time reducing costs. This categorical course
focuses on pretherapeutic staging of cervical cancer taking current guidelines of
the FIGO and of the European Society of Urogenital Radiology into account. The
A392 14:30
B. Iatrogenic emergencies in oncology patients: PRES and radiation
necrosis
P.C. Maly Sundgren; Lund/SE (Pia.Sundgren@med.lu.se)
Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) is characterised by head
ache, altered mental status, visual disturbances and seizures. Different conditions
have been associated with PRES, such as for example eclampsia bone marrow
transplantation and immunosuppressive treatment, hypertension, autoimmune
disease and cancer chemotherapy. The pathophysiology of PRES is still unclear
and different hypothesis will be discussed in this lecture. Typical radiological im
aging findings which are best presented on MRI include signal abnormalities due
to vasogenic oedema in predominately but not only white matter of the posterior
regions of the cerebral hemispheres, like the occipital and posterior parietal lobes
but also the frontal lobes often involved, whereas the cerebellum, the brainstem,
the deep white matter and basal ganglia are more atypical locations. The incidence
of radiation necrosis ranges from 5 to 24%. The delayed neurological symptoms
include functional and cognitive impairments, including deficits in learning, working
memory, executive function, vision, and motor function, and eventually dementia.
A complete understanding of the pathophysiology of radiation therapy-induced
changes to the central nervous system (CNS) is still lacking. MRI cannot reliably
discriminate tumour recurrence/progression from the inflammatory or necrotic
changes resulting from radiation, although the latter can be associated with more
specific patterns of enhancement, such as "soap bubble"- or "Swiss cheese"-like
with or without feathery margins and central necrosis. This lecture will focus on the
pathophysiology, aetiology and imaging features, of PRES and radiation necrosis
and their differential diagnosis in oncology patients.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the pathophysiology and imaging findings of reversible posterior
leukoencephalopathy syndrome (PRES).
2. To understand the pathophysiology and imaging findings of radiation necrosis.
3. To consolidate knowledge on how to differentiate tumour recurrence from
radiation necrosis on CT, MRI and PET imaging studies.
4. To become familiar with the potential role of perfusion imaging.
A393 15:00
C. Interventional techniques in oncologic patients
A. Gangi, X. Buy, G. Tsoumakidou, J. Garnon; Strasbourg/FR
(gangi@rad6
.ustrasbg.fr)
Percutaneous image-guided procedures can be applied for tumour management
in cases of spinal tumours. They consist of the tumour ablation and/or vertebral
consolidation. These procedures are usually not considered as acute emergency.
However, in cases of impending vertebral collapse, spinal consolidation should
be performed on an emergent basis. For the palliative treatment of painful spinal
tumours (metastases), the therapeutic goal should not be the complete ablation of
the tumour, but one or more of the following: tumour reduction, pain management,
prevention of risk of pathological fractures and in some cases, decompression of
spinal tumours extending towards the spinal canal. Precise clinical evaluation of
the patient is mandatory: origin and location of pain, previous treatment, which
anaesthesia the patient can tolerate, and life expectancy. For tumours causing
any neurological signs, surgical decompression should be the first treatment op
tion. Multidisciplinary decision is required to choose the more efficient and less
disabling technique.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn what is the role of vertebroplasty in treatment of patients with metastatic
spine fractures.
2. To learn if there is a role for tumour embolisation.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S96 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
3. To recognise normal imaging findings after surgery and how to differentiate
them from pathological ones.
4. To become familiar with the main complications after knee surgery.
A399 15:00
C. Ankle
C. Masciocchi; L'Aquila/IT (carlo.masciocchi@cc.univaq.it)
To evaluate postsurgical patients it is important to know the primary clinical diagno
sis, the surgical treatment, the interval since surgery and patients' current clinical
symptoms. Radiography is the most common imaging modality to evaluate the
postoperative ankle, particularly in traumatic cases; after reduction and fixation of
a fracture or dislocation it is generally carried out as routine. Ultrasonography is
highly sensitive and specific in postoperative tendon assessment, thanks to the
superb resolution, and the opportunity for dynamic evaluation of tendon integrity.
MRI has rapidly become important in post-operative assessment of the ankle,
because it provides high soft-tissue contrast, multiplanar capability and osseous
structures visualisation. It shows signal changes of ligaments and tendons, hypoin
tense subchondral sclerosis, subchondral bone marrow oedema, joint effusion,
capsular thickening, fibrosis and synovitis. MRI has also an important role in the
evaluation of post-surgery ankle pain due to impingement syndrome and in the
hindfoot chronic instability related to postoperated sinus tarsi syndrome; it demon
strates the anatomy of sinus tarsi, chronic synovitis and nonspecific inflammatory
changes, synovial cysts, fibrosis and subtalar joint effusion. It is important also in
the followup of tumours and tumour-like conditions of bone and soft tissues after
surgery. Computed tomography is the most valuable method to define the osseous
anatomy of the postoperative ankle, so it is important in the followup of the oper
ated osteochondral lesions of the talus. CT allows the evaluation of irregularities or
degenerative changes and progressive degenerative arthritis; however, CT usually
fails to evaluate soft tissue ankle lesion.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the principles of basic surgical techniques.
2. To become familiar with technical aspects of different modalities for imaging
post-surgical patients.
3. To recognise normal imaging findings after surgery and how to differentiate
them from pathological ones.
4. To become familiar with the main complications after ankle surgery.
14:00 - 15:30 Room E2
Oncologic Imaging
RC 1416
Monitoring response: the essential guide for all
radiologists
A400 14:00
Chairman's introduction
H.P. Schlemmer; Heidelberg/DE (h.schlemmer@dkfz.de)
Patient care in oncology requires repeated decision making continuously escorting
the individual course of the disease. As the interdisciplinary concept of therapy
planning and administration can be very complex, it has essentially to be based on
timely re-assessment of the individual treatment response at various time points.
Reproducible and quantitative assessment of response is also crucial for anticancer
drug development in clinical phase II and II trials. Taking repeated measurements of
the tumour size on Radiologic cross-sectional images yield the primary quantitative
parameter for objectively determining response in solid tumours. Different methods
have been employed for standardisation, e.g. WHO- and RECIST-criteria. It is
important to have in mind that a precise understanding and careful application of
the specified criteria is notably required to quantify response in a consistent way.
Common understanding of the underlying principles is of particular importance as
repeated image evaluation for patients during the course of their disease and/or
for multicentre trials cohorts may be conducted by different Radiologists working
even at different institutions. With the introduction of novel molecular targeted
anti-cancer agents (e.g. with anti-angiogenetic activity), however, early response
assessment by tracking tumour size changes alone may be insufficient. For this,
new imaging biomarkers are needed capable of detecting function and metabolic
tissue alterations, particularly early after treatment. This course will give an insight
into the current standards as well as provide new approaches for objective assess
ment of tumour response.
course presents an outline of the morphologic imaging criteria of the different T-
stages of cervical cancer based on scientific evidence.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the imaging strategies in cervical cancer.
2. To learn how to stage cervical cancer by MRI.
3. To learn how to avoid pitfalls in MR imaging of cervical cancer.
14:00 - 15:30 Room E1
Musculoskeletal
RC 1410
Postoperative joint imaging
Moderator:
G. Mantzikopoulos; Athens/GR
A397 14:00
A. Shoulder
K. Wortler; Munich/DE (woertler@roe.med.tum.de)
Imaging evaluation of the shoulder after surgery is challenging, as it necessitates
familiarity with several surgical techniques and their typical complications, knowl
edge of normal and abnormal postoperative findings, awareness of the advantages
and weaknesses with the different radiological techniques, as well as clinical
information on current symptoms and joint function. This course reviews the most
commonly used surgical procedures for treatment of glenohumeral instability and
rotator cuff lesions and highlights the significance of imaging findings with a view
to detection of recurrent lesions and postoperative complications. The indications
for plain radiography, MR imaging, MR arthrography and CT arthrography in the
postoperative setting will be discussed together with technical aspects and their
diagnostic performance. Special attention will be drawn to the depiction of shoulder-
specific and general surgical complications, such as deltoid dehiscence, implant
dislocation, foreign-body reactions, nerve injury and infection.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the principles of basic surgical techniques.
2. To become familiar with technical aspects of different modalities for imaging
post-surgical patients.
3. To recognise normal imaging findings after surgery and how to differentiate
them from pathological ones.
4. To become familiar with the main complications after shoulder surgery.
A398 14:30
B. Knee
K. Verstraete; Gent/BE (koenraad.verstraete@ugent.be)
There are many surgical techniques to repair meniscal tear: focal cartilage defect,
cruciate ligament tear, malalignment, fracture, osteoarthrosis,... Conventional
radiography, CT-scan, CT-arthrography and MRI play an important role in evalua
tion of the knee after surgery or arthroscopy. Indications for postoperative imaging
are infection, persistent pain and dysfunction. Every radiologist should be familiar
with "normal" imaging findings after arthroscopy, osteosynthesis, ligament recon
struction, osteotomy, knee prosthesis and meniscal or (osteo)chondral repair,
but also recognise the main complications after knee surgery or arthroscopy.
Orthopaedic hardware is usually evaluated on plain radiography or CT, and only
a relative contraindication for MRI. Microscopic metal artefacts and fibrotic scar
ring are frequently seen along the course of the instrumentation tract. After partial
meniscectomy, an obtuse angle at the apex of the meniscus and increased signal
intensity of the remnant part of the meniscus are normal findings, whereas fibril
lation and recurrent tear may explain complaints of the patient. Various intra- and
extra-articular reconstructive procedures exist for anterior and posterior cruciate
ligament reconstruction. Besides the neoligament, an osseous tunnel, screws and
metal artefacts are also visible. Postoperative findings of the extensor apparatus
include a thickened patellartendon, focal myxoid degeneration, fibrosis and focal
defects, e.g. after harvesting tendon tissue forACL reconstruction or after release of
the lateral patellar retinaculum for `unstable' patella.Accelerated osteoarthritis may
be a late postoperative finding. MRI very well depicts incorporation and alignment
of osteochondral auto- or allografts, and the position, morphology and integrity of
the meniscus after repair or transplantation.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the principles of basic surgical techniques.
2. To become familiar with technical aspects of different modalities for imaging
post-surgical patients.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S97
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Sunday
the distribution volume, for which the body-weight (g) is usually used. The tumour
lesions are delineated in the PET images by regions and/or volumes of interest
(ROIs, VOIs). The EORTC have published criteria to be applied on the results of
these measurements and recently also the PERCIST (PET Response Criteria In
Solid Tumours) have been proposed that combines measurements of tumour FDG
uptake and size to determine the results of the treatment.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn how response is measured with FDG-PET.
2. To understand quantitative measurement with FDG-PET.
3. To be familiar with pitfalls in measuring response.
4. To understand the role of FDG-PET in monitoring response in lymphoma.
Panel discussion:
When and how will functional imaging overcome morphological
assessment? 15:14
14:00 - 15:30 Room F1
Special Focus Session
SF 14
HIV/AIDS update 2012
A404 14:00
Chairman's introduction: Living with AIDS - numbers and facts
M.M. Thurnher; Vienna/AT (majda.thurnher@meduniwien.ac.at)
Since its first introduction 30 years ago, the researches continue to fight with the
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Not that long ago, the term "HIV" immediately
induced a vision of an untreatable infection that progressed to acquired immu
nodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and death. Highly Active Anti-Retroviral Therapy
(HAART) has significantly changed this scenario. HIV infection, whilst certainly
not conquered, has become a treatable chronic disease. Global HIV epidemic is a
series of very different epidemics in different countries. HIV prevalence rates vary
widely, as do transmission routes. Although the overall HIV-associated morbidity
and mortality has decreased worldwide, the access to HAART is not equal in all
parts of the world. In contrast to universal access to antiretroviral therapies in some
European countries and USA, in the Eastern Europe and Central Asia just 23% of
people who are in need have access to antiretroviral treatment. Globally, in 2008,
more than 10 million people living with HIV were still in need of treatment. HIV/AIDS
remains one of the world's most significant public health challenges, particularly in
low- and middle-income countries. This Special Focus Session attempts to eluci
date, discuss and update on: a) HIV-associated diseases and imaging findings b)
current antiretroviral strategies and c) future developments.
Session Objectives:
1. To review the current numbers and facts about HIV infection worldwide.
2. To highlight the evolution of HIV infection, novel findings in HIV pathogenesis,
and the interactions of the virus with the immune system.
3. To emphasise new diagnostic imaging tools for diagnosing and monitoring the
most common HIV-related diseases.
A405 14:03
Clinical challenges in HIV and CART era
A. Rieger; Vienna/AT
The broad implementation of antiretroviral combination therapy (cART) in high-
budget countries has significantly changed the clinical course of HIV infection.
Although eradication of the virus is still not feasible, long-term suppression of viral
replication is associated with immune reconstitution, a marked reduction of oppor
tunistic diseases, an improved quality of life and a life expectancy that in absence
of HCV coinfection is approaching that of HIV negative individuals. Nevertheless
some caveats have to be issued. In spite of years of educational efforts up to one
third of new HIV diagnoses are made only when significant immunodeficiency
had occurred already. Even with potent HIV therapies available late diagnosis is
a negative predictor for treatment success. In patients on successful cART im
mune activation is reduced but not to the levels of an HIV negative person. This
chronic low level inflammation as compared to age matched HIV negative persons
confers a higher risk for cardiovascular diseases, lymphoma and/or osteoporosis
and is possibly associated with a general premature ageing process. Similar to
other manifestations of progressed HIV disease the prevalence of HIV associ
ated dementia has decreased, however milder forms of neurocognitive deficits
are reported increasingly in spite of cART and viral suppression in the peripheral
blood. The importance of the brain as a sanctuary site for the immune system and
A401 14:05
A. RECIST made easy
A.G. Rockall; London/UK (andrea.rockall@bartsandthelondon.nhs.uk)
A significant part of cancer imaging involves the assessment of change in tumour
burden within the context of a clinical trial or research study. The reporting require
ments for these imaging studies are documented in the research protocol and need
to be adhered to by the reporting radiologist. A standardised response assessment
is important in order to allow data to be collated between different centres, as well
as to evaluate published data from different studies. Response evaluation criteria
in solid tumours (RECIST) were developed and published in 2000. RECIST criteria
have been widely adopted for the evaluation of treatment response in the clinical
trial setting. A revised version, RECIST 1.1, was subsequently published in 2009,
in order to address several problems that had been encountered with RECIST 1.0.
An extensive analysis of data was undertaken in order to underpin the changes with
a strong evidence base, prior to the publication of RECIST 1.1. New clinical trials
frequently use RECIST 1.1 but in some cases, new studies will still use RECIST
1.0 in order to allow direct comparison with a previous similar study. In this lecture,
the key features of RECIST will be presented together with the important changes
between RECIST 1.0 and 1.1. Frequently asked questions will be addressed and
the criteria will be illustrated with clinical examples.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn the rules for recording measurable disease.
2. To learn the rules for recording non-measurable disease.
3. To be able to answer frequently asked questions.
A402 14:28
B. Response measurement in `difficult' tumours
L. Ollivier1
, S. Apter2
, V. Servois1
, S. Neuenschwander1
; 1
Paris/FR, 2
TelAviv/IL
(liliane.ollivier@curie.net)
Even if the RECIST criteria based on anatomic size measurements of the tumours
have been recently updated, difficulties are still often encountered in measur
ing lesions, both in primary tumours and metastases. The aim of this course is
to analyse the major causes of these difficulties. Some are due to the tumours
themselves, known to be a constant problem in assessing their response to treat
ment. Bone lesions for example are even considered non target lesion leading
to a non-eligibility of the patients for a new therapy and the absence of correctly
measurable disease in malignant pleural mesothelioma or ovarian cancer can affect
patient management. Evolution under treatment of some tumours (even if they are
easily evaluable before treatment) and /or the adjacent parenchyma may also be
the cause of difficulties in assessing response. Modality used in the study, use of
automated measurements, type of study and type of treatment (GISTS) may affect
the measurements. The different criteria of response may also lead to discrepancies
between observers. Panel reviews often offer the opportunity to realise how much
intra-observer variability is important in these particular tumours. The second part
of this course consists in searching either in our experience or in the literature, the
new avenues to improve the quality of assessment of response in these kinds of
tumours known as difficult" and even to look forward to using new criteria, new
techniques and also new endpoints
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand why response measurement is difficult in some tumours.
2. To learn how response is measured in ovarian cancer/mesothelioma/GIST
tumours/myeloma.
A403 14:51
C. Assessment of response using functional imaging: the essentials
A.E. Sundin; Stockholm/SE (Anders.Sundin@ki.se)
The mainstay for image evaluation of response to oncological therapy is CT or
MRI applying morphological criteria, generally RECIST, or in recent clinical trials
RECIST 1.1. For some tumour types these criteria are not applicable and for others
RECIST-like criteria have been developed depending on the specific characteristics
of the tumour type. One example is the so-called Choi criteria for GIST that relies
not only on changes in tumour size but also on alterations in lesion attenuation.
In functional imaging using FDG-PET the tumour uptake reflects the metabolic
activity of the tumour and a decrease of FDG accumulation at followup during
and/or after therapy as compared with the base-line examination indicates treat
ment response. For some tumours, such as lymphoma, a visual interpretation in
this regard is often sufficient but for most cancers the FDG uptake in the tumours
needs to be quantified in the PET images. Usually, the standardised uptake value
(SUV) is used. SUV is a measure of the tumour radioactivity concentration that
is normalised to the amount of FDG injected (the injected radioactivity, Bq) and
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S98 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
of these patients, partial restoration of specific immunity may worsen a preexisting
disease. Immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS), which occurs in
some patients in the weeks to months after the institution of HAART, may alter the
typical imaging appearance of infectious diseases. Patients with IRIS demonstrate
paradoxical deterioration in their clinical status; IRIS-reported illnesses include M.
tuberculosis, MAC, AIDS-associated malignancies (Kaposi sarcoma), lymphoma,
and sarcoidosis. In the evaluation of HIV-related diseases, it is important for
radiologists to recognise the effect that treatment has on imaging appearances.
Learning Objectives:
1. To review pulmonary HIV-associated diseases.
2. To learn changing patterns in the presentation and epidemiology of thoracic
manifestations of AIDS.
3. To learn about the role of thoracic imaging at the beginning of AIDS and 30
years later.
Panel discussion:
How the shift in the natural history and clinical manifestation of HIV
is changing my imaging diagnosis 15:15
14:00 - 15:30 Room F2
Breast
RC 1402
How I report
Moderator:
I. Leconte; Brussels/BE
A409 14:00
A. Mammography
F.J. Gilbert; Cambridge/UK (fjg28@cam.ac.uk)
A structured mammogram report avoids ambiguous communication of informa
tion and aids audit and data collection. It should contain the following information:
an assessment of the breast density (fatty, mixed or dense or use the BIRADS
system of 1 - glandular tissue < 25%, 2 - scattered fibroglandular tissue 25-50%,
3 - heterogeneously dense 51-75%, 4 - > 75% fibroglandular and fibrous tissue.
A description of any mass seen in the breast with the size (maximum diameter
together with perpendicular measurement), the shape (round, oval, irregular),
margin (sharply or well defined, indistinct or illdefined, spiculated), density of the
lesion, any associated features; presence of asymmetric density or architectural
distortion. If calcifcation is present then the extent in two dimensions should be
given, type of particles (amorphous or indistinct calcification with tea cupping) or
fine linear, branching or casting. A description of the position of the abnormality
naming the quadrant of the breast or the distance from the nipple. Coarse benign
calification is not ususally reported. The presence or absence of any satellite lesions
is important. Several different scoring systems are used. The UK uses a 5-point
system - 1 - normal, 2 - benign, 3 - indeterminate, 4 - suspicious, 5 - malignant.
The American BIRADS system: 0 - more imaging required, 1 - normal, 2 - benign
lesion, 3 - high probability of being benign, short interval followup recomended,
4 - suspicious, 5 - high probability of cancer and 6 - known malignancy.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be familiar with the basic parts of a structured report.
2. To understand which information a clinician needs in a breast cancer patient's
report.
3. To learn to compose a report for a patient with a BI-RADS 3 lesion.
A410 14:30
B. Breast US
G. Rizzatto; Gorizia/IT (grizzatto@libero.it)
Breast ultrasound (US) examinations are sometimes reported separately from
mammography and sometimes reported as part of a combined examination. In
either case, the structure of the report should follow some general guidelines to
make the report clear and concise. The report should start with a brief description
of the technology used: transducer type and frequency, type of elastography when
relevant. A brief description of clinical history will follow as long as the rationale for
the use of US. Findings must be reported having in mind the diagnostic accuracy
of US for different clinical and/or comparative studies (i.e., US of a cancer lesion
will include findings relative to staging) and with comparison to prior studies when
relevant. Reporting of findings must be followed by the assessment (BI-RADS cat
egories should be preferred) with clear management recommendations. The report
should be succinct, using terminology and descriptors internationally accepted.
antiretroviral drugs has been established for many years. For both a successful
long-term management as well as a potential eradication of HIV, future strategies
have to be capable to battle the virus where it hides.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the developments within the global HIV epidemic.
2. To understand the complexities and controversies related to the natural his
tory, diagnosis and management of HIV infection; antiretroviral therapy and
immunotherapy.
3. To explain the synergy between basic and clinical sciences.
A406 14:21
HIV and brain
M.M. Thurnher; Vienna/AT (majda.thurnher@meduniwien.ac.at)
The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) enters the brain very early after exposure.
The most probable way is through infected monocytes and lymphocytes that cross
the blood-brain barrier (BBB). The introduction of antiretroviral therapies (cART) has
resulted in significant declines in morbidity, mortality and prevalence of opportun
istic infections. Despite treatment HIV-related CNS complications have remained
common. HIV-associated dementia (HAD) is considered as the most severe form
of HIV-related injury. Mild neurocognitive disorder (MND) represents a milder form
of impairment. An asymptomatic neurocognitive impairment (ANI) was introduced
to recognise individuals with impairment on neuropsychological testing who report
functional limitations. Neuroimaging plays an important role in detection of HIV-
related changes in the brain. New imaging modalities (DTI, MRS) are increasingly
used to measure injury within white matter tracts and regional changes in brain
metabolites. This lecture will focus on the spectrum of "Neuro-AIDS disorders" and
their imaging characteristics.
Learning Objectives:
1. To review the most common CNS diseases in the HIV-positive population.
2. To learn how to use advanced imaging findings in distinguishing HIV-related
brain disorders.
3. To consolidate knowledge on imaging-based therapy monitoring.
A407 14:39
Understanding the role of immune activation and restoration in HIV
infection
A.G. Osborn; Salt Lake City, UT/US (anne.osborn@hsc.utah.edu)
Immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) occurs when restored immu
nity causes an abnormally robust response to infectious or noninfectious antigens.
IRIS develops in 15-35% of AIDS patients beginning combination antiretroviral
therapy (cART). IRIS develops in two distinct scenarios: "Unmasking" IRIS (u-IRIS)
and "paradoxical" IRIS (p-IRIS). u-IRIS inAIDS occurs when beginning cART reveals
a subclinical opportunistic infection against a living pathogen. p-IRIS occurs when
a treated patient deteriorates after initiated of HAART. The recovering immune
response targets persisting pathogen-derived antigens or self-antigens to cause
tissue damage. This presentation discusses both types of IRIS and their imaging
manifestations in the CNS. Neuro-IRIS affects only 1% of all IRIS cases but must
be identified. u-IRIS should be distinguished from p-IRIS as disease management
and prognosis differ significantly. PML-IRIS, TB-IRIS, fungal- and parasite-IRIS
are illustrated. Non-HIV IRIS associated with natalizumab (Tysabri)-related PML
will also be illustrated and insights into the roles of immune restoration in disease
development in the setting of HIV-AIDS discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the pathophysiology of HIV infection of the brain.
2. To learn about the restoration of the immune function with antiretroviral thera
pies.
3. To become familiar with IRIS.
A408 14:57
Changing spectrum of HIV-related diseases in the chest: 30 years later
T. Franquet; Barcelona/ES (tfranquet@santpau.cat)
Since acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) was first reported in the early
1980s, the lung was the organ most frequently affected by opportunistic lung
infections (PCP) and noninfectious processes (Kaposi sarcoma and lymphoma).
Since the beginning of the epidemic, more than 60 million people have contracted
HIV and more than 25 million have died of AIDS-related causes. Actually, more
than 33 million people live with HIV/AIDS and in 2009, 1.8 million people died
from AIDS. The introduction of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) has
resulted in a considerable increase in the length of survival of HIV-infected patients.
Although significant progress has been made in the past decade in the treatment
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S99
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Sunday
intracranial stenting in different disorders ranging from stenoocclusive atheroscle
rotic lesions to aneurysms.
A413 14:05
A. Critical appraisal of the literature
J. Fiehler; Hamburg/DE (fiehler@uke.de)
Four randomised controlled trials (RCTs) comparing outcomes after carotid artery
stenting (CAS) with carotid endarterectomy (CEA) have been published recently.
Based on recent systematic reviews it has been recommended that CAS can no
longer be justified for patients suitable for CEA. Indeed pooled data of the RCTs
show higher peri-operative risk of performing CAS vs. CEA with comparable long-
term efficacy in many centres. The inferiority of CAS to CEA as a method cannot
be concluded from SPACE, EVA3S and ICSS because of limitations in study
design and conduct. The goal of this presentation is not to discredit these trials
but to develop a more differentiated and critical interpretation of the data and to
create more discussion. I will discuss the necessity of randomised control trials
(RCTs) for Interventional Neuroradiology in general and particular problems in study
design (non-inferiority design and interpretation of results, clinical equipoise, study
endpoints), practical study conduct difficulties (operator and centre experience,
antiaggregation, timing of treatment) and the interpretation of the results (relation
of internal and external validity, procedural complexity, the 68-years-surprise,
longer-term outcome). A premature rejection of CAS based on the data from these
studies could harm future patients who would have benefited from this procedure.
For the time being there is no reason why centres with good and independently
controlled track records should stop performing CAS.
Learning Objectives:
1. To recognise the general critical statistical and clinical issues in the interpreta
tion of a trial.
2. To understand and interpret the results from the trials assessing the treatment
of extracranial carotid diseases.
3. To understand and interpret the results from the trials assessing the treatment
of intracranial stenosis treatment.
4. To be informed about the conclusions that can be drawn from the current
published trials.
A414 14:28
B. PTA and stenting of extracranial arteries
T. Andersson, M. Soderman; Stockholm/SE
The most common indication for PTAand stenting of extracranial arteries is athero
sclerotic disease. Arterial dissection, spontaneous or traumatic, may also warrant
such treatment. Other, less common, indications are Fibromuscular Dysplasia
(FMD) and Takayasus arteritis (TA). Proximal stenosis of the internal carotid artery
(ICA) is a common manifestation of atheroclerosis in the western world. It can be
treated surgically with endarterectomy, but PTA/stenting has proven a good or
better alternative for many patients as shown in recent multicentre randomised
studies. It is today also possible in selected patients to reopen a completely oc
cluded internal carotid artery. This may be a treatment option for patients with
proven symptomatic hypoperfusion. Symptomatic atherosclerotic stenosis of the
extracranial vertebral arteries (VA) is not as common, but PTA/stenting may be a
treatment option also in this vascular territory. Arterial dissections usually heal but
in a situation with haemodynamically significant impairment of flow, PTA/stenting
may be needed in the acute situation. If the dissection causes a subarachnoidal
haemorrhage, vessel sacrifice is often the safest treatment option. If that, however,
for haemodynamic or other reasons is not possible, treatment with one or more
stents may lead to a good outcome. When performing thrombectomy for acute
stroke, a significant stenosis of the ipsilateral ICA or VA can be a complicating
factor demanding procedural alterations including PTA/stenting. FMD may cause
stenosis of the ICA, whereas TApredominately concerns the common carotid artery,
both possible to treat with PTA/stenting if the patient suffers from thromboembolic
or haemodynamic symptoms.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the endovascular treatment of extracranial arterial
disorders.
2. To understand the endovascular treatment strategies for extracranial vertebral
artery atherosclerotic and nonatherosclerotic disease.
3. To understand the endovascular treatment strategies for extracranial carotid
artery atherosclerotic and nonatherosclerotic disease.
4. To recognise the present and future challenges for PTA and stenting of extra
cranial arteries.
To reduce legal problems, other aspects of the report and documentation data
should comply with the available guidelines published by the reference National
or Continental Societies. As US examinations are made by frames with limited
field of view minimal documentation must be at least correlated to the reported
findings. To reduce legal problems avoid mistakes with patient name, date and
time of examination and lesion location.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be familiar with the ultrasound BI-RADS categories.
2. To learn how to integrate clinical information and radiological findings.
3. To know how to write a ultrasound report for a breast cancer patient.
A411 15:00
C. Breast MRI
M.H. Fuchsjager; Vienna/AT (michael.fuchsjaeger@meduniwien.ac.at)
Breast Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) examinations should be reported
in a structured way following guidelines of respective national, continental or
international societies. Adequate non-clinical information (i.e. patient name, date
and type of examination, etc). is indispensable. Any breast imaging report has to
follow a stringent structure including - indication, clinical history, clinical findings,
brief description of technology used, assessment of parenchymal density, detailed
description of significant findings, comparison with previous imaging studies, final
assessment according to BI-RADS. Indications and contraindications of breast MRI
will be discussed. Significant findings at breast MRI include foci (small contrast-
enhancing spot, NOS, < 5 mm), mass lesions, "non-mass-like enhancement" (no
mass lesion, partly diffuse regional contrast enhancement of various size) and
associated findings. As breast MRI is a functional study, different appearance pat
terns of kinetic contrast enhancement will be presented. The current status and
the appropriate use of the BI-RADS MRI lexicon will be discussed. Any breast MRI
report should not only follow these guidelines, but also express confidence, follow
a red thread, be consistent and therefore be comprehensible for clinicians. The
overall final BI-RADS assessment is based on the most worrisome finding, taking
into account both breasts and all imaging methods (Mammography, Ultrasound,
MRI) evaluated. Furthermore, adequate communication of the result as well as
do's and don'ts of report wording will be discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn how to integrate conventional (mammography and ultrasound) findings
into a breast MRI report.
2. To know how to write a complete report with all morphological and kinetic
information obtained and why this information should be thorough.
3. To acquire the necessary skills to compose a report for a breast cancer patient
at any stage (staging, followup, relapse, etc).
14:00 - 15:30 Room G/H
Neuro
RC 1411
Angioplasty and stenting of extra and intracranial
arteries
A412 14:00
Chairman's introduction
P. Vilela; Almada/PT (ferrovilela@sapo.pt)
The development of balloon angioplasty for atherosclerotic lesions in the 1960s
& 70s by Dotter and Gruentzi was a tremendous breakthrough for endovascular
treatments. Nowadays, both balloon angioplasty and stenting are widely accepted
for the treatment of stenoocclusive atherosclerotic lesions. In the neurovascular field
the application of these techniques has been broadened to other disorders such as
vasospasm, dissection aneurysms and stroke. In the 1980s, major breakthroughs
for the extracranial disorders endovascular treatments were accomplished by
Mathias and successful angioplasties of the subclavian and carotid arteries by the
introduction of cerebral protection techniques by Theron. More recently, during the
1980s & 90s, emerged the intracranial endovascular advances with the tranluminal
angioplasty by Sundt and stenting by Horowitz for intracranial stenosis and with
the use of stent-assisted coiling in aneurysms by Higashida. In the past years,
there have been significant advances in the endovascular treatment of extracranial
and intracranial disorders using stents, resulting from new devices and from safer
techniques. This session will be devoted to an update on angioplasty and stenting
of extra and intracranial arteries, experience the data coming from the major trials
and run through the indications, techniques and devices used for extracranial and
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S100 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
3. To present future trends of MRI in prostate cancer, answering the future clinical
needs, namely in the evaluation of lymph nodes.
A417 14:05
A. MRI in detection of prostate cancer
F. Cornud; Paris/FR (francois.cornud@imagerietourville.com)
MRI is more and more often used for PCa detection in patients with a negative
series of biopsies and a persistent biological suspicion of PCa. Multiparametric
MRI (mp-MRI) increases the accuracy of T2W-Imaging to localise PCa. The most
widespread protocol includes dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI (DCE-MRI) and
diffusion-weighted MRI (DW-MRI) which improve accuracy of T2W-MRI to detect
P-Zone cancers with a tumour volume > 0.2-0.5 cc. DCE-MRI has a high sensitiv
ity but a limited specificity related to a common enhancement of benign P-Zone
sextants and of T-Zone BPH nodules. On DW-MRI, PCa shows a significantly lower
Apparent Diffusion Coefficient (ADC) value than that of benign prostate tissue
which increases the specificity of T2W-MRI. Chronic prostatitis and BPH stromal
nodules can have a low ADC value close to that of PCa, but the use of ultra-high
b values (b2000) allows for a better differentiation between the three conditions.
Significant differences in tumour ADC values are observed between patients with
low risk, and those with higher risk localised P-Zone PCa. Image fusion between MR
and TRUS data set is a promising tool to increase the accuracy of targeted TRUS
guided biopsies. There is more and evidence that a normal MRI is correlated with
absence of cancer or presence of an insignificant tumour. PSA level and mp-MRI
may thus select patients requiring immediate biopsy to detect significant tumours
and those in whom biopsy could be deferred and indicated if followup shows signs
of PSA level progression and/or occurrence of suspicious MRI findings.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the role of MRI in the diagnosis of prostate cancer.
2. To understand the key MRI findings in prostate cancer.
3. To learn about the role of MR spectroscopy in the diagnosis of prostate cancer.
A418 14:28
B. MRI in post-treatment followup
A.T. Turgut; Ankara/TR (ahmettuncayturgut@yahoo.com)
The role of imaging in patients with increased PSA level after radical
prostatectomy or radiation therapy, which are the two main cur
ative treatment options for prostate cancer, is to aid in differentiating lo
cally recurrent disease which can be managed with local therapy from distant
metastatic disease requiring systemic therapy. Although the majority of local recur
rences in post-surgical patients can be detected by MRI in the perianastomotic
region which can also be evaluated with TRUS and TRUS-guided biopsy, some
recurrences can occur at pelvic sites that are beyond the range of TRUS; MRI
has a role of labelling these sites for TRUS-guided biopsy. The combination of
an external phased-array coil and endorectal coil is recommended for detecting
local recurrent cancer. Current protocols involve T2-weighted MRI combined with
functional techniques like dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI (DCE-MRI), magnetic
resonance spectroscopy and diffusion-weighted MRI. In the post-prostatectomy
bed, recurrences present as lobulated masses having low to intermediate signal
intensity on T2-weighted images and showing early, nodular enhancement with early
washout of gadolinium on DCE-MRI. After radiotherapy early contrast enhance
ment and early wash-out is seen recurrent tumors whereas the enhancement of
post-radiation fibrosis is slow and low, offering a good contrast with the usually
hypervascular recurrent cancer. The overall diagnostic efficacy of conventional MRI
in combination with functional techniques is better than T2-weighted MRI alone
which may play an important role in better assessment of locally recurrent disease.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the role of MRI in the followup of patients with prostate cancer
after radical prostatectomy or radiotherapy.
2. To learn about the MRI findings for local or distant metastasis in the post-
treatment followup of prostate cancer.
3. To learn about changes in signal intensity and the detectability of recurrent
prostate cancer after radiotherapy.
A419 14:51
C. New frontiers in imaging of the prostate
J.O. Barentsz; Nijmegen/NL (J.Barentsz@rad.umcn.nl)
In this presentation new techniques with potential clinical value will be described
with a focus on prostate cancer multi-modality MR imaging. Techniques such as
T2W, DWI, DCE and MRSI will be addressed, and their role in screening, deter
mination of tumour aggression and localisation, MR-guided biopsy, MR-guided
A415 14:51
C. PTA and stenting of intracranial arteries
V. Pereira, K. Lovblad; Geneva/CH (vitormpbr@hotmail.com)
There are three major indications for intracranial stents: atherosclerotic stenotic
disease, aneurysm treatment and acute stroke recanalisation. Intracranial athero
sclerotic disease has a different distribution around the world being more frequent
in Asian population (around 20%) and less frequent in European and American
cohorts. Best medical treatment demonstrated safety and better long-term results
compared with interventional treatment (SAMPPRIS). The current indication for
intracranial stenting for atherosclerotic stenotic disease would then be the cases
where the best medical treatment failed to control the disease with recurrent
emboli or stenosis progression. Intracranial aneurysms have been treatment with
endovascular techniques in most of the cases. Stenting pushed forward the treat
ment of large neck and complex lesions. Aneurysm bridging permitted to approach
cases where the balloon remodelling was not enough or bifurcation aneurysms.
More recently, stents with a dense porosity started to be used without associated
coiling in order to change intra aneurismal flow to induce aneurysm thrombosis
and progressive vascular remodelling. Patient's selection is the key point for a
successful procedure. Some technical details like good support on proximal ac
cess and good anti-aggregation therapy are important to increase the safety of
the procedure. The most recent domain to introduce the intracranial stent was
the acute stroke treatment. The development of retrievable stents (like the stent
solitaire). They have the capability to remove clot or dissolve with lytics. The rates
of recanalisation are close to 90%. The future prepare: coated stents to be used
without anti-aggregation, absorbable stents and very lower profiles.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the intracranial applications of angioplasty and/or
stenting in intracranial disorders.
2. To understand the endovascular treatment strategies for intracranial athero
sclerotic artery disease.
3. To understand the endovascular treatment strategies for intracranial nonath
erosclerotic artery disease.
4. To learn about the present and future challenges for PTA and stenting of
intracranial arteries.
Panel discussion:
What will be the fate of extracranial and intracranial angioplasty and
stenting procedures? 15:14
14:00 - 15:30 Room I/K
Genitourinary
RC 1407
MRI in prostate cancer
A416 14:00
Chairman's introduction
J. Venancio; Lisbon/PT (josevenancio@netcabo.pt)
MRI is used in the detection of prostate cancer (PCa) in several circunstances high
lightingA. patients with previous series of negative ultrasound-guided biopsies and
clinical or biochemical suspicion of PCa. B. Patients already treated for PCa, with
rising PSA. Functional multiparametric MRI including dynamic contrast-enhanced
MRI (DCE-MRI), diffusion-weighted MRI (DW-MRI) and spectroscopic MRI (S-MRI)
is useful to detect suspect areas, mainly in peripheral zone and direct TRUS or
MRI-guided biopsies. Nowadays 3 T MRI can improve PCa detection due to higher
multiparametric capabilities and more precise staging. It is very important precise
localisation of tumour in some kind of patients indicated for focal treatment: HIFU,
brachytherapy, cryotherapy... In the followup after treatment, with a biological or
clinical suspiction of relapsing, it is very important to detect peri-anastomotic or
pelvic recurrences, and MRI (combining the use of endorectal and pelvic phased
array coils) is better than US or CT. Particular conditions concerning present and
future clinical needs on imaging PCa will be discussed. New developments in MRI
of PCa will be presented, emphasising local staging, recurrences perianastomotic
and the evaluation of lymph nodes (Fe-nanoparticles?).
Session Objectives:
1. To analyse and compare the most important MRI developments.
2. To evaluate prostate after treatment for cancer, and evaluate the signal intensity
changes to detect local recurrencies.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S101
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Sunday
A422 15:00
C. Pre-clinical hybrid imaging
N. Belcari; Pisa/IT (belcari@df.unipi.it)
During the past decade we have observed a growing interest in in-vivo imaging
techniques for small animals. On the shadow of the successful application of dual-
modality imaging in the clinical environment, such as combined PET-Computed
Tomography (CT) or SPETC/CT, the hybrid imaging modalities have been recently
transferred to small animal scanners. Nowadays, the possibility of easy integration
of nuclear imaging techniques with other modality such as PET/SPECT/CT, PET/
MR or PET/Optical has become a mandatory requirement in the design of small
animal imaging systems. The combination of different imaging modalities in the
same scanner offers the possibility to perform experiments more effectively than
with a single modality only. This is especially true when two modality scans are
performed sequentially or simultaneously and without moving the animal. Present
technologies for the construction of hybrid systems for small animals will be pre
sented together with examples of commercially available hybrid scanners. Looking
at the next future, small animal PET/MR seems to be one of the most appealing
perfect choice for hybrid imaging, combining the exquisite sensitivity of PET with
the morphological/functional/spectroscopic high-resolution imaging of MR. The
present major limitation on the development of simultaneous PET/MR scanners
is the non-insensitivity of PMTs to magnetic fields. A reliable solution could be the
development of magnetic field insensitive position-sensitive photodetectors.Abrief
overview of the present status of development of the detector technology for PET/
MRI will be also presented.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about hybrid imaging tools in animal imaging/pre-clinical research.
2. To understand possible clinical applications.
14:00 - 15:30 Room N/O
Head and Neck
RC 1408
Performing and reporting head and neck
examinations: how do I do it?
Moderator:
P.Y. Marcy; Nice/FR
A423 14:00
A. Sinonasal CT scans
M. Becker; Geneva/CH (minerva.becker@hcuge.ch)
The purpose of this lecture is to discuss the most common indications to perform
sinonasal CT scans, to provide an understanding of the most common disease
states and their impact on the choice of the respective imaging protocol and to
provide a checklist of what the radiologist needs to report. First, the basic concepts
of sinonasal CT and cone beam CT imaging including current protocols, radiation
doses, 2D and 3D reconstructions and administration of contrast material will be
discussed, followed by a brief discussion of the pertinent anatomy including the
most relevant radiological anatomical landmarks. A systematic review will include
key radiological features of acute and chronic sinusitis and related complications,
polyposis, mycetomas, allergic fungal sinusitis and sinonasal tumours. Major
emphasis will be put on the systematic approach, on the bottleneck areas where
occlusion of normal passages may occur, on CT findings necessitating an additional
MR and on how to report in a comprehensive way.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn how to perform a state-of-the art CT examination of the sinuses.
2. To learn to decide when you inject a contrast agent on CT or suggest an ad
ditional MRI exam.
3. To learn what to report on CT examinations of the sinuses.
A424 14:30
B. Temporal bone CT and MRI scans
M.M. Lemmerling; Gent/BE
CT examination of the temporal bone: Temporal bone CT scans should be performed
in a reproducible way. Axial reconstructions are made in the plane of the lateral
semicircular canal and coronal reconstructions exactly perpendicular to this plane.
Thin sliced images are postprocessed using high-resolution algorithms. MR exami
nation of the temporal bone: the challenge is to perform a complete examination.
The standard version of such an exam starts with axial T2-weighted images of the
minimal invasive focal therapy (laser, cryo, HiFu), and MR-guided radiotherapy
will be discussed. Examples will be shown.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with new developments in MRI of prostate cancer.
2. To understand the future clinical needs, and how MRI can solve them.
Panel discussion:
What is the most appropriate radiological approach in patients with
rising PSA levels and when should it be taken? 15:14
14:00 - 15:30 Room L/M
Physics in Radiology
RC 1413
Hybrid imaging systems
Moderators:
A.A. Lammertsma; Amsterdam/NL
J. Votrubova; Prague/CZ
A420 14:00
A. Clinical SPECT/CT and PET/CT
T. Beyer; Zurich/CH (thomas.beyer@cmiexperts.com)
In 1996, Hasegawa et al. presented a prototype SPECT/CT-design comprising a
clinical SPECT-camera in tandem with a clinical single-slice CT. The combined
device was used to perform a small number of clinical studies, such as for quantita
tive estimation of radiation-dosimetry in brain cancer, whereby the CT data were
used also to generate the SPECT attenuation-correction-factors (ACF). Since
then, SPECT/CT has benefited a great deal from the advances in CT-technology
and several commercial system designs are available today. The clinical adoption
of SPECT/CT has been rapid, particularly for oncology and cardiology. SPECT/
CT currently has a smaller installed base than PET/CT. The proposal to combine
PET with CT was made in the early 1990s by Townsend, Nutt et al. In addition to
intrinsic image alignment, the anticipated benefit of PET/CT was to use the CT-
images to derive the PET-ACF`s. The first prototype-PET/CT became operational in
1998 and was clinically evaluated at the University of Pittsburgh. Since then PET/
CT-technology has grown rapidly by incorporating new concepts of PET, available
as PET/CT only, and multi-slice CT. Today`s installed base is about 5,000 systems
worldwide. The improvement in accuracy of PET/CT compared with PET or CT for
re-/staging is statistically significant and averages 10-15% over all cancers. Image
artefacts inherent to SPECT/CT and PET/CT can be detected, interpreted and
corrected/avoided by well-trained users. By adopting more innovative acquisition
schemes and data processing SPECT/CT and PET/CT will become faster and
more dose-efficient imaging methods and manifest themselves as integral parts
of state-of-the-art patient management.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the origins and evolution of SPECT/CT and PET/CT.
2. To understand the basic principles and general clinical applications.
A421 14:30
B. Clinical PET/MRI
G. Antoch; Dusseldorf/DE (antoch@med.uniduesseldorf.de)
PET/CT has been implemented in clinical routine in 2001. Since then the focus of
PET/CT indications has been oncology with neurological and cardiovascular indica
tions dragging behind. PET/MRI has just been introduced as the next generation
hybrid imaging system. Two different PET/MRI scanners are currently available
on the market. In the first scanner PET and MRI are installed at a distance hooked
by one patient table. PET and MRI are acquired sequentially with this system. The
second scanner available represents both imaging modalities combined in one
machine, offering simultaneous image acquisition of PET and MRI. At this early
stage of PET/MRI scanning, many questions have to be answered: as to what is
the most feasible method for MR-based PET attenuation correction and as to how
does the MR-magnetic field or MR-hardware (e.g. coils) affect the PET emission
quanta, etc. Apart from these technical questions the most important question is
on potential indications for this new imaging method. Will it be mainly oncology,
or will neurological and cardiovascular indications gain ground as compared with
PET/CT? This refresher course will discuss current concepts of PET/MRI and will
give answers to the questions named above.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become acquainted with the origins and evolution of PET/MRI.
2. To be informed about the current applications.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S102 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
A427 14:30
B. The role of radiographers in forensic imaging
J. McNulty; Dublin/IE (jonathan.mcnulty@ucd.ie)
Radiographers have a key role to play in the provision of high-quality forensic
imaging services and indeed forensic radiography should be viewed as an area of
specialisation within the broader profession in keeping with other specialist areas.
The concept of optimisation has been established in clinical radiography practice
across Europe and indeed in the forensic examination of living individuals, but
remains an issue in many centres performing a variety of forensic examinations
on the full or partial remains of deceased individuals along with specimen radiog
raphy. As with many other areas of service development barriers often exist to the
development of forensic imaging services and there are key steps that must be
considered in order to implement a high-quality service. Such barriers can include
access to appropriate equipment and other resources, availability of education and
training, a variety of medico-legal challenges and the voluntary nature of forensic
work within a clinical setting. A guideline-driven, well-planned approach involving
all key stakeholders is essential to the development and implementation of an
excellent forensic imaging service. While many international centres of excellence
in forensic imaging have now been established, and as more come on stream over
the coming years, there remain many examples where the radiography-based
forensic imaging service is not optimal and could be improved. A series of practical
approaches and potential opportunities for radiographers to help develop their own
local forensic imaging services will be explored.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the potential role of radiographers in forensic imaging.
2. To be aware of potential barriers and key steps in the implementation of a
local forensic imaging service.
3. To become familiar with good and bad examples of a radiography-based
forensic imaging service.
4. To be aware of local opportunities to develop forensic imaging services and
professional development.
A428 15:00
C. The importance of standards in education and training in forensic
imaging
E. Faircloth; Devon/UK (emily.faircloth@nhs.net)
Radiography is now internationally regarded as a valuable tool in forensic and
humanitarian investigations with continuous developments in this field. Despite this,
there are currently no internationally recognised standards for education and training
in forensic radiography. Training has traditionally been based on apprenticeship
and as such, the use of clinical imaging techniques in the forensic context remains
variable with little uniformity in service provision, training or education between
countries. A 2006 study on international forensic radiography provision indicated a
direct "correlation between the level of training given and its level of utilisation and
perceived benefit to the investigation". Lack of standards in training and education
can undermine good practice leading to poor record keeping, poor techniques in
evidence provision and increased levels of anxiety in imaging personnel. This pres
entation further explores the role of international training and education in forensic
radiography with recommendations for best practice including: 1. Development of
international standards. 2.An increase in formally accredited, accessible education
programmes. 3. Robust, sustainable national response teams of suitably trained
personnel. 4. A database of trained personnel for international deployment. 5. The
provision of practical simulation exercises (e.g. multidisciplinary mock disasters)
encouraging experiential learning. 6. The provision of online professional develop
ment opportunities (e.g. modular e-learning programmes). There is nothing that
can entirely prepare for the provision of forensic radiography services, particularly
in response to a mass fatality incident. However, the international forensic radiog
raphy community has a responsibility to provide training opportunities for imaging
practitioners to meet agreed international standards.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the potential impact of a lack of standards in forensic imaging
on forensic investigations.
2. To be informed about the role of education and training in key areas of forensic
imaging practice.
3. To become familiar with examples of international best practice in forensic
imaging education and training.
brain and posterior fossa, and axial T1- and heavily T2-weighted images covering
the temporal bone. After intravenous injection of gadolinium axial and coronal T1-
weighted images are performed. Temporal bone report on CT and MRI: structured
reporting is the result of structured viewing. In the evaluation of the middle ear
on CT examinations it is best to follow the sound wave on the axial images (from
tympanic membrane over malleus, incus and stapes to oval window), than inspect
the fissula antefenestram region and the oval window. The inner ear is evaluated
from cranially to caudally (semicircular canals, vestibule and vestibular aqueduct,
cochlea and cochlear aqueduct). The facial canal, carotid canal and jugular fossa are
finally evaluated. On the coronal images one should at least inspect the intactness
of tegmen tympani and the bony cover of the lateral semicircular canal. On MRI,
after viewing the brain images, one best first tries to detect abnormal enhancing
inner ear structures on the gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted images, and then
explains them using the heavily T2-weighted images.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn how to perform a state-of-the art CT examination of the temporal
bone.
2. To learn how to perform a state-of-the art MR examination of the temporal
bone.
3. To learn how to make a complete temporal bone report on CT and MRI.
A425 15:00
C. CT scans of the head and neck
A. Trojanowska; Lublin/PL (agnieszka30
@yahoo.com)
The purpose of this lecture is to present how a good diagnostic head and neck
scan can be achieved. Indications, technical problems and pitfalls, timing and
contrast administration issues will be addressed. Tips and tricks regarding the best
quality of the images will be discussed with appropriate examples. Afterwards, an
example of a structured report will be presented, describing comprehensively all
steps of radiological evaluation of the disease, followed by clear conclusion and
staging. Emphasis will be placed on what the surgeon needs to know in order to
plan the treatment. Next, attetion will be paid to lymph node evaluation: features of
malignant infiltration will be discussed. As an endpoint, all steps including proper
CT examination, radiological findings and structured reporting will be reviewed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn how to scan a neck on CT: technique, contrast administration and
timing.
2. To learn how to do structured reporting: "did I see it all"?
3. To learn to report abnormal lymph nodes in a structured manner.
14:00 - 15:30 Room P
Radiographers
RC 1414
Promoting best practice in forensic imaging
Moderators:
C. Vandulek; Kaposvar/HU
P. Vock; Berne/CH
A426 14:00
A. Forensic imaging: another important growing field
P. Vock; Berne/CH (peter.vock@insel.ch)
Forensic imaging has grown slowly from its early radiographic applications starting
before the year 1900, soon after the detection of x-rays, over the whole 20th century,
before turning into an exponential growth after the introduction of multidetector CT
and fast MRI techniques in the past ten years. Starting with a short summary of the
history, this conference will address the advantages of virtual autopsy as compared
with conventional autopsy: its non-destructive character, frozen objective docu
mentation, ease of archiving and distribution, the lack of motion artefacts, and the
lack of effects of ionising radiation. There are, however, significant disadvantages
of postmortem imaging; these and approaches to overcome the limitations will
be discussed as well as applications of forensic in vivo imaging. The differences
between clinical and forensic imaging will finally be pointed out, and we will discuss
some questions specific to forensic imaging, such as identification, detecting the
cause and manner of death, vital reaction at imaging and reconstruction.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be informed about the history of the field of forensic imaging.
2. To understand developments in the field of forensic imaging.
3. To be informed about the impact of these developments on the work of radiologists.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S103
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Sunday
markers of intraarticular disease, such as joint effusion, synovial hypertrophy and
microvasculature and is able to detect subclinical synovitis. The ability of US to
check multiple joints in one study and reveal subclinical synovitis seems to be
particularly relevant in JIA, as definition of oligoarthritis and polyarthritis is based
on the number of affected joints. US is an ideal means, therefore, for drawing a
more correct patient classification, as well as for alerting the referring physicians
towards the need of more aggressive treatment and closer monitoring. US is also
an excellent means to distinguish between joint synovitis and tenosynovitis and to
guide the aspiration and injection of steroids into joints that are difficult to reach
blindly. Despite these advantages, US is inferior to MR imaging in depicting early
inflammatory change and evaluating the articular cartilage. MR imaging is able to
assess bone marrow abnormalities and can better evaluate the late manifestations
of the disease, including erosions, joint space loss and ligamentous involvement.
Both Doppler US and contrast-enhanced MR imaging are able to provide a measure
of disease activity.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about imaging protocols.
2. To learn about imaging findings, mimics and pitfalls.
3. To understand the importance of early imaging of clinically `silent areas' e.g.
hip and TMJ.
14:00 - 15:30 Room Z
ENCITE Session
Imaging highlights: monitoring disease and therapy
Moderator:
S. Aime; Turin/IT
A432 14:00
Get trained on imaging cell therapies with probes and procedures
developed by ENCITE
S. Aime; Turin/IT
The project aims at developing imaging tools able to improve the monitoring of
cell therapy as well as the understanding of the fate of transplanted cells and the
mechanism of action of cell-based therapies. Using the knowledge obtained, tools
and treatment strategies can be further optimised to reap the full benefit of cell-based
therapies. The project relies on the extensive collaboration of European experts
for the development and implementation of novel imaging procedures with several
working groups from different disciplines (physics, chemistry, biology, informatics,
endocrinology, immunology, neurology, nuclear medicine, radiology). The work is
organized in five subprojects:1) Novel Imaging Technologies (New imaging meth
ods, post-processing techniques, visualisation tools); 2) Probe Chemistry (New
MRI reporter probes that draw a more comprehensive picture of molecular imag
ing applications); 3) Novel Tools for Cell Imaging (Technologies enabling tracking
of cell migration, proliferation, differentiation and death); 4)Pre-Clinical Validation
(Tools to assess stem cell engraftment, cell differentiation in major disease areas);
5)Translation towards Clinical Applications (to increase the efficacy of cancer im
munotherapy). Responding to an increasing level of interest and a great need for
educational activities in the field of cellular and molecular imaging, ENCITE has
elaborated a specific training initiative based on the creation of a Multi-Centre
Cluster devoted to the implementation of a repository of training procedures and
imaging reporters. The output of this activity is made available to all the project
partners and, more in general, to all the Cellular Molecular Imaging community.
A433 14:15
Cell tracking with 19 F magnetic resonance imaging
P. BohmSturm; Cologne/DE
Fluorine magnetic resonance imaging (19 F MRI) has recently received much at
tention in the field of cell tracking. In models of cell-mediated regeneration, cells
can be labeled with 19 F before implantation thus enabling in vivo detection with
19 F MRI. Due to lack of 19 F in endogenous tissue there is no confounding back
ground signal. Furthermore, the 19 F image intensity is proportional to the amount
of 19 F. A conventional 1H MR image acquired in the same session provides the
anatomical context. Therefore, for the first time it is possible to unambiguously
track cells in a quantitative manner. However, a lack of sensitivity has prevented a
broad application so far. Here, insight to the 19 F MRI activities within ENCITE is
given. Various cell types of interest for therapy have been labeled with 19 F agents
without impairment of cell function. Detection sensitivity is shown to have reached
a stage allowing practical use of 19 F MRI to track human neural stem cells in the
healthy and stroke-damaged rodent brain, to non-invasively control actual number
14:00 - 15:30 Room Q
Paediatric
RC 1412
Children's bones and joints
Moderator:
O.E. Olsen; London/UK
A429 14:00
A. Imaging of sports injuries
M. Alison, G. Sebag; Paris/FR (marianne.alison@rdb.aphp.fr)
Musculoskeletal sport injuries of children and adolescents differ from that of adults
because they occur on a growing skeleton with particular characteristics. The bone
and the cartilage are weaker than the muscles and the ligaments, resulting in specific
lesions. The vulnerability of the growing bone and cartilage are increased during
the rapid growth periods. There are two main types of sport injuries. The acute
traumatic lesions are the most frequent and correspond to the specific fractures
of the paediatric age. The chronic overused injuries are related to repetitive micro
traumas and are more frequently encountered in young athletes. The specific acute
sport injuries, more frequently seen in adolescents, are the metaphyso-epiphyseal
fractures, the apophyseal avulsions and the patellar dislocation. Sport injuries in
children can lead to specific complications when the physis is involved, resulting
in growth disturbance, with the need of an extended followup. X-rays are the first
imaging tool but indication should be selected according to the clinical findings.
Ultrasonography is ideally suited for the evaluation of soft tissue, muscles, tendons
and ligaments. CT is useful to better analyse complex articular fractures. MRI is
the imaging of choice to look for ligaments, menisci, osteochondral injuries and
overused injuries. MRI is also used to assess complications like epiphysiodesis
or osteonecrosis.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the most common sports injuries in children.
2. To learn about the imaging protocols and algorithms.
3. To become familiar with the imaging findings in common and relevant condi
tions.
A430 14:30
B. Hip dysplasia: US techniques and recommendations
K. Rosendahl; Bergen/NO (karen.rosendahl@helsebergen.no)
Developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH) is the most common musculoskeletal
disorder in childhood, with a reported prevalence of 1-4% according to method
of ascertainment and definitions used. Ultrasound has enabled a detailed view of
both neonatal hip stability (NHI) and morphology, and two different schools have
developed: one arguing that NHI alone is the major pathology warranting splinting,
the other including acetabular dysplasia as an important feature. Both static (Graf,
Morin) and dynamic (Harcke) ultrasound techniques, as well as a combination of
the two (modified Graf (Rosendahl)), have been described and are currently used.
In Europe, Graf's ultrasound technique or a modification of this is commonly used
within the German-speaking countries and areas, in parts of Scandinavia, the UK,
Italy, France, Hungary and the Netherlands. Others use a modified Morin's method
while Harcke's method is used only occasionally. Initially, universal ultrasound
screening using Graf's method led to higher treatment and followup rates than that
based on NHI alone, i.e. 3-5% versus 0.4-1.5% and 10-20% vs. 6-7%, respectively.
However, improved examination techniques and a better understanding of the
findings have led to a more tailored approach, and an extensive meta-analysis
performed in 2000, including 534 papers, could not find any differences in treatment
rates due to different ultrasound techniques. In this lecture I will present a crude
status for US techniques used and also give recommendations for a worthwhile
screening strategy based on present knowledge.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the different approaches of hip sonography in neonates.
2. To understand the need for a systematic study.
3. To learn about proposed standardisation for examination and reporting.
A431 15:00
C. Imaging of juvenile idiopathic arthritis
M. Valle, C. Martinoli; Genoa/IT (maura.valle@libero.it)
Ultrasound (US) and MR imaging have been used for early assessment of joint
disease in juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA). US is an accurate means to reveal
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S104 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
19F MRI to the tracking of DCs in vivo, as the technique allows both quantification
and high-resolution anatomic detail.
Discussion 15:15
16:00 - 17:30 Room A
Abdominal Viscera
RC 1501
Abdominal MRI: standard and advanced protocols
in clinical settings
Moderator:
I. Vivas; Pamplona/ES
A437 16:00
A. Liver: how to study a cirrhotic patient
A. Filippone; Chieti/IT (a.filippone@rad.unich.it)
Magnetic Resonance (MR) imaging has emerged as an important imaging modality
for the assessment of cirrhosis and its complications, such as HCC. Concurrent
technical improvement as well as implementation of advanced imaging sequence
designs permits high-quality examination of the liver with high intrinsic soft-tissue
contrast. The use of automated contrast detection methods combined with faster
sequences allows to optimise the arterial phase, which is essential for the detection
and characterisation of HCC. Finally, combining sequences, including T2 and T1
weighted images, diffusion-weighted sequences, dynamic gadolinium-enhanced
3D multiphasic imaging and liver-specific delayed phase sequences, allow a
simultaneous evaluation of the background liver parenchyma and of the liver le
sions. Morphologic features as well as the degree of fibrosis of the background
liver parenchyma represent the most important criteria in the clinical setting for
determining the presence of cirrhosis. Although liver biopsy is the standard of
reference for diagnosis and staging of liver fibrosis, MR elastography, diffusion-
weighted imaging and MR perfusion imaging have been developed for non-invasive
assessment of the liver fibrosis.
Learning Objectives:
1. To know how to perform a standardised study protocol that correctly assesses
the cirrhotic changes in liver parenchyma.
2. To learn which contrast media are applicable for nodule characterisation and
liver function evaluation.
3. To go through DW imaging, perfusion and MR elastography: help or hype?
A438 16:30
B. Small bowel and colon: how to study a patient with suspected
inflammatory bowel disease
N. Papanikolaou; Iraklion/GR (nickolas.papanikolaou@gmail.com)
MR Enteroclysis and MR Colonography examinations have been mainly utilised
to study patients with Crohn`s disease. Early, subtle lesions such as superficial
ulceration, mucosal nodularity and thickening or distortion of the intestinal folds
may be detected by MRE, although to a lesser extent comparing with conventional
enteroclysis, due to its lower spatial resolution. To improve detection rate of these
subtle lesions utilisation of dedicated ultrafast, high-resolution pulse sequences,
coupled with strong gradients have to be considered. Fibrofatty proliferation can
be easily depicted, while its composition regulates its signal intensity characteris
tics being of low signal intensity in case of fibrosis and of high signal intensity in
case of excessive fat accumulation. Gadolinium uptake on FLASH images allows
identification of hyperemic bowel segments due to inflammation and accompanying
small inflammatory nodes. Certain MR imaging findings, including the presence
of deep ulcers, wall thickness more than 7 mm and marked mesenteric lymph
nodes gadolinium enhancement were well correlated with the clinical activity index
(CDAI), and it is suggested that such findings may serve as indicators of Crohn`s
disease activity. Another important clinical challenge that MR Enteroclysis and MR
Colonography must address is accurate disease subtype classification. By recruiting
multiple contrast mechanisms like signal intensity on T2-weighted images, contrast-
enhancement patterns on T1-weighted post gadolinium gradient echo images and
motility-related information as identified on cine-TrueFISP images the latter clinical
questions can be answered in a certain extent.
Learning Objectives:
1. To review the basic technical aspects of MR enteroclysis.
2. To become familiar with diagnostic imaging findings related to disease activity.
3. To understand the use of optional sequences depending on the clinical ques
tion in patients with Crohn's disease.
of implanted cells, and to optimize dendritic cell migration in vitro for clinical cancer
vaccination studies. Finally, a multimodal imaging approach combining 19 F MRI
with Bioluminescence Imaging (BLI) is presented which allows non-invasive imaging
of the anatomical location (19 F MRI) and function (BLI) of neural stem cell grafts.
In conclusion 19 F MRI will help to optimize pre-clinical protocols of cell therapy
and possibly become clinically relevant with further advances in 19 F compound
synthesis, development of MRI hardware, and MRI pulse sequence optimization.
A434 14:30
Imaging of novel therapies in Gliblastomas using multiple biomarkers
W. Reichardt; Freiburg/DE
Glioblastomas still have an extremely poor prognosis up to now and new therapeutic
concepts are urgently needed. One of them is Anti-angiogenesis, which has been
approved recently and is now under clinical evaluation. Next to edema formation
and tumor morphometry, MR imaging can provide a number of vascular character
istics for therapy assessment in the tumors, which could especially provide an early
assessment of the therapy. Anti-angiogenic therapy in tumors can be monitored
by dynamic contrast enhanced MRI (DCE-MRI) or dynamic susceptibility contrast
imaging (DSC-MRI) and vessel size imaging (VSI) to detect changes in tumor
microvasculature. DCE-MRI (yielding permeability) is based on the measurement
of a concentration time curve after injection of a Gd-based contrast agent (CA),
whereas vessel size imaging and DSC-MRI (yielding blood volume) is usually
performed with iron-oxide particles. We could show that it is possible to acquire
multiple biomarkers to assess therapy response simultaneously in vivo using a
single shot gradient echo spin echo (GESE) EPI sequence with only one Gd-CA
injection. To account for the typical tumor heterogeneity in gliomas, tumor segmen
tation was performed prior to the determination of the bloodflow characteristics.
The determination of VSI and blood volume measurements using Gd-DTPA has
already been demonstrated successfully.
A435 14:45
Integrated image analysis of multi-modal pre-clinical imaging studies
B. Lelieveldt; Leiden/NL
The rapid developments in in-vivo molecular imaging modalities such as fluores
cence and bioluminescence imaging enables the live imaging of gene expres
sion, cell fate and protein interactions. Combined with detailed structural imaging
modalities such as magnetic resonance (MR), the biochemical onset of disease
and therapy can be monitored in combination with structural and functional con
sequences over time. This presentation discusses a number of image analysis
challenges emerging from longitudinal pre-clinical molecular imaging studies that
have been addressed within the ENCITE project. Three steps towards a quantitative
3D analysis of followup small animal imaging are presented: whole-body registra
tion, change visualization in followup data and fusion of optical and 3D structural
imaging data. Several application examples are presented in the context of cell
tracking and translational cancer research.
A436 15:00
In vivo imaging of immune responses in cancer patients
C. Figdor; Nijmegen/NL
We have been among the first to exploit dendritic cell (DC) therapy to treat cancer
patients. Over the past years, immunological responses are increasingly reported
and clinical responses have consistently been observed. Moreover, DC therapy
often has much milder side effects than standard chemotherapy. A major hurdle in
the development of the DC therapy is accurate delivery of the cells to lymph nodes
(LNs), or their successful migration from the site of injection to LNs. In particular,
tools for measuring cell migration in vivo are necessary. Ideally, we would be able
to quantify the number of DCs at the relevant site, with high resolution anatomi
cal context to allow differentiation of LNs and the possibility of longitudinal data
acquisition. Furthermore, functional data on the ensuing immune response is also
required. Towards these ends, we have been working on developing imaging
techniques to study DCs in vivo, for example with scintigraphy on 111In-labeled
DCs, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on iron-labeled DCs. Scintigraphy is
quantitative, but it is restricted to the relatively short half-life of the radioisotope and
is unable to resolve individual LNs. MRI allows high resolution anatomic localisation,
but the use of contrast agents such as iron oxide is not quantitative. Our recent
work has focused on imaging the functionality of these DCs using positron emis
sion tomography (PET) to study LN activation. Finally, we have also developed in
vitro assays that closely mimic in vivo DC migration in 3D scaffolds imaged using
quantitative 19F MRI, as a substitute for in vivo optimization. We plan on applying
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S105
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Sunday
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the clinical spectrum of infection and inflammation of
the female genital tract.
2. To understand their pathways of spread.
3. To recognise typical imaging findings of pelvic inflammatory disease and pelvic
abscesses and the role of image-guided intervention.
4. To consider the appearances of unusual infections and the differential diagnosis
of female pelvic infections.
16:00 - 17:30 Room C
CLICK (Clinical Lessons for Imaging Core Knowledge): Common
Clinical Cases
CC 1518
Fever of unknown origin
Moderator:
C.J. Herold; Vienna/AT
A441 16:00
A. Clinical considerations
C. Heussel; Heidelberg/DE (heussel@uniheidelberg.de)
Patient transport into the radiology department, contact to other potentially infectious
persons, and things like breath-holding are reasonable burdens and dangers to im
munocompromised patients. When searching the focus of fever, imaging should help
to identify an affected organ system in order to eventually guide invasive procedures
to identify underlying micro-organism or non-infectious disease. Equally relevant is
the exclusion of its involvement with a reasonable specificity. Depending on local
epidemiology, organ system, and the clinical signs and symptoms, suspected dif
ferential diagnosis can be derived from image patterns. Some of these diagnoses
might be exclusion diagnosis; others might require invasive procedures including
time-consuming and costly analysis to be verified. Invasive procedures, however,
require adequate heostasis, which is usually not available for a substantial duration
due to pancytopenia in patients which underwent chemotherapy. If imaging fails to
derive the underlying disease confidently and conclusively in a fast way, clinicians
might need to treat on an empirical basis. Empirical treatment plays a major role
in immunocompromised or severely ill patients at risk, since mortality rises within
hours of untreated disease. On the other hand, empiric treatment causes relevant
toxicity and substantial costs, while imaging might become cost effective. The ap
propriate investigational technique, frequently targeted differential diagnosis, and
the special needs of immunocompromised patients need to be understood by the
referring physician as well as by the radiologist. Thus, an intensive interdisciplinary
co-operation on a patient basis, as well as on a department basis is essential.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn more about the clinical conditions that cause fever without an apparent
origin.
2. To be informed about the clinician's way of thinking in the process of differential
diagnosis.
3. To become familiar with the potential role of imaging in the establishment of
the final diagnosis and planning of therapy.
A442 16:30
B. Imaging techniques and typical findings
G.R. Ferretti; Grenoble/FR (GFerretti@chugrenoble.fr)
Diagnosis of fever of unknown origin (FUO) is a major challenge for internists.
The spectrum of disease includes infections (28%), inflammatory diseases (21%),
malignancies (17%), and "no diagnosis" (19%). Deep vein thrombosis (3%) and
temporal arteritis in the elderly (16%-17%) are important considerations. Investi
gation of patients with FUO usually includes clinical and standard biological tests
which give numerous clues. Imaging procedures depend on objectives and various
imaging investigations should be organised in strategies. Early identification of the
best tissue to be the site of biopsy is one of the most decisive procedures. First-line
imaging studies usually include chest radiography, abdomen ultrasonography, and
contrast-enhanced CT of the thorax abdomen pelvis in order to disclose common
aetiologies such as infections (tuberculosis, Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia,
abdomen abscesses, pelvic abscesses), malignancies (Lymphoma, Metastatic
cancers, Renal cell carcinoma, Pancreatic carcinoma), autoimmune conditions
(Behcet's disease), and Miscellaneous (sarcoidosis). Vein sonography is useful for
detecting deep venous thrombosis. Nevertheless, there is a need for more complex
techniques if this strategy fails. Second-line techniques include MRI and 18-FDG
PET scan as (18)F-FDG accumulates in malignant tissues, at the sites of infection
A439 17:00
C. Pancreas and bile ducts: how to study a patient with suspected
chronic pancreatitis
M.A. Bali; Brussels/BE (mbali@ulb.ac.be)
Chronic pancreatitis (CP) is a continuing inflammatory process, characterised by
irreversible morphological changes, pain and permanent loss of exocrine/endocrine
function. Patients with suspected CP will undergo imaging and/or pancreatic func
tion tests to rule out early CP. Standard MR protocols consist of: axial/coronal TSE
T2-w, fat-suppression axial GRE T1-w and axial/coronal MRCP sequences. Early
ductal changes, as ectatic secondary ducts (pathognomonic sign of early CP) may
not be detected on standard MRCP. Secretin-enhanced MRCP (S-MRCP) studies,
performed during exogenous secretin stimulation, increase the diagnostic accuracy
in patients with suspicion of CP. The physiologic effect of secretin, i.e. transient
increase of pancreatic exocrine juice in the ductal system, improves pancreatic duct
visualisation on MRCP images. S-MRCP can quantitatively estimate pancreatic
exocrine reserve. Significant differences were reported between normal and severe
CP, while values obtained in mild CP were in the same range of normal. Normal
pancreatic parenchyma appears bright on unenhanced fat-suppressed GRE T1-w
images due to high protein content in the acini. On contrast-enhanced GRE T1-w
studies normal pancreas enhances significantly on the arterial phase due to its rich
arterial network. Parenchymal changes in CP patients are characterised by loss of
normal functional parenchyma and vascularity, replaced by fibrosis. These changes
induce the loss of pancreatic parenchyma hyper-intensity on unenhanced GRE T1-w
images and delayed arterial enhancement on contrast-enhanced images. Recent
published studies reported significant differences of apparent diffusion coefficients
(ADCs) calculated at baseline and after secretin stimulation between normal and
CP, with no differences among the different degree of severity.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the basic sequences (with technical details) for MRI/MRCP of
the pancreas and bile ducts.
2. To learn about advanced imaging protocols for MRI/MRCP of the pancreas
and bile ducts concerning functional/structural imaging.
3. To appreciate the most appropriate technical approach for characterising focal
pancreatic lesions.
16:00 - 17:30 Room B
Interactive Teaching Session
E 1520
Female pelvic infections: what the radiologist must
report
A440 16:00
Female pelvic infections: what the radiologist must report
J.A. Spencer1
, R. Forstner2
; 1
Leeds/UK, 2
Salzburg/AT
(johnaspencer50
@hotmail.com)
Most episodes of infection within the female pelvic organs are simply diagnosed on
clinical grounds and resolve over time with or without antibiotic therapy. Infection
which drains spontaneously usually resolves with these simple measures. Infection
trapped within the female pelvic organs results in pyometra and/or tuboovarian
abscess. These complications may require imaging. More severe infections may
discharge internally with the development of a pelvic abscess or dissemination to
the peritoneal cavity. Chronic infection may result in fibrosis with stricture forma
tion in the female pelvic organs or the adjacent bowel, bladder and urethra. This
involvement may result in lower GI or urinary tract symptoms. Other secondary
effects include lymphadenopathy which can be cystic/necrotic and venous throm
bosis with iliac and/or ascending ovarian vein thrombosis. Factors predisposing to
complicated infection include recurrent infections, previous surgery/radiotherapy,
intrauterine devices, instrumentation and immunocompromise. US is the first line
imaging test, ideally from the transvaginal route. This may be poorly tolerated by
women with severe infection/pelvic peritonitis. MR imaging is useful for sonographi
cally indeterminate pelvic masses. Women with pelvic or generalised peritonitis may
be suspected to have appendicitis or diverticulitis. Diagnosis may therefore arise
from emergency CT. Both US and CT are used for aspiration or drainage of pelvic
infections. A variety of endocavitary and percutaneous approaches are available.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S106 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
A445 16:30
B. Acute infections of the spine and spinal cord
M.M. Thurnher; Vienna/AT (majda.thurnher@meduniwien.ac.at)
Infections are among the most common causes of morbidity and mortality world
wide. An increased incidence of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection
worldwide resulted in a correspondingly increased frequency of brain and spine
infections. The compromised host is different than the normal host in distribution
of pathogens, which is determined by the nature of the host and defence defect.
Infections may be caused by bacteria, viruses, fungi and parasites. Intravenous
drug abuse is a growing cause of bacterial spinal infections. Typically, the organ
ism most likely to infect the spine is Staphylococcus aureus. In the spinal canal
bacterial infections can be located in the extradural (spondylitis, discitis, epidural
phlegmone/abscess), intradural-extramedullary (arachnoiditis, polyradiculitis) and
intramedullary (spinal cord abscess, myelitis) compartments. Toxoplasmosis and
cysticercosis are the most common parasitic infections. Fungal infections will be
frequently seen in patients after bone marrow transplantation with Candida and
Aspergillus being the most common agents. Pathogenic agents gain access to the
spine via several principal routes, which include haematogenous (both arterial and
venous), direct extension from adjacent soft tissue and iatrogenic inoculation during
surgery or interventional procedures. Iatrogenic spinal infections constitute 2.5%
of all spinal infections. The symptoms of spinal infections vary with the particular
disease, but constant back pain without a history of trauma is worrisome. Often
there is a delay in diagnosis because of the subtle presentation and the absence
of systemic signs such as temperature elevation.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about acute infections involving the spinal cord (myelitis).
2. To understand how to differentiate spinal cord infections from demyelinating
disease or tumours.
3. To learn about infections of the spine (spondylodiscitis).
A446 17:00
C. Acute disseminating encephalomyelitis
F. Barkhof; Amsterdam/NL (f.barkhof@vumc.nl)
Background: acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) is a post-infectious
disorder that develops days to weeks after common (respiratory) infections.
The relationship is often anecdotal, but in some cases it can be confirmed
by serology. ADEM by definition is a mono-phasic disorder (unlike MS), typi
cally presenting in children and young adults with multifocal signs and symptoms,
often with encephalopathy (e.g. drowsiness) and spinal cord involvement.
Imaging workup and findings: MRI is the modality of choice and brain scanning
should include T1, T2 and FLAIR as well as post-gadolinium T1. DWI and MRA
can be considered when the differential includes ischaemia, and spinal cord MRI
to exclude mass lesions. Typical brain MRI findings consist of multifocal T2/FLAIR
hyperintense lesions affecting the periventricular, infratentorial but also juxta-
cortical white matter. Lesions tend to be larger and more ill defined than in MS
and have a greater propensity to affect the basal nuclei, especially the thalamus.
Spinal cord lesions can be large and oedematous. Enhancement is variable, and
can be restricted to a subset of lesions, falsely suggesting dissemination in time.
Differential diagnosis: the most important differential is MS, where lesions tend to
be more circumscribed. Most importantly, new lesions will not develop at followup
in ADEM; in fact many lesions may resolve almost completely reflecting the inflam
matory rather than demyelinating character of the disease. MS on the contrary,
being multi-phasic, will typically produce new (enhancing) lesions at followup,
while old demyelinated lesions tend not to resolve.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn what ADEM is and how it occurs.
2. To learn what are the typical findings on imaging.
3. To learn how to differentiate ADEM from other diseases (tumours, demyelin
ation, ).
and inflammation and in autoimmune and granulomatous diseases. In some stud
ies, the PET scan contributed to the final diagnosis in 25%-69% of the patients.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the available imaging modalities to be used for the evaluation
of patients with fever of unknown origin.
2. To become familiar with the technical imaging considerations and the proper
diagnostic algorithm.
3. To know more about the typical imaging findings.
A443 17:00
C. Interactive case discussion
G.H. Mostbeck; Vienna/AT (gerhard.mostbeck@wienkav.at)
Based on the previous lectures in this session covering important clinical and
imaging findings of patients with FUO, this interactive lecture will present 5 to
8 cases where multimodality morphologic and functional imaging finally made
the diagnosis. According to the broad spectrum of FUO etiologies, inflammatory,
infectious and neoplastic causes of FUO will be covered. The audience will be
asked for imaging findings, differential diagnoses and recommendations for further
imaging, if indicated.
Learning Objectives:
1. To review typical cases illustrating the role of imaging modalities in the dif
ferential diagnosis of patients with fever of unknown origin.
2. To get involved in the diagnostic process by the use of electronic voting pads.
3. To understand the conclusion that may be drawn on the basis of the discussed
cases.
16:00 - 17:30 Room D1
Emergencies in Neuroradiology
CC 1519
Acute central nervous system infections
Moderator:
V. Dousset; Bordeaux/FR
A444 16:00
A. Acute infections of the brain
S. Karampekios; Iraklion/GR (karampek@med.uoc.gr)
In spite of the development of many antimicrobial therapies and the general im
provement of hygiene and health care systems all over the world, the incidence of
CNS infections has increased significantly. This can be attributed to the increased
number of patients with defective immune status, the widespread immigration,
the increased number of drug abusers and to the acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS) and its devastating effect on the immune system. The brain is
relatively protected from infection by the calvarium, the meninges and the blood-
brain barrier. However, a large number of pathogens, including bacteria, viruses,
fungi and parasites, can reach the brain haematogenously, or less likely by direct
extension from an adjacent infected focus. When an intracranial infection does
occur, the precise localisation in a specific anatomic compartment (parenchyma,
meninges, epi- or sub-dural space) is of great importance, because it narrows the
differential diagnosis, sometimes even determining the type of the pathogen, allow
ing immediate institution of the appropriate treatment and eventually leading to a
more favourable outcome. The acuteness of the clinical presentation depends on
patients immune status, the type of the pathogen and the clinical symptoms and
signs, since patients with meningitis or encephalitis tend to present more acutely
than those with mass lesions (abscesses). MRI is the most sensitive imaging
modality in detecting focal or diffuse infectious lesions. Recently, using advanced
MR techniques, such as Diffusion-Weighted Imaging (DW) and MR Spectroscopy
(MRS), further improvement in the detection and characterisation of infectious
brain lesions is possible.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with acute cerebral infections (viral, bacterial and fungal).
2. To learn about how to differentiate acute CNS infections from tumour.
3. To become familiar with new concepts in infectious diseases of the brain, e.g.
immunity reconstituted inflammatory syndrome (IRIS).
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S107
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Sunday
modalities of choice after renal transplantation. MSCT and MRI are valuable when
these techniques are inconclusive or when post transplantation complications are
suspicious. Renal transplant complications may result in impaired renal function or
graft loss, most occurring at predictable times post transplantation. Post transplant
complications can be divided into four major categories: parenchymal abnormalities,
collecting system abnormalities, perinephric collections, and vascular abnormali
ties. Main vascular complications are renal artery stenosis/thrombosis, renal vein
stenosis/thrombosis, arteriovenous fistula and pseudoaneurysm. Parenchymal
complications are acute tubular necrosis, acute and chronic rejection, infarct,
pyelonephritis, renal cell carcinoma and post transplant lymphoproliferative disor
der. Perinephric collections are urinoma, haematoma, lymphocele and abscess.
Main collecting system complications are hydronephrosis, calculi, urinary leak and
obstruction. DUS is excellent tool not only to assess anatomic abnormalities and
vascular status, but also to establish a baseline for future followup. Radionuclide
scans help to assess renal perfusion and function. CT or MR urography allows
imaging of the entire course of ureteral and periureteral abnormalities. US and CT
are very useful for guidance of renal biopsy and drainage of large fluid collections.
CT or MR angiography may be useful in doubtful cases to evaluate renal artery
stenosis. Treatment of choice in diagnosis of the renal artery stenosis is percutane
ous transluminal renal angioplasty (PTRA) or PTRA with stent.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the most common causes of transplanted kidney dysfunction.
2. To appreciate the role of imaging methods in the evaluation of renal transplant.
3. To become familiar with imaging findings in various pathologic conditions of
renal transplant and understand their impact on treatment.
A450 17:06
D. The AV shunts for haemodialysis: imaging and intervention
N. Grenier; Bordeaux/FR (nicolas.grenier@chubordeaux.fr)
There are two types of AV shunts for haemodialysis: AV fistulas and AV by-pass.
The former have the longest life duration and the latter are implanted when fistu
las fail. No systematic followup of these shunts is required. But imaging plays a
major role to define causes of dialysis dysfunction and to treat complications. Main
dysfunctions are a decrease of pump flow, evocative for occlusive disease located
up-stream the arterial needle, and an increased venous pressure, evocative for
occlusive disease located down-stream the venous needle. Other problems are
an increased dialysis time, difficulties in needle placement, clotting, etc. Clinical
examination must focus on sites of anastomoses and along the shunt looking for
decreased thrill, decrease of shunt tension, and abnormal thrill areas. Color Doppler
must cover the entire shunt from the afferent artery to the subclavian vein, looking
for stenoses, usually located on the venous side, aneurysms, mural thrombus,
acute thrombosis, steel phenomenon or collections. When a stenosis is present,
measurement of velocity ratio helps in quantifying its severity, being significant
when > 3. The risk of thrombosis increases when flow decreases within the shunt.
Angioplasty is required when stenosis is significant and/or when pressure increases
or flow decreases on successive dialyses. Auto-expansive stents are implanted
when stenoses recur. Acute thromboses are treated by mechanical thrombolysis
using aspiration or mechanical devices.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the principles of function of hemodialysis shunts.
2. To understand the principles of US examination according to the type of
dysfunction.
3. To be aware of the indications and techniques of endovascular management.
16:00 - 17:30 Room E1
Emergency Radiology
RC 1517
Polytrauma: redefining imaging issues for
management priorities
Moderator:
P.A. Poletti; Geneva/CH
A451 16:00
A. Vascular trauma
G. Schueller; Vienna/AT (gerd.schueller@meduniwien.ac.at)
In the trauma setting, the number of angiographic studies has substantially
increased with the advent of multidetector CT. Particularly in dedicated trauma
centres, CT angiography (CTA) is offered to evaluate multiple vascular territories,
16:00 - 17:30 Room D2
Urogenital Imaging
CC 1521
The patient with renal impairment
Moderator:
P. Aspelin; Stockholm/SE
A447 16:00
A. Iodine and Gd-based contrast media in patients with renal
impairment: a tale of two evils
S.K. Morcos; Sheffield/UK (morcsk2
@aol.com)
Contrast agents, both iodine- and gadolinium-based, are generally safe and are
very widely utilised. However, there is concern about inducing contrast-induced
nephropathy (CIN) associated with iodinated contrast media (ICM) and nephrogenic
systemic fibrosis (NSF) following the administration of certain types of gadolinium-
based contrast media (Gd-CM) in patients with advanced renal impairment. CIN
is associated with further deterioration in renal function, may speed the need for
dialysis, and increase the morbidity and mortality of the affected patients. Unfor
tunately all ICM have the potential of inducing CIN in patients with reduced renal
function. This complication can be minimised by volume expansion and reducing
the dose of the contrast agent. Large volume of data indicates that NSF is caused
by the release of free gadolinium from Gd-CM with low kinetic and thermodynamic
stability such as the non-ionic linear agents. This complication can be avoided
with the use of the lowest possible dose of the highly stable macrocyclic agents.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the potential risks of using iodine or gadolinium-based
contrast media in patients with renal impairment.
2. To know how to reduce the risk of these potential risks.
3. To become familiar with guidelines on the choice of which contrast-enhanced
imaging technique should be considered in patients with advanced renal
impairment.
A448 16:22
B. Imaging the impaired kidneys
M. Claudon; VandoeuvrelesNancy/FR (m.claudon@chunancy.fr)
The global prevalence of renal insufficiency (RI) in the population is increasing.
RI may be classified depending on 1. the clinical type: acute, intermittent and
chronic; 2 the stage: mild to severe; and 3. the cause: pre-renal, renal, post-renal
or urinary obstruction. An appropriate management of RI may lead to decrease of
morbidity and mortality, especially in intensive care units or among patients with
end-stage renal disease (ESRD). The role of imaging is based on a multimodality
approach, with ultrasound, CT, MRI and scintigraphy providing both morphological
and functional information, including split renal function and glomerular filtration
rate measurements. Several strategies in key clinical situations, including renal
artery stenosis, parenchymal diseases, and obstructive uropathy will be discussed
in the adult and paediatric population.In chronic ESRD, the development of acquired
multicystic disease is frequently observed on native and transplanted kidneys.
Primary malignancy of the kidney allograft is not an exceptional condition in the
long term and may justify regular screening by imaging, with potential diagnostic
difficulties in differentiating cysts and tumours. In case of a tumour, imaging is
helpful in selecting the appropriate surgical or percutaneous procedure, with the
objective of transplant nephron sparing.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be able to recognise the main etiologies of acute and chronic renal impair
ment to be known by radiologists.
2. To learn about several diagnostic strategies for the morphological and functional
evaluation of an impaired kidney.
3. To learn about long-term complications of chronically impaired kidneys, includ
ing multicystic disease and tumours.
A449 16:44
C. The transplanted kidney
I. Sjekavica; Zagreb/HR (ivica.sjekavica@zg.htnet.hr)
Imaging techniques are important to evaluate different situations in the field of
kidney transplantation: the living and cadaveric donor, the recipient's evaluation,
the diagnosis of graft dysfunction, the diagnosis and treatment of complications.
Doppler ultrasound (DUS) and nuclear medicine examinations are the imaging
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S108 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
16:00 - 17:30 Room E2
State of the Art Symposium
SA 15
Imaging hip joint replacement
A454 16:00
Chairman's introduction
V.N. CassarPullicino; Oswestry/UK (Victor.Pullicino@rjah.nhs.uk)
Total hip arthroplasty is one of the most effective orthopaedic reconstruction
procedures and is predicted to have ever-increasing patient volumes. Outcome
assessment has become a sub-specialty in its own right attracting a large volume
of scientific research and coverage in leading orthopaedic journals. The goal is
for the hip replacement to outlive its recipient! Imaging plays a pivotal role in the
assessment of its clinical outcomes, detection of failure and assessment of com
plications. There are multiple risk factors including patient selection, patient age,
gender, primary hip disease, body weight, geometry of prosthesis, surface texture,
type of metal, durability of bearing surface, bearing surface coupling, type of pros
thesis, etc., which the radiologist needs to be familiar with when called to interpret
post-operative imaging. In addition, bone remodelling also takes place around the
prosthetic components resulting in altered bone density and morphological changes,
which although normal may also increase the risk of fracture. These risks do not
only operate in isolation, but are also inter-related. Component position related to
surgical technique and proficiency is crucial, as it has been consistently shown
that proper positioning is critical for the stability of the implant, fixation durability
and optimum bearing surfaces wear. The three speakers will address the role of
imaging with a view of differentiating the expected "normal" changes and appear
ances from developing peri-prosthetic complications.
Session Objectives:
1. To learn about the current state-of-the-art prostheses.
2. To be familiar with the common problems of hip replacement.
3. To define the strengths and weaknesses of the imaging modalities in assessing
hip replacement.
A455 16:05
Radiography and ultrasound: how far can you go?
S. James; Birmingham/UK
Hip arthroplasty is an extremely common orthopaedic procedure and there is a
wide array of implants which are in current use. It is important to understand the
normal radiographic appearances following hip joint replacement, so complications
can be appreciated and accurately reported. Radiographs still provide the mainstay
for the initial diagnosis of component failure, both in the immediate post-operative
period and at long-term followup. The relative significance of different patterns of
radiolucency, bone sclerosis and component position is discussed. The normal or
pathological significance of these findings is correlated with design, surface and
fixation of the prosthetic components. It is of vital importance that serial studies
are compared to early post-operative x-rays during followup to report accurately
any sign of prosthetic failure and trigger prompt specialist referral. Ultrasound is
quick to perform, inexpensive, does not suffer from susceptibility artefacts and can
be used to guide treatment. The common soft tissue complications following hip
arthroplasty are reviewed and illustrated.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the radiographic appearances of different types of
prosthesis design.
2. To recognise the normal radiographic appearances following hip joint replace
ment.
3. To learn about the common abnormal radiographic findings following hip
replacement.
4. To understand the role of ultrasound in assessing the post-operative hip.
A456 16:28
CT: when should you do it and how?
A. Blum, S. Lecocq, M. Louis, J. Wassel, B. Osemont, G. Lux, P. Teixeira;
Nancy/FR (alain.blum@gmail.com)
CT scan plays an increasing role in the evaluation of hip arthroplasty. This tech
nique has wide indications, as it is more sensitive than radiographs in detecting
osteolysis secondary to prosthesis loosening, it clearly shows the periprosthetic fluid
collections suggesting infection, and is the best technique to guide their aspiration
including the aorta and mesenteric, pelvic and cervical systems. In addition, in
extremity trauma with suspicion for arterial injuries, CTA has proven accurate in
helping diagnose significant vascular injuries. Yet digital subtraction angiography
(DSA) is reserved for therapeutic intervention. This talk aims to discuss technical
aspects as well as indications for CTA and DSA. In particular, the implementation
of CTA in whole-body trauma CT is emphasised. In addition, typical imaging find
ings are reviewed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the most important imaging features and their impact
on patient management.
2. To understand technical details, potential difficulties and pitfalls of demonstrat
ing these findings.
3. To be familiar with the pertinent findings to report.
A452 16:30
B. Chest and abdomen
M. Scaglione; Castel Volturno/IT (mscaglione@tiscali.it)
Thoraco-abdominal injuries are a significant cause of death in the polytraumatised
patients. Early recognition and communication of life-threatening thoraco-abdominal
injuries is the major task for the radiologists involved in the emergency room. Al
though, most of these patients reach the hospital prior to death, lethality continues
to remain high. Heart, thoracic great vessels, trachea, bronchus, pleura, lung,
diaphragm, abdominal/retroperitoneal vascular and solid organ injuries are potential
causes of death. Any appropriate surgical/interventional management approach
must be carried out "around the clock", before the thoraco-abdominal injuries reach
the level of clinical evidence. On the other hand, non operative management has
actually become the standard of care for the most serious thoraco-abdominal
injuries. These goals become feasible if a correct contrast-enhanced MDCT diag
nosis, in a dedicated facility in which the trauma team works effectively 24 hours
a day, seven days a week, is performed. Thus, in this lecture, the most serious
thoraco-abdominal injuries will be illustrated, with special emphasis on vascular
injuries as well as the value of post-processing techniques, protocols, pitfalls,
tips and tricks. Furthermore, the importance of a rational and integrated imaging
approach will be pointed out and, finally, the role of the radiologist in emergency
room will be emphasised.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the most important imaging features and their impact
on patient management.
2. To understand technical details, potential difficulties and pitfalls of demonstrat
ing these findings.
3. To be familiar with the pertinent findings to report.
A453 17:00
C. Extremities
U. Linsenmaier; Munich/DE (ulrich.linsenmaier@med.unimuenchen.de)
Extremity injuries in patients after polytrauma can be very complex and are often
difficult to be diagnosed comprehensively when patients undergo only an initial
whole body CT (WBCT). Extremity injuries comprise: fractures of (1) long bones, (2)
articular joints, (3) complex fractures of hands and feet; (4) vascular, (5) soft tissue
and (6) nerval and plexus injuries and (7) amputations. The use of MDCT could
replace conventional radiographs (CR) in many indications. MDCT is indicated in all
major and complex bony fractures and should be carried out early. Many institutions
include those extremity scans in the WBCT workup using the arterial contrast phase
as CT angiography (CTA) providing an excellent workup of the vascular system.
CR remains an important diagnostic mean; however, these CRs should only be
carried out after completion of the initial WBCT to avoid any dangerous delays in
diagnosis of life-threatening injuries. CRs are especially suitable for followup and
postoperative controls. Magnetic resonance imaging (MR) is an adjunct to MDCT
and CR in the diagnosis of extremity injuries. It is indicated in complex injuries with
unstable articular injuries, those involving tendons or major ligaments and nerval
and plexus injuries. However, MR should only be carried out after complete stabi
lisation of the patient. Finally, it has to be mentioned that the operative treatment
of extremity injuries must be priority oriented and carefully planned in the context
of possible concomitant injuries and a possible risk of multi-organ failure (MOF).
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the most important imaging features and their impact
on patient management.
2. To understand technical details, potential difficulties and pitfalls of demonstrat
ing these findings.
3. To be familiar with the pertinent findings to report.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S109
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Sunday
examples. Epidemiological, clinical and imaging findings of these diseases will
be discussed, and differential diagnostic features will be proposed. It will also be
discussed as to how these diseases insert into the broader general context of
lung diseases, and how imaging can contribute to a better understanding of their
respective clinical characteristics.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the imaging findings in pulmonary fibrosis.
2. To be able to recognise the imaging findings in pulmonary sarcoidosis.
3. To learn about the imaging findings in pulmonary vasculitis.
A460 16:50
C. Neoplastic lung disease
H.U. Kauczor; Heidelberg/DE (HansUlrich.Kauczor@med.uniheidelberg.de)
Imaging plays a pivotal role to conclusively stage lung neoplasms in order to guide
the treatment decisions. Staging of non-small cell lung cancer is based on the
recent 7th edition of the International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer
(IASLCT). In this edition T1 is divided into T1a ( 2 cm); and T1b (> 2 - 3 cm). T2
is divided into T2a (> 3-5 cm) and T2b (> 5-7 cm). Nodules in the same lobe are
categorisd as T3; nodules in a different lobe of the same lung as T4. N-staging is
unchanged. Metastases are divided into M1a and M1b. Malignant pleural effusion
and a metastasis to the contralateral lung are designated as M1a; metastases
to regions outside the lung/pleura as M1b. A second nodule in the non-primary
ipsilateral lobe, previously M1, is now T4M0. CT and MRI perform equally well for
T-staging. There are some slight advantages for MRI in the differentiation of T3
and T4 stages as well as the assessment of resectability. PET/CT has its major
asset in N-staging, whereas for M-staging whole body MRI is preferred over PET/
CT. Randomisd studies on lung cancer screening using CT in heavy smokers
indicate a significant reduction of mortality when compared with the use of chest
x-ray. The impact of this observation for the broad potential use of CT for individual
early detection is unclear. Pulmonary nodules should be followed according to the
current recommendations of the Fleischner Society.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be able to stage lung neoplasms with imaging.
2. To understand the integrative role of CT, MRI, and PET in imaging and staging
pulmonary neoplasms.
3. To gain practical information about lung cancer screening and pulmonary
nodule followup according to the most recent guidelines and recommenda
tions.
Discussion 17:15
16:00 - 17:30 Room F2
Breast
RC 1502
Evaluation of the treated breast and followup
A461 16:00
Chairman's introduction
M. Sentis; Sabadell/ES (melcior.sentis@gmail.com)
A462 16:05
A. Evaluation of residual disease after excisional biopsy
K.A. Frei; Hinterkappelen/CH (ka.frei@gmx.ch)
Breast-conserving surgery followed by radiation therapy and chemotherapy is
the treatment of choice for early stage breast cancer. After lumpectomy of breast
carcinoma, residual tumour is left in the breast in a reported 32 to 63%. Patients
with complete removal of all tumour tissue achieve better local and systemic con
trol of disease. Imaging after excisional biopsy might be helpful in the detection
of residual disease and therefore guide further treatment. The three methods of
choice for predicting residual cancer at the surgical site are the histopathological
evaluation of the margins of the biopsy specimen for the presence of tumour and
mammography after biopsy to identify residual microcalcifications. Mammographic
evaluation of such breasts is frequently impaired by decreased compressibility,
architectural distortion and locally increased density. MR imaging of the breast
for analysis. It clearly shows the prosthesis components or screw fractures and
demonstrates the contact between the acetabular cup and the iliopsoas muscle
in case of iliopsoas inflammation. Some classic rules help to improve the image
quality and reduce the metal artefacts. It is advisable to use x-ray tube potential of
at least 120 kVp, thin-section acquisitions, thicker reconstructions and multiplanar
reformat technique along certain planes and volumetric rendering techniques (VRT).
The most innovative techniques to improve the image quality are the iterative
reconstruction algorithms, which significantly reduce the metal artefacts and allow
a dose reduction to the patient. DSA mode bone subtraction is also an innovative
technique which reduces the metal artefacts and enhances the depiction of recur
rent tumours. Finally, CT scan can be combined with arthrography to improve the
detection of prosthesis loosening, acetabular wear or fistulas.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn the best parameters to optimise a CT-scan of a hip prosthesis.
2. To be familiar with the diagnostic criteria of femoro-acetabular impingement.
3. To learn about the new technical refinements of CT-scans of hip joint replace
ments.
A457 16:51
MRI: can it replace the above?
S.J. Eustace; Dublin/IE (seustace@iol.ie)
This talk will outline the role of MRI as a diagnostic tool in the assessment of failed
hip prostheses. In particular, the talk will outline the advantages and disadvantages
of MRI in this setting. Limited by metal artefact, the fine details immediately adjacent
to the prostheses is limited and MRI is therefore most useful to assess the para-
articular soft tissues and marrow.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with metal artefact reduction techniques at MRI (MARS).
2. To review safety aspects of MR imaging of prostheses.
3. To review specific diagnoses afforded by MRI in the assessment of prostheses.
Panel discussion:
Can we define an algorithm for assessment of the painful hip
replacement? 17:14
16:00 - 17:30 Room F1
Organs from A to Z: Lung
MC 1522
Causation-based imaging review of lung disease
Moderator:
C. MuellerMang; Vienna/AT
A458 16:00
A. Bacterial and viral pulmonary infections
T. Franquet; Barcelona/ES (tfranquet@santpau.cat)
Pulmonary infection is a major cause of morbidity and mortality. Several bacteria
and viruses can cause lower respiratory tract infection in adults. Viruses such as
human metapneumovirus, hantavirus, coronavirus, H1N5 and H1N1 have been
reported as severe human pathogens. Combination of pattern recognition with
knowledge of the clinical setting is the best approach to pulmonary infectious
processes. A specific pattern of involvement can help suggest a likely diagnosis
in many instances. The most common patterns seen at HRCT in acute bacterial
and viral infections include consolidation, nodules, tree-in-bu pattern, ground-glass
attenuation and airway disease. High-resolution CT can be helpful in the detection,
DDx and management of patients with lung infections.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be able to recognise typical and atypical imaging manifestations of common
bacterial lung infections, including mycobacteria.
2. To be able to recognise typical and atypical imaging manifestations of common
viral lung infections.
3. To learn about the changing patterns of pulmonary infections and emergent
pathogens, and their importance for the radiologist.
A459 16:25
B. Non-infectious inflammatory lung disease
A.A. Bankier; Boston, MA/US (abankier@bidmc.harvard.edu)
This presentation will present imaging features of non-infectious inflammatory lung
diseases. Pulmonary fibrosis, sarcoidosis and vasculitis will serve as prototypical
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S110 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
Panel discussion:
The new challenge in breast cancer: evaluation of response 17:14
16:00 - 17:30 Room G/H
Neuro
RC 1511
Advanced techniques: diffusion tensor imaging
(DTI) in clinical practice
Moderator:
P.C. Maly Sundgren; Lund/SE
A465 16:00
A. DTI technique, sequences, software and post processing
W. Van Hecke; Antwerp/BE (wim.vanhecke@ua.ac.be)
During this lecture, an introduction to Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) will be given.
This introduction will elaborate on the basics of the DTI technique, the acquisi
tion and sequences of DTI data sets and the post-processing options to obtain
quantitative DTI results. First, the underlying physical principles of DTI will be
explained, including the Brownian motion of water molecules, diffusion anisotropy,
and tractography. Then, information will be provided about the typical acquisition
scheme of DTI data sets, with a short introduction to some important parameters.
Once the DTI data sets are acquired, different techniques can be used to evaluate
the quantitative DTI values, depending on the application. An overview of these
different techniques, such as region-of-interest-based, tractography-based, and
voxel-based analysis will be given and some crucial aspects and pitfalls of these
techniques will be explained.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the physical principles and different information pro
vided by the DTI technique/sequence.
2. To learn about the most common techniques for quantitative assessment of
DTI parameters and fibre tractography data.
3. To understand the most crucial aspects of DTI post-processing.
4. To recognise some of the most important pitfalls in DTI post-processing.
A466 16:30
B. DTI in brain tumours
M. Essig; Erlangen/DE (mediag@me.com)
Diffusion-weighted MRI is used routinely in the assessment of cerebral diseases
including the workup of cerebral tumours, enabling to assess the tumour cell density
of lesions - the higher the tumour cell density, the lower the ADC. As diffusion is
truly a three-dimensional process, molecular mobility in tissues may be anisotropic,
as in brain white matter. With diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), diffusion anisotropy
effects can be fully extracted, characterised, and exploited, providing even more
exquisite details on tissue microstructure. The most advanced application is certainly
that of fibre tracking in the brain, which, in combination with other functional MRI
techniques, might open a window on the important issue of connectivity and tissue
integration. Beside the ability to visualise the fibrous tracts, DTI has proved to be a
valuable diagnostic tool in the assessment of intracranial neoplasm, e.g. to describe
the infiltrative nature of a tumour. Quantitative fractional isotropy measurements
enable to assess the tumour infiltration into areas with otherwise normal-appearing
MRI. DTI proved also to be helpful in the differentiation of intraaxial and extraaxial
lesions or to determine the grade of gliomas preoperatively. However, peritumoural
DTI values were reported to be helpful in distinguishing solitary intraaxial metastatic
lesions from gliomas. In addition, the method enables one to distinguish presumed
tumour-infiltrated oedema from vasogenic oedema composed purely of extracellular
water. These capabilities of DTI are helpful in current diagnostic scenarios and
conceivably will be useful for broader applications in the future.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the spectrum of qualitative and quantitative information
provided by DTI for the evaluation of brain tumours.
2. To gain knowledge of the importance of DTI/tractography in the pretreatment
assessment of brain tumours.
3. To learn the usefulness of DTI in the characterisation of tumours, peritumoral
white matter tracks and in the differential diagnosis of brain tumours.
after surgery, unlike mammography, is not limited to the evaluation of lesions that
contain microcalcifications. Imaging evaluation in patients with positive margins
after lumpectomy is indicated to evaluate the extent of residual disease in order
to decide whether reexcision or mastectomy might be indicated. MRI may be
considered after breast-conserving therapy in three instances: first as an evalua
tion tool for residual disease after positive tumour margins, second as a method
of evaluating suspected recurrence and third as an additional tool in patients who
undergo breast-conserving therapy.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be familiar with the indications for imaging after excisional biopsy.
2. To understand the clinical needs of imaging findings in the treated breast.
3. To understand the indications of MRI in detection of residual disease.
A463 16:28
B. Evaluation of response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy
L. Martincich; Candiolo/IT (laura.martincich@ircc.it)
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy is provided to patients with large or inoperable breast
cancer in order to reduce tumour size for optimal local surgery. Breast MRI provides
both morphological and functional findings, which have been demonstrated to be
reflective of some hallmarks of cancer. Besides, the examination has showed
capability in identifying changes in vascularisation, cellularity and tumour volume
due to chemotherapeutic drugs and target-therapy. Among imaging modalities,
MRI represents the most accurate examination in the identification of pathological
complete response and in the assessment of the extent of residual disease after
the treatment. However, several factors may affect the diagnostic performance
of breast MRI in terms of under or overestimation of tumour response. Tumour
histopathological features, patterns of enhancement before the treatment and type
of shrinkage have been demonstrated to influence the accuracy of the examina
tion. New MR techniques, such as H1MR Spectroscopy and Diffusion-Weighted
Imaging, are showing potentials in the discrimination between responder and non-
responder patients during and after the treatment. However, these techniques even
if promising require further evaluation for the routine application in clinical setting.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the principal mechanisms of tumour vascularisation and micro
structure.
2. To understand the changes in tumour vascularisation and microstructure due
to neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
3. To understand the accuracy and limitations of response monitoring with breast
MRI.
A464 16:51
C. Surveillance for and detection of recurrent disease after therapy
I. Schreer; Kiel/DE (ischreer@email.unikiel.de)
The long-term results of randomised controlled trials comparing mastectomy with
breast-conserving therapy (BCT) have shown that patients treated with BCT are at
continuous risk of ipsilateral breast cancer recurrence (IBR), even after 15 years,
without reaching a plateau. This continuous and sustained risk of about 1% annu
ally is accompanied by the risk of a synchronous or metachronous contralateral
cancer development in 2 - 20% of the breast cancer patients. The cumulative risk
of contralateral invasive or non invasive cancer is 0.6% per year and 10% after 20
years. One of four IBRs is the cause of distant metastases. The goal is to detect
cancer recurrence within the ipsilateral as well as metachronous in the contralateral
breast at the earliest opportunity, because the detection during regular followup
examinations is beneficial on survival of the patients in comparison with symptomatic
detection. Surveillance mammography after treatment for primary breast cancer is
recommended by the American Society of Clinical Oncology for example and the
National German Guideline on Breast Cancer Detection, Treatment and Aftercare.
The recommendations are consensus-based and not evidence-based. Mammog
raphy is more sensitive than clinical examination (86.1% vs 56.7%); nevertheless,
13 - 22% is detectable by physical examination only. In case of inconclusive findings
by conventional imaging CE-MRI is indicated and results in the highest sensitivity
to detect or exclude ipsilateral recurrence. PEM and scintigraphy are considered
methods under investigation.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the risk of recurrent disease and a second primary following
the treatment of breast cancer.
2. To be familiar with the literature on surveillance mammography and other
imaging methods for detection.
3. To appreciate the range of recommendations for surveillance mammography
and clinical followup.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S111
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Sunday
identified and treated in advance to avoid major coronary events. Cardiac CT allows
for the exact assessment of coronary morphology including length, calcification
and severity of lesions. Based on these morphological information, success of a
percutaneous revascularisation procedure can be anticipated with high prognostic
accuracy. Additionally, the possibility of identification of lesion at risk by means of
coronary CT has been described recently. By this, dedicated treatment of only
the relevant stenosis should become possible avoiding multiple, potentially un
needed, stents. Finally, even the assessment of myocardial viability by means of
CT becomes possible. Using all the possibilities of cardiac CT optimised treatment
plan can be established, and outcome can be estimated. This presentation should
give an overview about potential applications of cardiac CT for optimised treatment
decisions and planning. Potentially useful algorithms for improving the outcome of
coronary interventions should be provided.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the role of CT coronary angiography in the assessment of
patients prior to percutaneous intervention.
2. To appreciate the role of myocardial imaging in patients prior to cardiac inter
ventions.
3. To understand how to integrate coronary CT in the assessment of patients
selected for cardiac interventions.
A470 16:28
B. Can MRI predict the outcome of coronary revascularisation?
M. Francone; Rome/IT (marco.francone@uniroma1
.it)
Prediction of coronary revascularisation outcome represents a major clinical target
since a large number of medical and surgical options have become available for
chronic ischaemic cardiomyopathy with need to identify more rigorous criteria for
patient selection. The combination in a single examination of function, stress-
perfusion and tissue characterisation with T2-weighted "oedema-sensitive" and
late-gadolinium enhancement (LGE) techniques, supported the role of cardiac
MR (CMR) as an important technique for the evaluation of patient candidates for
revascularisation. Besides more "traditional" indicators like ejection fraction, end-
diastolic wall thickness or end-systolic volumes, extent and distribution of myocardial
scar depicted with LGE has been identified as one of the most important predictors
of post-revascularisation outcome with direct influence on functional recovery
and on major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE) due to the potential induc
tion of arrhythmias from the scar. LGE technique has been shown to be superior
to nuclear medicine for the assessment of myocardial viability due to the higher
spatial resolution (up to 60-fold greater than SPECT) and an intrinsic high-contrast
resolution. A further technique that could be adopted before revascularisation is
stress imaging. Myocardial ischaemia detected by either CMR adenosine first-pass
perfusion or dobutamine-induced wall motion abnormalities has been shown to
predict subsequent cardiac death, whereas normal stress perfusion showed a high
negative predictive value for MACE. In conclusions, although as a relatively new
diagnostic modality prognostic evidence is predominantly derived from single-centre
studies, CMR is increasingly becoming an important tool for risk stratification before
revascularisation, offering indications about outcome and mortality.
Learning Objectives:
1. To appreciate the diagnostic value of MRI in CAD.
2. To understand the important prognostic factors that MR is able to provide.
3. To learn about the advantages of performing cardiac MR prior to coronary
revascularisation.
A471 16:51 
C. The value of CT before percutaneous aortic valve replacement
R. Salgado; Antwerp/BE (rodrigo.salgado@uza.be)
Cardiac valve diseases are an important public health problem, with an increas
ing incidence strongly linked to the increasing age of the Western population.
The most frequent valve disease is aortic stenosis, for which percutaneous
aortic valve replacement (PAVR) is currently evolving as an alternative therapy
in high-risk patients. Nevertheless, careful evaluation of all aspects of this new
approach is still required to avoid uncontrolled diffusion. Imaging plays a key role
in selecting patients who may be eligible for PAVR, focusing on the evaluation
of leaflet anatomy, severity of valve dysfunction, haemodynamic consequences
and potential problems in the access route. While echocardiography is commonly
used for both the anatomical and functional evaluation, multidetector CT (MDCT)
has important intrinsic advantages providing state-of-the-art 3D imaging with a
high spatial resolution over a large anatomic coverage. During this course, we will
discuss the advantages and disadvantages of MDCT compared with other imaging
modalities. The relevant anatomy of the aortic valve and annulus will be reviewed,
with emphasis on correct alignment of the imaging planes, and its implications for
A467 17:00
C. DTI in paediatric diseases
P.E. Grant; Boston, MA/US (ellen.grant@childrens.harvard.edu)
Diffusion tensor imaging plays an important role in the diagnosis and management
of paediatric brain disorders as it provides important physiological information.
This physiological information comes from the fact that water molecules diffuse
approximately 10 microns using typical diffusion parameters, allowing interrogation
of tissue properties at a micron level with this information volume averaged over
a 8 cm3 image voxel. In our clinical experience we have observed that decreased
diffusivity occurs in situations where there is 1. Metabolic failure (ex. acute necrosis)
or compromise (ex. Status epilepticus), 2. Myelin vacuolization (ex. Maple Syrup
Urine Disease), 3. Increased cellular density (pus, medulloblastoma). However, in
hypoxic, ischemic insults it is important to remember that normal diffusivity does
exclude a significant brain injury in the first few days after an event. In this situation,
delayed cell death mechanisms may be activated, resulting in delayed decreases
in diffusivity (delayed necrosis) or just long term volume loss (delayed apoptosis).
Using the directional information, underlying tissue structure can be further interro
gated. This is particularly helpful when assessing lesions of decreased diffusivity to
determine if they are more likely to be metabolic compromise or myelin vacuolization
as opposed to irreversible metabolic failure. In addition tractography can be used
in preoperative planning, however, appreciation for limitations in regions of edema
need to be understood to avoid underestimating the presence of axonal bundles.
Research approaches use diffusion tractography to better understand structural
connectivity and changes that occur in networks with development and disease.
Learning Objectives:
1. To recognise the specificities of DTI in the paediatric brain.
2. To gain knowledge of the importance of DTI in the assessment of brain matura
tion and white matter diseases.
3. To learn the DTI value in the evaluation of brain destructive lesions.
16:00 - 17:30 Room I/K
Cardiac
RC 1503
MRI and CT before cardiac interventions or surgery
A468 16:00
Chairman's introduction
G.P. Krestin; Rotterdam/NL (g.p.krestin@erasmusmc.nl)
Advancements in CT and MRI technology have led to an increasing use of these
modalities in the non-invasive assessment of coronary arteries, myocardial per
fusion and cardiac function. While their role in detecting coronary artery disease and
functional disorders has been widely accepted, it is still unclear whether they could
be adopted in triaging patients for the best therapeutic approach. Large studies
have already suggested that indication for surgery and percutaneous interventions
cannot be solely based on the demonstration of morphological alterations and that
such "cosmetic" interventions are not always leading to the expected outcomes.
Therefore, non-invasive imaging techniques have to offer more than just the detec
tion of grades of coronary artery stenosis, of areas of infarcted myocardium, or of
valvular alterations. Adjustment of imaging protocols for additional evaluation of
coronary flow reserve, of myocardial perfusion and contractility and of valve size,
position and damage with subsequent quantification of degree of stenosis and/
or regurgitation are necessary in order to allow choosing the most appropriate
therapeutic approach and thus become the "gold standard" for prognosis and
pretherapeutic diagnosis of cardiac diseases.
A469 16:05
A. Can CT predict the outcome of percutaneous intervention?
C. Loewe; Vienna/AT (christian.loewe@meduniwien.ac.at)
The outcome of coronary revascularisation is not only defined by primary technical
success, but also by improvement of symptoms and quality of life. Thus, despite
the individual comorbidities, the outcome and thus the potential benefit of coronary
revascularisation depends on many different factors, including morphology, distribu
tion and severity of coronary lesions, myocardial viability, and ventricular function.
Consequently, the detection of coronary stenosis is not sufficient for planning an
optimised treatment, and more information is needed to personalise the treatment
plan. It should be evaluated if the myocardial territory supported by the diseased
artery is still vital and lesions at risk for plaque rupture (culprit lesions) should be
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S112 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
the detector. These various approaches to obtaining energy-dependent measure
ments have different dose efficiency and different sensitivity to subject motion.
The simplest method to process the multi-energy data reconstructs CT images
from each spectrum and performs the multi-energy analysis on the reconstructed
images. A somewhat preferred method performs energy-dependent processing
on the raw projections prior to reconstruction. Hybrid methods are now available.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about new developments in functional and spectral CT imaging.
2. To be able to assess their impact on patient dose.
A474 17:00
C. New image reconstruction techniques
J. Nuyts; Leuven/BE (johan.nuyts@uz.kuleuven.be)
Filtered backprojection (FBP) is currently the standard reconstruction algorithm
in CT. FBP is fast and performs very well in many cases. FBP assigns the same
certainty to all projections. In reality, the reliability of the projection data depends
on the attenuation along the projection lines. As a result, FBP is suboptimal
for noisy data. Performance in the presence of noise can be improved either
by certainty based preprocessing of the projection data or by using iterative
reconstruction algorithms based on a more realistic noise model. If the number
of projection angles is limited, FBP suffers from artefacts. In contrast, iterative
reconstruction is more robust against angular sampling issues. Nonetheless, if
the number of projection angles is too low, there is not enough information for
perfect reconstruction, and any algorithm will have problems finding the true
solution. The problem can be alleviated by using prior knowledge about the ob
ject to be reconstructed. An example is the currently very popular total variation
prior, which assumes that the reconstructed object should be piecewise uniform.
One can improve the performance of image reconstruction using more accurate
models of the acquisition physics (e.g. finite resolution, energy spectrum: "MBIR").
However, this makes the reconstruction task also more complicated. Many meth
ods have been proposed, which combine preprocessing based on physics with
fast reconstruction using FBP. Even better reconstructions can be obtained by
integrating the model into the iterative reconstruction algorithm, but at the cost of
increased computation times.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the impact of iterative reconstruction techniques in CT.
2. To learn about novel algorithms.
3. To be able to assess their impact on patient dose.
16:00 - 17:30 Room N/O
Head and Neck
RC 1508
Post-treatment head and neck management: the
diagnostic dilemma
A475 16:00
Chairman's introduction
R. Maroldi; Brescia/IT (maroldi@med.unibs.it)
Major changes in the treatment of head and neck neoplasms encompass the
advances of endoscopic-based surgical techniques, mainly for nasosinusal and
laryngeal tumours, and the application of sophisticated radiation therapy techniques,
combined with chemotherapy.As most tumours arise from the mucosa of the upper
aero-digestive tract, clinical surveillance is necessary to detect superficial recur
rences, while morphological and `functional' imaging techniques are indispensable
to detect subclinical extra-mucosal and nodal recurrences. How can imaging tech
niques discriminate recurrence, inflammation, necrosis or scar? Key points include
the knowledge of the normal appearance of tissues (morphology & signals) on CT
and MRI after surgery and chemo-radiotherapy. Specifically, when non-surgical
treatment has been used, it means to become familiar with the expected changes
both of tumour and adjacent tissues. Changes that can be asymmetric as extremely
precise techniques of dose delivering are used, like tomotherapy. Morphology-
based imaging techniques are often inadequate to discriminate small recurrences
from vascularised scar tissue (enhancing). CT or MRI requires to be integrated by
information provided by functional-based imaging techniques, FDG-PET-CT be
ing the most established. Recently, a great interest among radiologists is focused
on the application of DCE-CT or DCE-MRI and DWI-MRI in the followup of head
and neck neoplasms. In fact, several studies have credited these techniques for
providing functional information about tissues (perfusion, water exchange) that
correct reporting of the necessary measurements targeted at the clinicians' need.
Furthermore, MDCT scan protocol design will be reviewed, focusing not only on
optimal implementation of common scan parameters but also on the need of
ECG-triggering and its consequences. Finally, we will present the current status
of evidence on using MDCT in PAVR procedures, and discuss future challenges
and perspectives.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand how to optimise the imaging protocol for aortic valve imaging.
2. To learn how to report the findings and what to include in the report.
3. To understand the impact of this approach on patient management.
Panel discussion:
Improve your interaction with your colleagues 17:14
16:00 - 17:30 Room L/M
Physics in Radiology
RC 1513
Novel developments in CT and impact on dose
Moderators:
M. Kachelrie; Heidelberg/DE
J. Vlahos; London/UK
A472 16:00
A. Patient dose assessment in CT
P.C. Shrimpton; Didcot/UK (paul.shrimpton@hpa.org.uk)
CT remains a particular focus for efforts in radiological protection owing to its steadily
increasing clinical application and the relatively high patient doses. Dosimetry is
an essential element within good CT practice in order to allow the assessment of
typical radiation risks in support of the justification of procedures and the routine
monitoring and comparison of typical doses in pursuit of the optimisation of patient
protection. The practical basis for dosimetry in contemporary CT remains the
(updated) CT dose index (CTDI100), measured in either free air or the standard
CT dosimetry phantoms. These latter measurements underpin the dose indicators
commonly displayed by the CT scanner: volume-weighted CT dose index (CTDIvol)
and dose-length product (DLP). Whereas these quantities are not patient doses,
they nevertheless provide useful characterisation of each CT exposure in order
to allow comparison of practice and facilitate improvements in patient protection.
Typical levels of CTDIvol and DLP at each CT centre, periodically determined as
the mean values observed for representative samples for each patient group and
type of examination (and associated clinical indication), should be adopted as local
diagnostic reference levels (DRLs). These should be subject to periodic review
and compared with both corresponding national DRLs and also practice at other
CT centres in pursuit of optimised patient protection. When required, estimates of
typical organ and effective doses to reference patients from standard CT examina
tions can be made on the basis of appropriate dose coefficients normalised to the
dose indicators (CTDIair, CTDIvol or DLP).
Learning Objectives:
1. To be familiar with technical dose parameters in CT.
2. To understand how to assess patient dose.
3. To be informed about the role of diagnostic reference levels in CT.
A473 16:30
B. New frontiers in CT: functional and spectral imaging
N. Pelc; Stanford, CA/US (pelc@stanford.edu)
Recent advances have generated renewed interest in dual energy CT. This pres
entation will discuss the basic principles, and the strengths and limitations of the
techniques and implementations, of multi-energy methods for material characterisa
tion. Conventional CT is at best an image of the linear attenuation coefficient at one
energy and cannot uniquely identify tissue. Materials with different atomic numbers
have different energy-dependent attenuation. Multi-energy imaging measures at
tenuation at different energies to more fully characterise materials. An important
limitation is the fact that in the diagnostic energy range the attenuation of all materi
als is dominated by Compton scattering and photoelectric absorption, and unless
there is a K-edge in the spectrum used, these phenomena have the same energy
dependence for all materials. Thus, there are only two "basis functions" and spectral
CT essentially measures effective atomic number and electron density. While there
is residual ambiguity, it still provides important information. The main requirement
for dual energy CT is to measure data using two spectra using multiple kVp and/
or filtration or methods in which the x-ray energy discrimination is performed at
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S113
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Sunday
Although functional parameters are still mainly subject of research, the combination
of perfusion-CT or functional MRI with positron emission tomography (PET) tracers
and biological parameters such as p16 positivity or presence of human papilloma
virus may allow in future for more accurate prediction of response to treatment.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the prognostic significance of MR imaging-determined
tumour parameters.
2. To become familiar with the prognostic significance of CT imaging-determined
tumour parameters.
3. To learn what is evidence-based, including future perspectives.
Panel discussion:
Recurrence, inflammation, necrosis or scar: is imaging useful? 17:14
16:00 - 17:30 Room P
Radiographers
RC 1514
Breast screening programmes: roles and issues for
radiographers
Moderators:
G. Forrai; Budapest/HU
K. Haller; Wiener Neustadt/AT
A479 16:00
A. Establishing competencies of radiographers in national screening
programmes
J. Hammond; Dublin/IE (joanne.hammond@cancerscreening.ie)
Mammography continues to be the diagnostic tool for breast screening programmes
and the radiographer is closely involved with both the technical quality of the imag
ing and with each client's satisfaction with the service. Establishing the necessary
competencies of the individual radiographer is a core requirement within the breast
screening process and essential for a national breast screening programme. The
purpose of this session is to provide an overview of the quality assurance structure
within a breast screening programme and in particular how the role of the radiog
rapher and radiographic quality assurance contribute towards this. The importance
of national quality assurance guidelines and programme standards, methods of
establishing the individual skills and competencies of radiographers and how these
are subsequently measured and maintained through regular review and audit will
be discussed. Individual factors will also be considered including the importance
of performing high-quality mammography technique with minimal discomfort and
radiation dose, peer review and appraisal and ensuring appropriate communica
tion and messages about breast cancer screening are delivered. Establishing and
maintaining the competence and skill of the individual radiographer is essential to
the quality and success of the breast screening service and to ensure the required
standard of mammography is constantly achieved.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the concept of a breast screening programme.
2. To understand the role of the radiographer within a breast screening pro
gramme.
3. To learn about the competencies of radiographers in a breast screening pro
gramme and how these might be established.
A480 16:30
B. Quality control and quality assurance of breast screening
programmes from the radiographers viewpoint
A. Kostiov; Ljubljana/SI (anamarija.kostiov@gmail.com)
Quality control (QC) and quality assurance (QA) in Slovenian screening programme
Dora are done by radiographers, radiologists and medical physicists. Radiographers
perform daily and weekly equipment testing, radiologists perform positioning control
and pathology double reading control and medical physicists perform half annual
testing of the equipment and overview results of daily and weekly tests done by
radiographers. Important parameter of QA and QC in breast screening programme
is received mean glandular doses (MGD). They can easily be calculated and in the
calculations we can evaluate the influence of breast thickness on the MGD. The
purpose of the refresher session is to present procedures of QA and QC done by
radiographers and some procedures that are in Slovenia now done by radiologists
but with the tendency that they be done by radiographers. The calculations of
MGD will be presented with average manual values of MGD in Slovenian breast
screening programme Dora, along with the effect of breast thickness on MGD and
help to discriminate scar from recurrences. Obviously, the horizon pursued is to
combine morphology and functional data in a single examination.
A476 16:05
A. Expected changes after treatment
A.S. McQueen; Newcastle upon Tyne/UK (andrewmcqueen7
@hotmail.com)
For any radiologist involved in the multidisciplinary care of head and neck cancer
patients, the interpretation of post treatment imaging can be challenging. Recurrent
or residual malignancy is often clinically occult; therefore, the radiologist has an
important role to detect and delineate neoplastic disease so that salvage therapy
might be considered. A range of imaging changes can be expected following treat
ment with the main modalities of surgery and radiotherapy and these often prove
difficult to differentiate from malignancy. The surgical management of head and
neck cancer involves primary resection, lymph node dissection and reconstructive
surgery and these procedures are often extensive, resulting in an altered anatomi
cal landscape for the radiologist to interpret. A spectrum of changes can also be
anticipated following treatment with radiotherapy, although recent developments in
image-guided radiation therapy aim to improve target delineation and avoid adja
cent organs at risk. The expected CT, MRI and ultrasound appearances following
surgery and (chemo)radiotherapy will be reviewed in this session.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the current treatment options in head and neck cancer.
2. To understand the expected tissue changes after radiotherapy.
3. To appreciate the expected imaging findings after surgery.
A477 16:28
B. Surveillance imaging, tumour recurrence and treatment complications
F.A. Pameijer; Utrecht/NL (f.a.pameijer@umcutrecht.nl)
In post-treatment imaging in head and neck malignancy it can be difficult to dif
ferentiate between signs of tumour recurrence and expected changes and/or
complications. Patients at risk for local failure after radiation therapy (RT) can be
successfully identified by a post-RT CT (or MR) study between 1 and 6 months
after RT. The optimal time-point to perform such a base-line study` seems to be
about 3 to 4 months post-RT. Patients with indeterminate findings are candidates
for imaging surveillance`; i.e. followup imaging every 3 to 4 months up to a period
of 2 years after RT. Chondronecrosis is an uncommon treatment complication after
RT. In laryngeal chondronecrosis, the larynx is not able to maintain its structural
integrity without clear signs of persisting or recurrent tumour. However, extensive
soft tissue changes surrounding the necrotic laryngeal framework can be seen,
making differentiation from tumour recurrence virtually impossible. In fact, tumour
recurrence and chondronecrosis may coexist. Certain imaging findings proved to
be suggestive of radionecrosis, and these will be discussed using examples from
daily practice. Ongoing studies suggest that metabolic imaging (FDG-PET) may
detect local recurrences with a higher accuracy than conventional` anatomically
based imaging techniques, such as CT and MR.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the ideal time for followup.
2. To become familiar with the patterns and appearance of tumour recurrence.
3. To understand treatment complications and to differentiate them from tumour
recurrence.
A478 16:51
C. Predicting outcome of radiation therapy in head and neck cancer:
clinical reality?
V. Vandecaveye; Leuven/BE (vincent.vandecaveye@uz.kuleuven.ac.be)
Concomitant chemoradiotherapy (CRT) increases locoregional control and over
all survival in locally advanced head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNC)
compared with radiotherapy alone and allows for comparable disease-free survival
(DFS) post surgery. Cure rates and survival may be further improved by tailoring
treatment strategies on an individual basis, but this requires early diagnostic biomar
kers. The identification of prognostic biomarkers prior to treatment may potentially
have highest impact as it would allow guiding initial treatment decisions and thus
individualise treatment from the start. The aim of the presentation is threefold: to
discuss the prognostic significance of MRI determined tumour parameters, CT-
determined parameters and to discuss evidence-based facts and future applications.
Next to anatomical parameters that may influence treatment outcome, including
tumour volume, T-stage and involvement of certain anatomic subareas such as
the laryngeal cartilage, the pre-epiglottic space and subglottic area, CT and MRI
also allow for determination of functional predictive parameters using perfusion-CT,
dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI (DCE-MRI) and diffusion-weighted MRI (DWI).
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S114 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
torsion, pelvic inflammatory disease and haematometra due to an imperforate hy
men. Ultrasound is the most suitable first-line radiological examination in children
with abdominal emergencies. Despite many other imaging modalities can provide
helpful information, they should be reserved to the small percentage of cases in
which the diagnosis still remains uncertain after sonography.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the role of sonography in acute digestive disease.
2. To become familiar with the specific imaging findings of intussusception and
appendicitis.
3. To learn about the acute pathology of the liver, biliary tract and pancreas.
A483 16:30
B. GU emergencies in children: kidney, ovary, testis
M. Riccabona; Graz/AT (michael.riccabona@medunigraz.at)
This lecture will discuss the role of emergency imaging in acute paediatric GU con
ditions, with particular focus on the potential of ultrasound (US). Besides GU tract
trauma conditions such as urosepsis, renal failure, renal colics, ovarian or testicular
torsion with all the respective relevant differential diagnoses have to be considered
and urgently addressed adequately. Particularly with respect to radiation protection
and due to the superb US potential in childhood, US is often used as the primary
imaging tool and will - in many conditions reveal all treatment relevant informa
tion. However, in other conditions such as severe (multiple) trauma age-adapted
paediatric CT remains the best primary imaging tool. Work-up and followup may
require imaging, usually achievable by US and partially by MRI, scintigraphy and/
or cystography. Thus the imaging algorithms differ from adults. The most important
conditions, their imaging appearance, the potential pitfalls and some important
methodical details will be presented, also discussing recommended paediatric
imaging algorithms. In most acute paediatric GU conditions US is adequate as
the first and often sufficient imaging modality. Rarely other imaging is necessary
particularly in the acute setting - except for CT in severe (multiple) trauma. All
imaging should be indicated with respect to therapeutic consequences and the
ALARA principle, and proper paediatric protocols as well as methododical skills
(e.g., dedicated paediatric US) should be provided 24 hours throughout the year.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the diagnostic imaging approach in acute urinary tract disease.
2. To become familiar with the sonographic aspects of ovarian emergencies.
3. To understand the role of sonography in acute scrotum diseases.
A484 17:00
C. Abdominal trauma in children
M.P. GarciaPena; Barcelona/ES (plgarciapena@gmail.com)
Trauma is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in children. The clinical
evaluation of children with potential blunt abdominal injury presents a difficult
and challenging task. Therefore diagnostic imaging plays an important role in the
evaluation of injured children. The most common indication for abdominal imaging
following trauma in children is haematuria. The majority of children with haematuria
do not have urinary tract injury. Certain clinical variables have been associated
with a higher risk of abdominal injury. These include gross haematuria, abdominal
tenderness, ecchymoses, and a low Trauma Score. Lap belt ecchymoses represent
an important high-risk marker for injury. They are associated with complex of injury.
Sonography has limited utility in the assessment of paediatric abdominal trauma.
Computed tomography (CT) is the imaging method of choice in the evaluation of
abdominal injury after blunt trauma in haemodynamically stable children. An un
stable patient needs to be stabilised prior to CT or to proceed directly to surgery.
Evaluation with CT allows for accurate detection and quantification of injury to
solid and hollow viscera and can also identify an active haemorrhage. CT can help
prioritise optimal management by diagnosing the major or most life-threatening
site of haemorrhage or injury. CT can also demonstrate associated bony injury to
ribs, spine and pelvis. A normal CT examination may prevent other unnecessary
explorations. The decision for operative intervention in the small percentage of
children who require surgical haemostasis is primarily made based on clinical
criteria and not on CT findings.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about traumatic lesions of the abdomen in children.
2. To learn the diagnostic strategy for abdominal trauma.
3. To appreciate the improvement of diagnosis with new technology.
most common mistakes in positioning of the breast in our screening programme.
Radiographers are responsible for appropriate condition of x-ray machine. In the
future radiographers will take control over the positioning from radiologists and make
a larger impact on QAand QC in breast screening programme. With the knowledge
of how MGD is calculated, radiographers would be able to observe and understand
the impact of breast thickness on MGD with preserving image quality regularly.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the importance of QC and QAof breast screening programmes.
2. To learn how to calculate and apply the MGD/AGD (mean glandular dose/
average glandular dose) in practice.
3. To be aware of the effect breast positioning has on QA of breast screening
programmes.
4. To become familiar with the role of radiographers in QA and QC of breast
screening programmes.
A481 17:00
C. The radiographer's role in optimisation of dose and image quality
in mammography
D. O'Leary; Dublin/IE (desiree.oleary@ucd.ie)
Efforts to reduce radiation dose in mammography should be linked to and limited by
image quality and the radiation dose should only be lowered to levels compatible
with image quality for adequate diagnosis; this is optimisation of mammography.
In order to achieve this goal, radiographers should become familiar with dose
and image quality in mammography and understand the benefits of identifying
and addressing dose and image quality issues in mammography. The purpose
of this refresher session is to learn how to optimise dose and image quality in
mammography. The concept of diagnostic reference levels in mammography will
be examined and European / International dose limits will be compared. The link
between image quality and mean glandular dose (MGD) will be explored as will
the link between compression (force and depth) and MGD in current research and
previous publications. Suggestions for lowering of the mean glandular dose and
raising image quality in mammography will be made based on current research.
This session will examine methods for lowering radiation especially in digital imaging
by greater training of radiographers to consistently achieve perfect mammography
images. It is only through standardisation of the undertaking of the mammographic
projections with regard to achievable compression depth and the application of
compression force delivered to the breast that this can be achieved. Scoring of
image quality by removing subjectivity from the scoring systems may also aid in
the achievement of high image quality goals for all mammography departments.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with dose and image quality in mammography.
2. To understand the benefits of identifying and addressing dose and image
quality issues in mammography.
3. To learn how to optimise dose and image quality in mammography.
16:00 - 17:30 Room Q
Paediatric
RC 1512
Abdominal emergencies in children
Moderator:
F.E. Avni; Brussels/BE
A482 16:00
A. Non-traumatic abdominal emergencies in childhood
P. Toma; Rome/IT (paolo.toma@opbg.net)
Investigation of paediatric abdominal emergencies represents approximately 20%
of the radiological demand in primary care. Ultrasound of the abdomen is extremely
helpful in both establishing and excluding disease: all authors agree on the primary
role of sonography in the setting of acute abdominal conditions, a very common
cause of presentation to the hospital for children. More and more, radiologists try
to avoid abdominal x-rays, because they usually are of limited value in establishing
the cause of acute abdominal pain as an isolated symptom. In paediatric practice,
radiation protection is of outmost importance. Therefore, CT scanning should be
reserved to specific or complex problems. Actually, CT scan is more extensively
performed in the U.S. than in Europe. The high cost of MRI, in addition to its lim
ited availability and long examination times, has been a major limitation to its use
in the emergency setting: it can supplement sonography in selected cases, e.g.
cholangiopancreatography magnetic resonance in jaundice, pelvic MRI in adnexal
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S115
C D E F G H
A
Monday, March 5
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S116 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
predictor of survival. Evaluation of 18 F-FDG kinetics (dynamic-PET) allows to
differentiate response or non-response. PET tracer that quantifies tumour pro
liferation (11C-thymidine), drug-resistance activity (11C-verapamil) and tissue
hypoxia (18 F-fluoromisonidazole) may contribute to clinical risk assessment for
tumour-aggressive behaviour. Combined information, obtained with new devices
PET/MRI, will probably change diagnostic algorithms.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn the common indications for conventional nuclear medicine tracers
(99mTc-MDP, 99mTc-MIBI) in musculoskeletal tumours using hybrid imaging
(SPECT/CT).
2. To be familiar with the current evidence and clinical applications of 18 F-FDG
PET/CT in musculoskeletal tumours.
3. To be aware of the future developments of novel PET tracers and integrated
PET/MRI.
4. To learn the common indications for conventional nuclear medicine tracers.
A488 09:21
Sonography: diagnostic developments
C. Martinoli; Genoa/IT (carlo.martinoli@libero.it)
Imaging of musculoskeletal tumours is inherently complex and presents unique
challenges and continuing integration of morphological and functional capabilities
as technology progresses. In the past years, ultrasound is rapidly advancing and
refining and its development is essentially aimed at both increasing image quality
and introducing new biomarkers. High-resolution volume imaging with matrix trans
ducers and introduction of isotropic-voxel acquisition are opening perspectives in
providing more reliable and accurate quantification of soft-tissue tumour volumes
and estimating the fractional amount of intratumour vasculature. In addition, the
storage of serial volume datasets with time would allow better comparison of find
ings in longitudinal studies, providing new insights into assessment of the patient
outcome and evaluation of the results of therapy. Based on the latest advance
ments, measurement of tissue strain with elastography and introduction of specific
techniques to detect signals from microbubble-based contrast media at the high
frequencies used to image superficial tissues are providing new parameters of
analysis of soft-tissue masses. In contrast imaging, depiction of intratumour blood
flow distribution, quantification of the fractional moving blood volume and analysis
of intensity/time curves would also improve the sensitivity to change of ultrasound
and contribute to a better characterisation of musculoskeletal tumours.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn the value of US in the diagnostic work-up of musculoskeletal tumours.
2. To be familiar with the most recent advances and trends in the development
of US technology.
3. To be aware of pros and cons and potential pitfalls of US in this field.
Panel discussion:
The role and guidelines of the imaging techniques on the
management of MSK neoplasms 09:44
08:30 - 10:00 Room B
Interactive Teaching Session
E 1620
Breast cancer
A489 08:30
A. Detection
C.S. Balleyguier; Villejuif/FR (balleyguier@igr.fr)
Breast Cancer detection relies almost exclusively on the radiologist. Mammography
is the basic tool for screening. Sonography and MRI are complementary techniques.
Sensitivity of Mammography is very high (close to 90%) in case of fatty breast.
However, accuracy declines in case of dense breast. The most challenging cancers
are infiltrative lobular carcinoma and cancers presenting only with architectural
distortion. Mammography is by far the best examination for the detection and
characterisation of microcalcifications. Sonography is not a screening tool, but
is a useful complement to questionable mammograms. MRI is very powerful and
might become the primary screening tool in selected populations like high-risk
women, but should not replace mammography in all cases due to the risk of false
positive findings.Acombined report of both MRI and mammogram is desirable. The
radiologist should be familiar with the most common traps: lesions seen on only
one view, cancer seen only as a mild asymmetry of breast density, identification
of neoplastic calcification in the middle of uneven microcalcifications and mildly
08:30 - 10:00 Room A
Special Focus Session
SF 16a
The role of advanced imaging in musculoskeletal
neoplasms
A485 08:30
Chairman's introduction
J.C. Vilanova; Girona/ES (kvilanova@comg.cat)
In the past few years there has been an important progress in the different imag
ing modalities. It is vital for radiologists involved on skeletal tumours to be familiar
and understand the new advanced techniques in order to improve the work-up for
patients with musculoskeletal neoplasms. Different functional MRI sequences are
evolving and are used on different decision-making. The emergence of PET/CT has
revolutionised the staging of a wide range of solid tumours but the role of PET/CT
in musculoskeletal tumours is not well understood. Ultrasound has demonstrated
the increasing role to manage skeletal tumours, especially using contrast-enhanced
technique. This session will review and update the current application of the
advanced image techniques, combined with the conventional ones, to manage
musculoskeletal neoplasms in the diagnosis, staging and increasingly in the treat
ment of selected bone tumours. It is hoped that the session will encourage a better
understanding of this important role in the care of patients with skeletal neoplasms.
Session Objectives:
1. To learn about advanced imaging applied to skeletal tumours.
2. To learn about the role of different imaging techniques in managing musculo
skeletal neoplasms.
3. To be familiar with the application and benefits of each modality.
A486 08:35
Advanced MR techniques
J.L. Bloem; Leiden/NL (j.l.bloem@lumc.nl)
The MR parameters needed to emphasize various functional parameters such
as diffusion and dynamic Gd-enhanced MR will be discussed. The current and
potential impact of these techniques are compared to novel ways to analyse tumor
biology. The specific parameters of tumor biology such as angiogenesis, apoptosis,
etc. can be visualized with several imaging techniques, of these MR is the most
universal one today. The relationship with other preclinical imaging techniques is
illustrated. Conclusion. MR imaging has not yet reached a plateau phase. MR offers
new inroads in visualizing tumor biology. Technical developments are not only in
the field of data acquisition, but also in post-processing
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn how to perform an advanced clinical MR protocol.
2. To explore the potential of new MR techniques.
3. To learn if the impact of MR in tumour imaging has reached a plateau.
A487 08:58 
PET/CT and scintigraphy
J.R. Garcia; Barcelona/ES (jrgarcia@cetir.es)
Bone and soft-tissue sarcomas represent a group of malignancies with highly
variable history. Although the extent of the disease may be delineated in ana
tomical images, Nuclear Medicine techniques offer unique information regarding
tumour biology. Multimodality imaging, integrating helicoidal CT to SPECT or PET,
combines the advantages of both techniques: high-resolution (morphology) and
high sensitivity (metabolism). There is a wide range of tracers that can be used to
study biological characteristics of sarcomas. Bone scintigraphy is very sensitive
for the detection of primary bone tumours and bone metastases. Blood-flow and
blood-pool phases of three-phase bone scan improve the detection of soft tissue
involvement.A high 201Tl (thalium) uptake is frequently seen in malignant tumours
but quantitative assessment (lesion to normal tissue ratio) has not been helpful in
differentiating sarcomas from benign lesions. Multidrug resistance (MDR), which
is due to the overexpression of P-glycoprotein, is a major problem in neoadjuvant
chemotherapy. Wash-out rate (WR%) of 99mTc-MIBI (methoxyisobutylisonitrile)
is correlated with MDR-expression. 18 F-FDG-PET (18 F-fluorodeoxyglucose)
is helpful in tumour grading but cannot discriminate between low-grade tumours
and benign lesions. 18 F-FDG accurately detects primary tumours, lymph node
and bone metastases. Changes in 18 F-FDG uptake correlate significantly with
histopathologic response. Standard Uptake Value (SUVmax) is an independent
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S117
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Monday
A492 09:00
B. Imaging techniques and typical findings
C.J. Zech; Munich/DE (Christoph.Zech@med.unimuenchen.de)
The spectrum of differential diagnoses is broad in the liver. Therefore, incidentally
discovered liver lesions represent a challenging clinical situation. Fortunately, there
are specific imaging features for the most common benign and malignant liver
lesions (like, e.g. haemangioma, FNH, cysts, vascular pseudolesions, HCC, metas
tases) so that a minimal-invasive diagnosis with a biopsy in not needed in a lot of
cases. In ultrasound the echogenity and recently also the contrast agent behaviour
is used for liver lesion characterisation. In CT attenuation and also contrast agent
behaviour are used for characterisation. MR imaging offers several options including
T1- and T2 weighted images, use of chemical shift imaging, GRE sequences with
long echoes and diffusion weighted images, so that tissue components like fat,
water, glycogen, iron, etc. can be evaluated already in the pre-contrast examination.
Beside the evaluation of dynamic signal characteristics in the early dynamic phase
after contrast agent application, MR can utilise also tissue-specific contrast agents
dedicated to the RES or to the haepatocytes. Other modalities like angiography,
PET or other nuclear medicine methods usually only play a minor role nowadays in
the evaluation of incidental liver lesions in non-oncological patients. In oncological
patients the clinical consequences and also the range of diagnoses and pre-test
probabilities are different from those of the non-oncological group; therefore, the
demands to imaging are even higher. In case of atypical presentation of otherwise
benign liver lesions like sclerosed haemangioma close followup or even biopsy
can be necessary in such a setting.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the available imaging modalities for the evaluation of patients
with incidentally detected focal liver lesions.
2. To become familiar with the technical imaging considerations and the proper
diagnostic algorithm.
3. To know more about the typical imaging findings.
A493 09:30
C. Interactive case discussion
G. Brancatelli; Palermo/IT (gbranca@yahoo.com)
Incidental lesions are frequently discovered during routine radiographic evaluations.
Correlation with clinical history and additional confirmatory imaging is essential to
the development of an accurate, focused differential diagnosis and for appropriate
management. The objective of this presentation is to describe the imaging findings
associated with incidentally found liver lesions and to review those clinical and
radiological features, which should be considered in development of an ordered
and accurate differential diagnosis.
Learning Objectives:
1. To review typical cases illustrating the role of imaging modalities in the dif
ferential diagnosis of unexpected liver lesion cases.
2. To get involved in the diagnostic process by the use of electronic voting pads.
3. To understand the conclusion that may be drawn on the basis of the discussed
cases.
08:30 - 10:00 Room D1
Emergencies in Neuroradiology
CC 1619
Acute onset of cranial nerve dysfunctions
Moderator:
M.A. Papathanasiou; Athens/GR
A494 08:30
A. Acute loss of vision
S. Pedraza; Girona/ES (sapedraza@gmail.com)
Acute vision loss is a symptom of great concern. There are multiple causes of acute
blindness and Diagnostic radiology is essential to determine the cause. The aetiol
ogy of acute blindness could be located at different anatomic areas such as ocular
globe, optic nerve, the suprasellar/optic chiasm region and optic tracts, geniculate
bodies, and visual cortex. Differential diagnosis of cortical blindess are cerebrov
ascular disease, surgery (paricularly cardiac surgery) and cerebral angiography.
CT and MRI iImaging protocol will be presented with discussion of tips and tricks.
enhancing images in MRI or lesions masked by a severe background enhancement.
The radiologist should be fully aware of BIRADS terminology and should be able
to propose the correct indications for biopsy, as well as the preferred guidance.
Learning Objectives:
1. To know the respective role of each imaging technique in the diagnosis of
breast cancer.
2. To learn common pitfalls in the diagnosis of breast cancer.
A490 09:15
B. Followup
G. Forrai; Budapest/HU (forrai.gabor@tonline.hu)
The role of radiologist is to provide detailed preoperative assessment and post-
therapy followup including detection and differential diagnosis of recurrence and
post-therapy sequelae. Diagnostic tools are combination of clinical examination,
mammography, sonography, MRI, PET/CT and guided biopsy.Additional diagnostic
help is obtained by comparison with prior films. The quality of the postoperative
imaging depends also on preoperative assessment. All the congenital and benign
conditions must be known before surgery in order to avoid postoperative interpre
tation problems. Pathology results and preoperative films as well as prior surgical
and/or needle biopsy results must be present. Post-therapy conditions are some
times challenging because post-therapy changes may mimic recurrent disease.
Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease; therefore, the spectrum of morphology
and progression dynamics may be very different. Followup is chosen when the
post-therapy changes are stable or show typical benign morphology features.
Progressing or indeterminate lesions have to be biopsied if all imaging modalities
fail to provide an equivocal diagnosis. Monitoring neoadjuvant chemotherapy by
prediction of response is a new step towards individualised therapy of breast cancer.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the common features of recurrent breast cancer.
2. To learn how to establish imaging followup protocols for breast cancer.
08:30 - 10:00 Room C
CLICK (Clinical Lessons for Imaging Core Knowledge): Common
Clinical Cases
CC 1618
Surprise in the liver
Moderator:
M. Lewin; Villejuif/FR
A491 08:30
A. Clinical considerations
E. Szabo, A. Palko; Szeged/HU
Focal liver lesions are part of our everyday practice since radiologists performing
various types of examinations may encounter them without being aware of any
clinical condition raising the suspicion of these changes. In a situation like this
several important decisions are to be made by the radiologists, based on several
issues: is the lesion clinically significant? Is the lesion benign or malignant? Are
additional imaging examinations necessary? Does it require medical, surgical or
interventional radiological action? Should it be, and if yes, how frequently followed
up, etc. For providing a well-established answer to these questions the reporting
radiologist has to be familiar with medical history and results of former examinations
(physical, laboratory, imaging, etc,); consider the age, gender, physical condition,
eating and drinking habits, and potential drug abuse by the patient, bearing in mind
the prevalence and statistical probabilities of different pathologic conditions. With
all this information at hand the thorough analysis of images obtained by different
modalities will allow a rather reliable differential diagnosis and a well-established
planning of therapy of the incidentally detected lesions.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn more about the clinical conditions that may result in the appearance
of focal liver lesions.
2. To be informed about the clinician's way of thinking in the process of differential
diagnosis.
3. To become familiar with the potential role of imaging in the establishment of
the final diagnosis and planning of therapy.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S118 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
08:30 - 10:00 Room D2
Urogenital Imaging
CC 1621
Prostate and urinary bladder
Moderator:
N. Papanicolaou; Philadelphia, PA/US
A497 08:30
A. State-of-the-art imaging of prostate cancer: which technique
should I use?
A.R. Padhani; Northwood/UK (anwar.padhani@stricklandscanner.org.uk)
Multiparametric MRI is of proven value in the assessment of prostate cancer at
presentation and for relapsed disease. Key elements for evaluation are morpho
logical T2W sequences, diffusion-weight MRI, dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI
and proton MR spectroscopic imaging. In order to use these techniques, it is
necessary to understand the biological basis for observations and to understand
how methods of data acquisition and analysis affect the results obtained. Evidence
regarding histological and clinical validation of each technique also needs to be
known. Artefacts and limitations of each technique will be presented. Indications
for their use will be introduced.
Learning Objectives:
1. To appreciate current limitations of MRI for prostate cancer patients.
2. To understand that limitations can be addressed by advanced MRI techniques
(diffusion-weighted MRI (DW-MRI), MR spectroscopic imaging (1H-MRSI) and
dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI (DCE-MRI)).
3. To learn about the use of scoring schemes for imaging analysis and structured
reporting of scans.
4. To become familiar with indications for advanced MRI.
A498 09:00
B. Prostate cancer: how to be successful for clinicians
J.O. Barentsz; Nijmegen/NL (J.Barentsz@rad.umcn.nl)
Multifunctional MRI techniques are increasingly being used to address bottlenecks
in prostate cancer patient management. These techniques yield qualitative, semi-
quantitative and fully quantitative biomarkers that reflect on the underlying biological
status of a tumour. These techniques have the potential to provide unique informa
tion which can be used for tumour detection in the treated and untreated gland, for
predicting future tumour behavior and for monitoring and predicting the likelihood
of response to treatment. It is now widely recognised that the multi-parametric MRI
approach for evaluating the prostate goes beyond what can be achieved using any
single functional MRI technique. If these techniques are to have a role in patient
management, effective communication of results by the use of scoring systems,
structured reporting and a graphical interface that matches prostate anatomy are
key elements. Practical guidelines for integrating multiparametric MRI into clinical
practice including new indications, via case examples are presented.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn how and when state-of-the-art multimodality MRI (including T2-w,
DWI, DCE and MRSI) should be performed.
2. To understand what indications are most important to urologists, radiation
oncologists and patients.
3. To be able to recognise where multi-modality MRI is likely to be most helpful
in this respect.
A499 09:30
C. Bladder cancer: state-of-the-art aiming and staging
G. HeinzPeer; Vienna/AT (gertraud.heinz@meduniwien.ac.at)
Tumours of the urothelium (transitional cell carcinomas) are by far the most common
bladder malignancies, comprising approximately 95% of all such lesions. Squamous
cell carcinomas or mixed transitional and squamous cell tumours, adenocarcinomas
and undifferentiated lesions represent approximately 4% of malignant bladder le
sions. Patients with bladder cancer usually present with painless haematuria, either
gross or microscopic.Asense of false security may arise by the spontaneous disap
pearance of bleeding. Locally advanced tumours present with pelvic or abdominal
pain due to ureteric obstruction, pelvic side wall muscle invasion, or invasion of
adjacent organs. When a clinical diagnosis of bladder cancer is suspected initial
investigation includes lower urinary tract endoscopy. Flexible cystourethroscopy
allows assessment of the entire urethra and the entire urinary bladder. Usually
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with lesions, involving the optic nerve which can cause
sudden loss of vision.
2. To understand how lesions in the suprasellar/optic chiasm region can cause
loss of vision.
3. To become familiar with lesions involving the optic tracts, geniculate bodies,
and visual cortex.
A495 09:00
B. Hearing loss
C. Colosimo; Rome/IT (colosimo@rm.unicatt.it)
Diagnostic imaging plays a crucial role in evaluating patients with sudden onset of
hearing loss (HL). CT and MRI are the basic imaging tools, but the choice of the
imaging strategy is largely based upon a preliminary clinical evaluation that must
differentiate between conductive hearing loss (CHL) and sensoryneural hearing
loss (SNHL): in acute CHL CT is by far the preferred diagnostic tool, while MRI
represents the 1 choice approach in SNHL. High-quality CT/MRI technique is
mandatory in investigating patients with acute HL; basically multidetector CT units
and high field MRI warrant detection of even subtle/tiny changes in the middle ear,
labyrinth, internal acoustic canal and brain. In CHL multiplanar HR CT is generally
able to detect findings consistent with acute bacterial otitis and post-traumatic
changes commonly responsible for the sudden onset of CHL. In SNHL MRI, by
combining unenhanced T1, T2 and post-contrast T1 WI sequences, provides an
excellent sensitivity in recognition of the intralabyrinthine fluid changes, small
intracanalicular mass, brainstem/brain alterations. Thus MRI is able to detect
acute haemorrhagic labyrinthitis and other inflammatory/infective involvement of
the labyrinth (on the basis of the labyrinthine fluid signal changes and/or abnormal
contrast-enhancement), to demonstrate tiny intracanalicular and intralabyrinthine
schwannomas as well the other by far less common primary and metastatic tumours
and to show directly and characterise small/subtle intraparenchymal brain changes
in critical location with respect to auditory pathways. Only in few selected cases is
CT required to confirm/ complete the evaluation of the bone labyrinth.
Learning Objectives:
1. To appreciate the imaging strategies and findings for patients with sudden
onset of hearing loss.
2. To understand the choice of imaging technique: for CT scanning versus MRI.
3. To become familiar with causes of hearing loss involving the middle ear,
labyrinth, internal auditory meatus, brainstem and brain.
A496 09:30
C. Facial nerve paralysis and trigeminal neuralgia
A. Borges; Lisbon/PT (borgalexandra@gmail.com)
Facial and trigeminal nerve palsies have a devastating clinical impact. Causes
for palsy are several fold including trauma, stroke, inflammation, neoplasm and
neurovascular conflicts. Detailed neurological examination is mandatory as it may
help tailoring imaging studies to specific segments of these long cranial nerves,
from their brainstem nuclei to their peripheral branches. Appropriate imaging re
quires a thorough understanding of the anatomy and physiology of these cranial
nerves. Whereas the brainstem nuclei and intracranial segments are best imaged
by MRI, CT still plays a role in the depiction of the long and tortuous intratemporal
segments of the facial nerve. Bell's palsy is by far the most common cause of acute
FNP. The role of imaging relies mainly on the exclusion of other potential causes
requiring therapeutic intervention and providing prognostic information. The most
common acute symptom related to the trigeminal nerve is trigeminal neuralgia
with neurovascular conflicts being increasingly recognised as its main cause with
the increasing use of high-resolution MRI, including angiographic sequences.
Cranial nerve palsies may be the first presentation of a malignancy either due
to direct nerve compression or through perineural spread. Facial nerve palsy is
seldom the first presentation of a parotid malignancy and may even antedate the
depiction of a parotid mass. Strategically located strokes, vascular malformations
and multiple sclerosis are among the most common causes of central palsies by
affecting cranial nerves' nuclei. High-resolution imaging tailored to the different
segments of these nerves has undoubtedly increased the diagnostic yield and
improved patients' management.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the anatomy of the facial and trigeminal nerves.
2. To understand the imaging strategies in patients with trigeminal neuralgia.
3. To consolidate knowledge of the difference between central and peripheral
facial nerve paralysis, and how this affects imaging strategies.
4. To become familiar with the choice of imaging technique.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S119
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Monday
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the changing role of conventional imaging techniques.
2. To learn about the current indications for ultrasound and intravenous urography
in imaging patients with haematuria.
3. To learn about the technique and imaging features of causes of haematuria
on ultrasound and intravenous urography.
4. To appreciate the current complementary role of these techniques in relation
to CT urography.
A502 08:58
CT urography
M.N. Ozmen; Ankara/TR (mozmen@hacettepe.edu.tr)
Computed tomography urography (CTU) is defined as diagnostic examination
optimised for imaging the kidneys, ureters and bladder with thin-slice multidetec
tor CT imaging, intravenous administration of a contrast medium and imaging in
the excretory phase which is a mandatory part of any CTU protocol. A typical CT
urographic protocol has three phases that allow complete evaluation for the most
common urological causes of haematuria. After an initial unenhanced phase,
nephrographic phase images are acquired with the highest sensitivity in the
detection of renal masses. Pyelographic phase images are acquired to evaluate
the urothelium. Besides investigation of haematuria, other indications of CTU are
evaluation of patients at increased risk for having upper or lower tract urothelial
neoplasms, urinary diversion procedures following cystectomy, hydronephrosis,
planning of percutaneous nephrolithotomy, traumatic and iatrogenic ureteral injury
and complex urinary tract infections. CTU can be justified as a first line test for the
upper and lower urinary tract in haematuria patients with a high pre-test probability
for TCC. For lower risk groups, CTU can be used as a problem solving test if tradi
tional work-up remains negative and symptoms persist. Radiation dose has been
one of the most important driving factors in optimisation of CTU techniques and in
selecting justified indications. Radiation doses in CT urography can be reduced by
limiting the number of imaging phases through the use of dual energy CT or split-
bolus technique. In general, CTU should be tailored towards the clinical question
based on clinical information in order to achieve the lowest possible radiation dose.
Learning Objectives:
1. To discuss the current role of CT urography in evaluation of patients with
haematuria.
2. To become familiar with the main techniques of CT urography and its limitations
and strengths.
3. To learn about the key imaging features of the urothelial disease.
A503 09:21
MR urography
T. ElDiasty; Mansoura/EG (teldiasty@hotmail.com)
Magnetic resonance urography (MRU) is the only study, alternative to MDCTU,
which can thoroughly image all the anatomical components of the urinary tract,
including renal parenchyma, pelvicaliceal systems, ureters and the bladder in a
single test. MRU, using either heavily T2-weighted pulse sequences or gadolinium-
enhanced T1-weighted sequences, has shown potential to detect, localise and
characterise collecting system abnormalities in the patient with haematuria. There
are developing MR nephrourography (MRNU) techniques to obtain structural
and functional renal data simultaneously. Because neither iodinated intravenous
contrast nor ionising radiation is used, it is safe in patients with contraindication
to iodinated contrast media, in young patients, and without contrast in the preg
nant patient. The main disadvantages of MR urography, which have hindered its
widespread usage in the evaluation of the patients with haematuria are its limited
ability to reliably detect urinary tract calcifications and air and limited availability in
comparison with MDCTU. Another disadvantage of MRU is that spatial resolution
of MRU does not approach MDCTU or IVU, and therefore, subtle ureteric or col
lecting system abnormalities could potentially be missed. High spatial resolution
imaging is currently used for 3D-volume rendering and for better depiction of renal
collecting system and ureters.
Learning Objectives:
1. To appreciate the role of MR urography as an alternative, complementary, or
primary imaging study for patients with haematuria.
2. To understand the clinical value of different MR techniques used to image
patients with haematuria.
3. To become familiar with the imaging features of different causes of haematuria
on MR urography.
Panel discussion:
Which modality in which patient with haematuria? 09:44
after endoscopic visualisation of a bladder tumour, the histopathological diagnosis
and initial treatment of the tumour are achieved by TUR (transurethral resection).
Limitations of conventional cystoscopy include diminished visualisation of the
bladder neck and within diverticula and technical difficulties in patients with urinary
diversion. Cystoscopy is contraindicated in patients with bacteriuria, acute cystitis,
urethritis, prostatitis, obstructive prostatic hypertrophy, and stricture or rupture of
the urethra. In rare cases complications like iatrogenic injury to the urethra and
bladder as well as urinary sepsis may occur due to cystoscopy. Imaging studies
are required both in patients with negative cystoscopic findings and in patients with
proven bladder cancer. In this talk the strengths and limitations of various imaging
techniques in evaluation of bladder cancer will be given.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the clinical presentation and management of bladder cancer.
2. To understand the clinical goals of imaging in bladder cancer.
3. To be able to assess the strengths and limitations of various imaging techniques
in staging of bladder cancer.
08:30 - 10:00 Room E1
Special Focus Session
SF 16b
How should we image the patient with haematuria?
A500 08:30
Chairman's introduction
A.T. Turgut; Ankara/TR (ahmettuncayturgut@yahoo.com)
Haematuria, ranging from an incidental finding to a significant symptom neces
sitating urgent treatment, is one of the most commonly encountered indications of
disease in clinical practice. It may simply be macroscopic, referring to its visibility
on gross examination, or microscopic. Importantly, haematuria can be a sign of a
number of various benign and malignant underlying diseases of the urinary system,
including renal or ureteral calculus, urothelial neoplasms, trauma, infection and
haemorrhagic cystitis.Among these, assessment for urological malignancy is prob
ably the most important reason for evaluating these patients, which necessitates the
use of diagnostic tools with a high accuracy. In general, the cause of haematuria
can be appropriately diagnosed by physicians on the basis of a detailed patient
history, clinical presentation, cytological findings and serological findings though
invasive diagnostic tools like conventional cystoscopy and ureteroscopy may be
required for a proper diagnosis. Nevetheless, the evaluation of patients with hae
maturia frequently requires complete evaluation of the entire urinary tract by several
imaging modalities, including intravenous urography, retrograde ureterography and
pyelography, ultrasonography, computed tomography or magnetic resonance imag
ing. In this regard, familiarity with the evolving role of the aforementioned imaging
modalities in the diagnostic algorithm for haematuria and knowledge about the
imaging characteristics of various diseases are crucial for radiologists.
Session Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the current status of imaging in the management of
patients with haematuria suspected of having urologic origin.
2. To learn about the evolving role of different imaging modalities in the diagnostic
algorithm for haematuria.
3. To appreciate the significance of a proper imaging strategy in different clinical
situations involving variable degrees of risk for urothelial cancer.
A501 08:35
Ultrasound and intravenous urography: what is the new role?
S. Moussa; Edinburgh/UK (sami.moussa@luht.scot.nhs.uk)
In recent years there has been a major change in the way patients presenting
with haematuria are investigated, particularly in relation to imaging. This has been
mainly influenced by the significant advances in CT and MR technology, and the
introduction of CT Urography which is now considered one of the reliable imaging
modalities. The role of IVU and ultrasound has been relegated to a complementary
role, to some extent problem solving rather than their past essential role. The role
of IVU in imaging patients with haematuria is therefore limited to very specific
circumstances as follows: a) lack of access to CT or MR, b) stone localisation in
some cases to demonstrate the calyceal anatomy and c) chronic pyelonephritis.
Ultrasound imaging remains, however, the first line investigation for patients with
microscopic haematuria and a useful adjunct to CT in the investigation of frank
haematuria: a) characterisation of renal lesions, b) followup of known lesions and
c) followup of renal trauma.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S120 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
diarrhoea, vomiting, constipation and abdominal pain. The differential diagnosis
includes acute complications of treatment, complications or progression of the
primary tumour, metastatic spread of tumour and problems related to co-morbid
conditions. In this presentation I will illustrate these principles in two situations, one
generic and acute and one more specific with subacute and chronic problems; the
neutropaenic patient after chemotherapy or bone marrow transplantation; following
radical chemoradiotherapy for cervical cancer.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be familiar with the range of complications that may arise following chemo
therapy/radiotherapy.
2. To understand how these changes can simulate active disease.
3. To learn how to distinguish between these changes and active disease.
A507 09:21
C. Complications of treatment in the CNS
P. Demaerel; Leuven/BE (philippe.demaerel@uz.kuleuven.ac.be)
Radiotherapy and chemotherapy are the common central nervous system can
cer treatments. Other possible treatments, including recombinant humanised
monoclonal antibodies and autologous dendritic cell-based immunotherapy have
been used. Complications can occur soon after initiating a treatment, but delayed
complications several months or years after treatment are increasingly being rec
ognised. One of the difficulties concerns the differentiation between progressive
disease/tumour recurrence and treatment-related changes, e.g. radionecrosis or
inflammatory/immune-mediated changes. The term "pseudoprogression" is often
used for the latter. The Response Assessment in Neuro-Oncology working group
has recently updated the response criteria. Advanced MR imaging techniques are
being used in an attempt to find imaging biomarkers and to gain more insight into
this difficult differential diagnosis. Diffusion and perfusion imaging and MR spec
troscopy have shown promising results. Elevation of choline and depression of
N-acetyl aspartate is usually associated with the presence of tumour. Post-therapy
necrosis is often characterised by the presence of lipid/lactate and the absence of
other metabolites. Measurements of the apparent diffusion coefficient on diffusion
imaging and cerebral blood volume on perfusion imaging have been investigated
as potential biomarker too. Cancer treatments may also affect the central nervous
system and cause neurotoxicity by direct injury to the glial cells, vascular injury or
through immune-mediated mechanism. The imaging findings can include entities
such as posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome, progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy and Wernicke encephalopathy.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be aware of the complications of chemotherapy and radiotherapy on the
CNS.
2. To be able to recognise the specific imaging features of these complications.
3. To understand the optimal use of imaging techniques for evaluating these
complications.
Panel discussion:
How can the radiologist make sure not to miss complications of
cancer treatment? 09:44
08:30 - 10:00 Room F1
Abdominal Viscera
RC 1601
The cystic lesions of the pancreas
Moderator:
D.J. Breen; Southampton/UK
A508 08:30
A. How can we differentiate cystic neoplasms from pseudocysts?
H.J. Brambs; Ulm/DE
Cystic lesions of the pancreas are increasingly being detected due to the wide
use of CT and MRI. They encompass a broad spectrum of benign, premalignant,
and malignant tumors. The primary challenge is to differentiate pseudocysts from
cystic neoplasms, particularly intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms, mucinous
and serous cystic neoplasms, and solid pseudopapillary neoplasms. Pseudocysts
develop as a consequence of acute pancreatitis. The imaging appearance may
evolve over a period of several weeks from an irregularly marginated formation to
a well circumscribed lesion with a thickened smooth wall. Necrotic material is com
monly present in early phases of the development. Most frequently pseudocysts are
unilocular without internal septa and without solid contrast-enhancing components.
08:30 - 10:00 Room E2
Oncologic Imaging
RC 1616
Imaging the complications of cancer treatment
A504 08:30
Chairman's introduction
P. Brader; Vienna/AT (peter@brader.md)
Patients being treated for malignancy are vulnerable to a unique set of complica
tions that are often urgent and are first identified or clarified on radiologic imaging
studies. As advances in cancer therapy have resulted in an improved prognosis for
the patient, an awareness of the consequences of treatment becomes increasingly
important. All cancer treatment modalities are associated with a spectrum of toxic
effects that may involve all organ systems. This session will discuss and illustrate
the complications of a range of cancer treatments and their effects on the lung,
abdomen, pelvis and CNS. The panel will discuss common complications that
develop after the completion of cancer treatment and emphasise the importance
of radiologists' awareness of these complications. This will permit more effective
patient surveillance, which may afford patients the opportunity for earlier interven
tion and an improved quality of life.
Session Objectives:
1. To learn what the radiologist should know about complications of cancer treat
ments.
2. To understand the role of imaging in identifying some of these complications.
3. To be familiar with the diverse spectrum of these complications and their
radiological features.
A505 08:35
A. Pulmonary complications of the treatment of malignancy
S. Diederich; Dusseldorf/DE (s.diederich@marienhospital.de)
In patients undergoing therapy for malignant disease with new pulmonary ab
normalities, differentiation between pulmonary manifestations of malignancy, i.e.
progressive disease and non-neoplastic changes associated with the therapy
may be challenging. The consequences, however, are usually very important
as therapy-associated abnormalities may be treated with discontinuation of the
therapy whereas progressive malignancy often requires more intense therapy.
The knowledge of typical imaging findings of therapy-induced changes as well as
strategies to further clarify this dilemma are, therefore, of utmost importance. This
presentation will demonstrate the chest radiographic and CT-findings of common
therapy-associated pulmonary abnormalities including opportunistic infection with
uncommon organisms due to immunosuppression, radiation pneumonitis, pul
monary toxicity due the chemotherapy, graft versus host disease in bone marrow
transplant recipients, rejection in pulmonary transplantation and vascular disorders.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be familiar with pulmonary complications that may arise in patients being
treated for malignancy.
2. To be aware of the possible infectious aetiologies.
3. To learn the appearances of typical and atypical infections, including fungal
infection.
A506 08:58
B. Imaging the effects of cancer treatment in the abdomen and pelvis
J.A. Spencer; Leeds/UK (johnaspencer50
@hotmail.com)
The effects of cancer treatment can be desired, i.e. a treatment response or un
desired, i.e. complications which may harm or even kill the patient. Complications
are classified as acute, defined as those encountered up to 3 months; sub-acute,
between 3 and 12 months; and delayed or late complications after 12 months.
However, there is variation in susceptibility among individuals and there may be
overlap of the acute, sub-acute and early delayed effects in the first few weeks
to months following treatment. Radiological manifestations are often non-specific
and thus the clinical context and temporal relationship to induction of therapy are
important considerations. Good communication between the radiologist and the
oncologist is vital for the early recognition and accurate diagnosis of complications
related to treatment. The role of the radiologist is to help clinical colleagues to make
a distinction between the effects of the cancer and the effects of its treatment so that
ineffective or toxic therapies can be discontinued. Cancer patients with treatment
complications usually present with common and non-specific symptoms such as
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S121
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Monday
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn how to differentiate between benign and malignant cystic lesions.
2. To know the correct management of unclassified cystic lesions at imaging.
3. To become confident with the reference imaging criteria suggesting treatment.
08:30 - 10:00 Room G/H
Neuro
RC 1611
Spine: update on spinal disorders
Moderator:
M. Sasiadek; Wroclaw/PL
A511 08:30
A. Imaging algorithm for degenerative spinal disease and
spondyloarthropathies in 2012
J. Van Goethem, C. Venstermans, F. De Belder, L. van den Hauwe, P.M. Parizel;
Antwerp/BE (johan.vangoethem@ua.ac.be)
Seronegative spondylarthropathy consists of a spectrum of chronic inflammatory
disorders that lacks the presence of rheumatoid factor and that are clearly distinct
from rheumatoid arthritis. Whereas rheumatoid arthritis involves predominantly
the synovial joints, significant abnormalities in the cartilaginous joints, entheses,
as well as synovial articulations are seen in spondylarthropathic processes. The
age of onset ranges from 20 to 40 years and the overall prevalence is estimated
to be as high as 0.2 to 2 %, ankylosing spondylitis (AS) and psoriatic arthritis (PA)
being the most prevalent. Moreover, both AS and PA may cause severe functional
disability of the affected patients. Ankylosing spondylitis has a predilection for the
axial skeleton, resulting in progressive stiffness, flattening of the lumbar lordosis and
exaggeration of the thoracic kyphosis, together with a limitation in spinal flexion. A
peripheral polyarthritis with predilection for the lower limbs occurs less commonly.
Psoriatic arthritis may involve both the appendicular and the axial skeleton and
is characterised by a chronic course. Other less frequent spondylarthropathies
consist of Reiter's syndrome, Enteropathic arthropathies and SAPHO (Synovitis,
Acne, Pustulosis palmoplantaris, Hyperostosis and Osteitis); spondylarthropathies
have a different appearance than degenerative changes. Not only the pattern of
involvement and the specific imaging findings, but also the age of the patient and
the clinical symptoms allow the differentiation between the two entities.
Learning Objectives:
1. To recognise the imaging features of degenerative spinal disease.
2. To recognise the imaging features of spondyloarthropathies.
3. To differentiate the imaging findings of degenerative spinal disease and spon
dyloarthropathies.
4. To recognise the importance of establishing an imaging algorithm for the
differential diagnosis between degenerative spinal disease and spondyloar
thropathies.
A512 09:00
B. Myelitis, myelopathy and spinal cord tumours
M.M. Thurnher; Vienna/AT (majda.thurnher@meduniwien.ac.at)
Despite its high sensitivity but low specificity magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is
the modality of choice for diagnosis of spinal cord diseases. Spinal cord examination
is one of the more challenging MR examinations from a technical, interpretative,
and differential diagnostic standpoint. It usually shows T2WI hyperintensity, focal or
extensive, gadolinium enhancement and sometimes cord swelling. Demyelinating
diseases, primary and secondary tumours, infections, acute transverse myelitis,
spinal cord infarct, and compression myelopathy are only few possible causes of
signal abnormalities of the cord. Transverse myelitis is the default diagnosis for
an unexplained myelopathy evolving over the course of days to three weeks with
subsequent stabilization or improvement. In practice there are no satisfactory
ways to distinguish among different forms of myelitis and also in some cases from
neoplastic conditions. Astrocytomas and ependymomas are tumors of the spinal
cord, which are pathologically very different tumors and the therapy is likewise also
different. Differentiation between these tumors is crucial for patients management.
This lecture will review typical imaging findings in major categories of spinal cord
diseases on conventional and advanced MR sequences. Possible pitfalls, helpful
clinical information, and recognition patterns will be discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the epidemiology and clinical manifestations of the
most common types of myelitis, myelopathy and spinal cord tumours.
Other less commonly encountered unilocular cysts include IPMNs, mucinous cystic
neoplasms, solid pseudopapillary neoplasms, and the very rare unilocular types of
serous cystic neoplasm. These cystic lesions lack clinical, laboratory, and imaging
evidence of pancreatitis. Mucinous cystic neoplasms predominantly involve the tail
of the pancreas and occur almost exclusively in females in the 4.-5. decade. They
have a thick wall, a smooth contour, and lack a communication to the pancreatic
ductal system. Solid pseudopapillary neoplasms occur predominantly in young
females and have most frequently solid components. Serous cystic neoplasms have
a microcystic sponge-like appearance with a lobular contour and dense septations.
Only, the rare oligocystic type has striking similarities with side branch type IPMN.
Because there is a considerable overlap among the imaging findings of pseudocysts
and neoplastic cystic lesions, history, clinical presentation, age, and gender have
to be regarded. CT and MRI are excellent modalities for the detection of cystic le
sions, but MRI including MRCP is superior in the characterization of these lesions.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn the most common cystic lesions of the pancreas.
2. To know typical imaging findings of pseudocysts and cystic tumours.
3. To become familiar with imaging elements that differentiate cystic lesions.
A509 09:00
B. IPMN: diagnostic and staging criteria
R. Manfredi; Verona/IT (riccardo.manfredi@univr.it)
Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMNs) of the pancreas originate from
the mucinous epithelium of the pancreatic duct system and are characterised by
papillary growth, hyper-production of mucin causing ductal dilatation. The gross
appearance of these tumours depends on the site of origin, along the pancreatic
duct system: we can distinguish IPMNs of the main pancreatic duct (MPD) (both
with segmental or diffuse involvement), IPMNs of the side branches (SB) or IPMNs
of both MPD and SB (mixed type). Histologically, IPMNs are classified into adeno
mas, border-line tumours and carcinomas, depending on the basis of the degree of
cytoarchitectural atypia. Malignancy can occur in 30-88% of IPMNs, as an in situ
or invasive cancer. A stepwise progression from adenoma to carcinoma has been
hypothesised, because of the coexistence of different degrees of dysplasia in the
same tumour. The risk of malignant degeneration correlates with the site of origin
of the tumour. IPMNs typically produce radiographically identifiable ductal dilata
tion secondary to production of large amounts of mucin, which may predominantly
involve the main pancreatic duct, branch ducts or both. Different imaging modalities
including computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance (MR) imaging or MR
cholangiopancreatography, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
(ERCP), transabdominal ultrasonography (US) and endoscopic US have been
used to evaluate IPMNs, and each modality has advantages and disadvantages
that will be illustrated.
Learning Objectives:
1. To know how to display the CT and MR findings of IPMN.
2. To learn the limitations and complementary roles of CT and MR.
3. To become familiar with imaging staging elements that suggest management
of different lesions.
A510 09:30 
C. How to manage incidental findings
C. Triantopoulou; Athens/GR (ctriantopoulou@gmail.com)
Definitive diagnosis and differentiation between benign and malignant cystic pancre
atic lesions is often possible when the lesion has a typical radiological appearance,
but in many cases characterisation with imaging alone is impossible. Microsyctic
adenoma is the only type of cystic neoplasm that can be diagnosed with almost
complete certainty, while diagnosis of mucinous cystic tumours is often hypothetical.
CT and MRI are reasonably and similarly accurate in the characterisation of cystic
pancreatic masses as benign or malignant. Small lesions are more susceptible
to misdiagnosis. Concerning correct management of unclassified cystic lesions at
imaging one should keep in mind that even small morphologically benign-appearing
cysts present moderate frequency of malignancy. Most "authorities" agree that no
imaging modality is sufficiently accurate to differentiate among the multiple benign,
premalignant and malignant cystic lesions that are visualised by US, CT or MRI. A
dedicated examination protocol is mandatory while the level of diagnostic certainty
depends on experience. In cases of typical findings (microcystic adenomas, IPMN,
cystadenocarcinomas) no further imaging is required. In any case one should use
a method with high sensitivity for the diagnosis (MDCT) and a method with high
specificity for the differential diagnosis (EUS guided FNA). DWI and CEUS show
promising results. Surgical resection has been suggested for cases where the main
pancreatic duct is > 6 mm in diameter, lesion size is > 30 mm, or intramural nodules
are seen, given that the patient is a good candidate with reasonable life expectancy.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S122 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
some interpretation and hence narrow the differential diagnosis. The meaning of
a term may also change over time. It is very important that both radiologists and
the readers of their reports speak the same language and know and understand
the meaning and the full content of each term. This is especially important when
radiological findings in patients with diffuse lung diseases are described and inter
preted. Diagnosis of diffuse lung disease is indeed largely based on the recognition
and description of the appearance pattern of the disease because this often allows
developing an appropriate list of differential diagnosis. Members of the Fleischner
Society have introduced a glossary of terms for thoracic imaging. This presenta
tion will emphasise on the importance of such a glossary for both describing and
interpreting chest images.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the importance of a glossary of terms for thoracic imaging.
2. To become familiar with the new definitions introduced in the last glossary of
terms proposed by members of the Fleischner Society.
A516 08:58
B. From pattern recognition to disease diagnosis: a practical
approach (part 1)
A. Devaraj; London/UK
Ground-glass opacification and mosaic attenuation are two signs that are frequently
observed on HRCT. While the identification of these signs is usually not challeng
ing, their interpretation can be more difficult. This is because in isolation there is
a wide differential diagnosis for these abnormalities. For example, conditions as
disparate as hypersensitivity pneumonitis, connective tissue disease related lung
disease and pulmonary oedema may all give rise to these signs on HRCT. How
ever, by searching for additional information such as the distribution of disease
and the presence of ancillary features, and by integrating with clinical information,
the differential diagnosis may be refined. This presentation will review the causes
of mosaic attenuation and ground-glass opacification on HRCT and will provide
a practical approach on how to deal with these signs and formulate a diagnosis.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the different patterns on HRCT scans of the chest.
2. To learn about a systematic approach to differential diagnosis of diffuse lung
diseases.
3. To review key imaging findings.
A517 09:21
C. From pattern recognition to disease diagnosis: a practical
approach (part 2)
N. Howarth; CheneBougeries/CH (nigel.howarth@grangettes.ch)
HRCT imaging has an established role in the management of patients with diffuse
lung disease and is recommended for all patients at initial diagnosis and during
followup. HRCT provides information essential for diagnosis and prognosis, for
choice of management and monitoring of treatment and for the detection of com
plications. Radiologists should benefit from an understanding of important aspects
of gross lung anatomy. Knowledge of the pattern and distribution of disease proc
esses improves the quality of the radiology report and our contribution to patient
management. Basic HRCT patterns (reticulation, nodules, ground-glass opacities
and/or cysts) are common to many disease processes and usually non-specific.
However, their distribution and temporal evolution can be characteristic enough for
diagnostic purposes. The principles and good practices of HRCT pattern recogni
tion will be explained. Specific examples will be discussed to demonstrate how
the combined information of high-resolution images of the lung parenchyma with
clinical, functional and biological information improves disease diagnosis, can guide
surgical biopsy and monitor treatment response. Advances in the understanding of
the pathophysiology of diffuse lung disease result in new training requirements for
radiologists who should promote close collaboration with chest medicine special
ists and pathologists.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the different patterns on HRCT scans of the chest.
2. To learn about a systematic approach to differential diagnosis of diffuse lung
diseases.
3. To review key imaging findings.
Panel discussion:
How do we report CT of diffuse lung disease? 09:44
2. To learn the imaging patterns of and to differentiate between myelitis, my
elopathy and spinal cord tumours.
3. To consolidate knowledge of the best neuroimaging protocols for evaluating
patients with suspected myelitis, myelopathy and spinal cord tumours.
4. To be aware of the importance of advanced neuroimaging techniques for the
evaluation of spinal cord diseases.
A513 09:30
C. Percutaneous treatment of spinal diseases
M. Muto; Naples/IT (mutomar2
@gmail.com)
Spinal diseases include a wide range of pathologies causing spine pain. The
pathogenesis of spinal pain is multifactorial due to disk diseases, vertebrogenic
diseases articular diseases; clinical approach represents the basis for the correct
therapy. The ganglium is the station of control of the pain receiving fibers by mul
tiple structures. Each kind of these pathologies can be treated by mini-invasive
percutaneous technique. Those include disk treatment at cervical or lumbar level
by many different techniques such as nucleoplasty, percutaneous ablation, O2-O3
infiltration, discogel or percutaneous decompression; vertebral augmentation is also
useful to treat vertebral compression fracture due to osteoporosis, metastasis or
vertebral haemangioma to stabilise the metamer with antalgic effect and different
techniques such as vertebroplasty, kyphoplasty and vertebral body stenting; facet
joint syndrome can be treated with radio-frequency and direct steroid infiltration
plus O2-O3; back pain due to spinal stenosis and black disk syndrome can be
treated by the positioning of intraspinous device. Kyphoplasty can also be used
in selected traumatic fractures avoiding bed rest and orthesis devices. The key
point of the success of those treatments is the correct patient's selection with ap
propriate inclusion-exclusion criteria based on clinical evaluation and diagnostic
imaging. It is important to perform all those techniques with high-quality angio-suite
to avoid complications.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the most important percutaneous treatment options
for spinal diseases.
2. To learn of the common techniques of percutaneous disk treatments.
3. To learn of the common techniques of percutaneous pain relief treatments.
4. To learn of the common techniques of percutaneous spinal bone treatments.
08:30 - 10:00 Room I/K
Chest
RC 1604
Patterns in chest radiology: diffuse lung diseases -
what the radiologist should know
A514 08:30
Chairman's introduction
D.M. Hansell; London/UK (davidhansell@rbht.nhs.uk)
Readily understood and clearly defined descriptors are a prerequisite for the
characterisation of diffuse lung disease. Over the years terms have fallen in and
out of favour but there has been a gradual refinement, and arguably improvement,
in the definitions employed so that phrases such as "inflammatory shadowing" are
less widely used and more reproducible terms have increasingly been adopted.
The Fleischner Society's glossary of terms for thoracic imaging (2008) contains
definitions of the common descriptors (relatively few) that are used for diffuse
lung diseases. In this session the modified and newer definitions included in the
Fleischner glossary will be discussed. Thereafter, some key terms including ground
glass opacity, mosaic attenuation, nodular and reticular patterns will be explored
in detail. Particular attention will be paid to the correct identification of these pat
terns and their subgroups/variants. The way in which a differential diagnosis is
synthesised, centred on these basic patterns, will then be explored.
A515 08:35
A. The glossary of terms for thoracic imaging: old and new definitions
J.A. Verschakelen; Leuven/BE (johny.verschakelen@uz.kuleuven.ac.be)
Most radiological reports consist of a descriptive part` in which the radiologist
describes the findings and a short conclusion part` containing the interpretation
of what is seen. Both parts are filled with jargon`. Some terms are typical radio
logical language` while others refer to terminology also used by clinicians and
pathologists. Some terms are purely descriptive but others may contain already
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S123
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Monday
A520 08:55
To understand new challenges, such as imaging in asymptomatic
individuals
K. Ahlstrom Riklund; Umea/SE (katrine.riklund.ahlstrom@diagrad.umu.se)
Imaging takes a more advanced role in patient care and makes personalised
medicine possible for some diagnosis. Modern technologies such as SPECT, CT,
MR and hybrid imaging with SPECT or PET/CT and PET/MR give new opportuni
ties to find and follow diseases at earlier stages. This results in the possibility to
find some diseases even before symptoms. Even a low possibility to find diseases
creates a need from the population, and wild screening" is an increasing issue
in the western world. Cardiac imaging, search for oncologic diseases, i.e. lung
cancer or colonic cancer are probably the most common indications" for imaging
of asymptomatic individuals. Imaging of asymptomatic individuals with ionising
radiation is a new challenge and still scientific results are sparse. Risk factors
increase the benefits of imaging. Besides finding treatable diseases also benign
diseases will be found and might introduce complementary imaging and treatment.
Radiation protection issues might be even more important in this new challenge
and the radiation risk component has to be taken into consideration. All use of
imaging with ionising radiation has to be justified also in asymptomatic individuals.
Guidance to referring doctors is needed and one of the challenges is to address
the balance on the risk and benefits. Another issue where guidance is needed, is
information to the individuals and which consideration should be taken. Guidance
would best come from the professionals, and in these guidelines there should also
be a consideration of radiation protection and risk assessment. The talk will review
work of ICRP in this area.
Learning Objectives:
1. To get an insight into imaging in diagnostic and screening purposes.
2. To review work of imaging in asymptomatic individuals.
3. To learn about the approaches of the ICRP to new challenge, imaging in
asymptomatic individuals.
A521 09:15
Hybrid systems and growing challenge posed by CT
M.M. Rehani; Vienna/AT (m.rehani@iaea.org)
Hybrid imaging systems combine x rays with other form of imaging like nuclear
imaging or MRI. The most often used systems are PET/CT; SPECT/CT and more
recently MRI/CT. PET and SPECT contributes to radiation dose to patient in addition
to dose from CT. Typical radiation dose to an adult patient from PET scan depends
on the activity of the injected FDG (18F-Fluoro deoxyglucose) and is typically 8 mSv
for adult using 400 MBq and is the same whether a part of the body or the whole
body is imaged. Nearly similar situation and dose are for SPECT. The CT dose
varies widely (5 to 20 mSv) depending upon area scanned and whether the scan
is for localisation or a diagnostic scan. A number of ways have been developed to
reduce radiation dose to the individual patient and to population using principles of
justification and optimisation. The highest contribution in coming years is expected
to be many-fold reduction in CT dose by development of sub-mSv CT. Next is
large scope of reducing inappropriate examinations. At policy level, there is grow
ing emphasis on individual patient dose reduction (without losing the diagnostic
efficacy), whereas in the past the significant emphasis was on population dose. In
many developing countries there is need to increase use of modern imaging and
thus population dose will justifiably increase and that is not bad thing. The talk will
review work of IAEA and ICRP in this area. Significant material and information
are available at http://rpop.iaea.org.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the types of hybrid systems, applications and the exposure
involved.
2. To review work of international organisations on dose management.
3. To learn about ways to keep the medical population exposure stable despite
the growth of CT.
Panel discussion:
Optimisation vs justification: range of 1-10 mSv CT examination vs
more strict selection of indications 09:35
08:30 - 10:00 Room L/M
Professional Challenges Session
PC 16
Upcoming challenges in radiation protection
A518 08:30
Chairmen's introduction
E. Vano1
, P. Vock2
; 1
Madrid/ES, 2
Berne/CH (elivano@terra.es)
Radiological Protection (RP) represents a substantial part of the quality manage
ment system in clinical practice for many medical specialties, especially in those
using ionising radiation for imaging. The most important international and national
organisations have dedicated significant efforts to improve radiation safety in medi
cine in the past years. The International Commission on Radiological Protection
(ICRP) and its Committee 3, focussed on the aspects of RP in medical diagnosis,
therapy, or biomedical research is producing documents on recommendations
to help in the progress of a safer medicine. Imaging in asymptomatic individuals
represents a challenge in RP. Several aspects (individual rights and benefits,
radiation risks, ethical issues, regulations, etc) and several stakeholders need to
be considered and ICRP has recently decided to launch a Task Group to produce
recommendations on this topic. Another challenge to be discussed in the session
is the justification and optimisation of some of the hybrid imaging systems using
radionuclides for single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) or positron
emission tomography (PET) combined with x-ray computed tomography (CT). New
systems combining some of these imaging modalities with magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) need also to be considered when patient radiation doses are one
issue. The combination of the three presentations in this joint session of the ESR
and ICRP should allow a fruitful discussion on the limits of optimisation and the
relative role of optimisation and justification, with a need of a more strict selection
of medical indications when the expected radiation doses could be significant.
Session Objectives:
1. To analyse the need for radiological protection in view of the increase in medi
cal radiation exposure from imaging.
2. To understand new challenges, such as imaging in asymptomatic individuals.
3. To critically justify and optimise hybrid imaging by PET-CT and SPECT-CT.
A519 08:35
Challenges in radiation protection for imaging: work in progress by ICRP
E. Vano; Madrid/ES (elivano@terra.es)
Radiological Protection (RP) represents a substantial part of the quality manage
ment system in clinical practice for many medical specialties, especially in those
using ionising radiation for imaging. The most important international and national
organisations have dedicated significant efforts to improve radiation safety in medi
cine in the past years. The International Commission on Radiological Protection
(ICRP) and its Committee 3, focussed on the aspects of RP in medical diagnosis,
therapy, or biomedical research is producing documents on recommendations
to help in the progress of a safer medicine. Imaging in asymptomatic individuals
represents a challenge in RP. Several aspects (individual rights and benefits,
radiation risks, ethical issues, regulations, etc) and several stakeholders need to
be considered and ICRP has recently decided to launch a Task Group to produce
recommendations on this topic. Another challenge to be discussed in the session
is the justification and optimisation of some of the hybrid imaging systems using
radionuclides for single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) or positron
emission tomography (PET) combined with x-ray computed tomography (CT). New
systems combining some of these imaging modalities with magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) need also to be considered when patient radiation doses are one
issue. The combination of the three presentations in this joint session of the ESR
and ICRP should allow a fruitful discussion on the limits of optimisation and the
relative role of optimisation and justification, with a need of a more strict selection
of medical indications when the expected radiation doses could be significant.
Learning Objectives:
1. To get an insight into ongoing activities of ICRP Committee 3 (Protection in
Medicine).
2. To learn about the approaches of the ICRP to new challenges.
3. To get a preview of upcoming recommendations.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S124 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
to depict the upper airways, the deep spaces of the face, the skull base and/or
the orbit. Enlarged lymph nodes may be a sign of inflammatory disease, but it
may also be the first expression of malignant disease such as nasopharyngeal
cancer, malignant lymphoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, neuroblastoma and should be
interpreted with caution. In case of doubt, revision of findings and/or repeating
the US examination within a short space of time (days) is mandatory. When US is
inconclusive, further imaging with MRI should be advised. In young children MRI
requires general anaesthesia or sedation for optimal results. In this presentation
cases will be shown and difficult decisions will be highlighted. Differential diagnostic
considerations will be discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the most frequent neck space occupying lesions.
2. To understand diagnostic imaging protocols.
3. To become familiar with the main differential diagnosis.
A525 09:21
Imaging of maxillofacial and sinonasal pathology in children
S. Bisdas; Tubingen/DE
Paediatric masses in maxillofacial and sinonasal spaces are not a rare finding and
a challenging diagnostic dilemma. The patient's age provides important diagnostic
information in cases of congenital lesions while age-related changes should be
carefully appreciated. Attention to clinical history and physical examination, as
well as knowledge of the embryological features and anatomy of these regions,
can provide clues for accurate diagnosis. The radiological evaluation of paediatric
patients usually begins with conventional and colour Doppler US to depict superficial
structures, often at bedside, to confirm their cystic or solid nature. X-rays demon
strate the osseous nature of a mass and are particularly useful in the maxillofacial
region. X-ray findings may not allow definitive characterisation, especially in deeply
situated lesions, and thus, CT aids in the morphological characterisation by precise
visualisation of fine bone structures, calcifications and deep soft-tissue. However, a
more detailed depiction of the soft-tissue masses can be achieved by MR imaging,
which offers superior contrast resolution, especially in the gadolinium-enhanced
and fat-saturated sequences. Common paediatric pathologies in the sinonasal
and maxillofacial regions will be presented with emphasis on the characteristic for
each disease imaging findings.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about age-related changes that should not be misinterpreted.
2. To understand the role of x-rays, CT and MRI.
3. To become familiar with the imaging findings.
Panel discussion:
How best to image the principal head and neck abnormalities in
children 09:44
08:30 - 10:00 Room P
Physics in Radiology
RC 1613
Simulations help us understand x-ray imaging
Moderators:
H. Bosmans; Leuven/BE
A. Persson; Linkoping/SE
A526 08:30
A. Monte Carlo simulations of x-ray tubes and x-ray spectra
M. Koutalonis; London/UK (Manthos.Koutalonis@bartsandthelondon.nhs.uk)
Simulation of x-ray spectra using computers is a very important tool for the investiga
tion of patient dose and image quality in diagnostic radiology. Since experimental
measurement of x-ray spectra requires specialised equipment and is not always
feasible, simulation has become a popular method. The several general purpose
codes that have been developed during the past decades, the databases with
particle interaction cross sections available and the substantial increase in comput
ing power (with a considerable fall in cost) have played a crucial role to this end.
When simulating an x-ray tube, various complex phenomena need to be taken
into account, such as the electron multiple scattering, bremsstrahlung interac
tions, characteristic x-rays emitted from the K-shell and Auger electrons emitted
during a photon interaction. Together with the simulation of the target material and
the filtration of the x-ray beam through permanent (e.g. a Be window) and added
filtration (e.g. Al, Mo, Rh, Ag etc)., this technique can lead to a good estimation
of the emitted x-ray spectrum. This review will provide an overview of the basic
08:30 - 10:00 Room N/O
Special Focus Session
SF 16c
Paediatric head and neck imaging
A522 08:30
Chairman's introduction
B. De Foer; WilrijkAntwerp/BE (bert.defoer@gza.be)
The evaluation of paediatric head and neck pathology requires a thorough knowl
edge of head and neck anatomy as well as of the normal variants in the head
and neck region in children. Knowledge of embryology and background clinical
information is of utmost importance to narrow differential diagnosis in the paediatric
population. It should be noted that adult pathology in the head and neck region
cannot simply be projected as such onto the paediatric population. Also, imaging
strategies differ from the adult approach. It is important to realise that several enti
ties can be regarded as benign or as an anatomical variant in children, whereas
the same imaging appearance in adults should be regarded as pathological. In
the following lectures, normal anatomy, anatomical variants and pathology in the
head and neck region in the paediatric population will be highlighted emphasis
ing the difference with the adult population as to normal anatomy, pathology and
imaging strategies.
Session Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the specific head and neck anatomy in children and
normal appearance for age.
2. To understand the imaging strategy.
3. To learn about the most important head and neck abnormalities in children.
A523 08:35
Imaging of temporal bone pathology in children
B. De Foer; WilrijkAntwerp/BE (bert.defoer@gza.be)
The imaging aspect of the temporal bone in children differs from its aspect in adults.
A structural analysis of the temporal bone in children on a point-to-point basis with
knowledge of the specific temporal bone anatomy in children is required. Congenital
anomalies should be evaluated using both CT and MRI. On CT, assessment of the
external auditory canal, middle ear and mastoid, ossicular chain as well as the bony
delineation of the membranous labyrinth should be performed. The membranous
labyrinth as such, nerves and central vestibular and auditory pathways are mainly
evaluated using MRI. In tumoural and infectious pathology, CT and MRI are comple
mentary.Again CT will demonstrate the bony delineation of external and middle ear
as well as the inner ear and temporal bone pyramid. MRI allows better soft tissue
and membranous labyrinth evaluation. Several pathological entities are only seen
in children both in the infectious (e.g. coalescent mastoiditis) as tumoural subgroup
(e.g. histiocytosis X and rhabdomyosarcoma). A vast majority of pathologies are
caused by infectious-inflammatory lesions, such as chronic middle ear infection,
tympanosclerosis and cholesteatoma. Whereas at the onset, CT has been the
primary imaging tool, MRI has become more and more important in the evaluation
of patients with chronic middle ear infection and/or cholesteatoma, especially in
the post-operative followup. Normal anatomy, variants, imaging techniques and
protocols will be discussed. On overview of the most important congenital, tumoural
and infectious and inflammatory pathologies will be given.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with congenital malformations.
2. To learn about the imaging findings of inflammatory and space occupying
lesions.
3. To understand the imaging strategy.
A524 08:58
Imaging approach for a child with a neck mass
N.J.M. Freling, A.M.J.B. Smets, E.E. Deurloo; Amsterdam/NL
(n.j.freling@amc.uva.nl)
A swelling in the neck of a child may be due to a congenital lesion - cystic, vascular
or solid - due to acute / chronic inflammatory disease - in which clinical data are
important to consider -, or due to a neoplasm - benign or malignant. Ultrasound
remains the first-line imaging modality in all children presenting with a subacute /
chronic or slowly progressive swelling in the neck. It is quick, widely available and
non-invasive and no deleterious effects to this young population are known. In an
acute life-threatening situation, however, CECT or even MRI might be considered
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S125
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Monday
2. To learn how to simulate x-ray images.
3. To learn how to validate Monte Carlo simulations of an x-ray imaging system.
08:30 - 10:00 Room Q
Computer Applications
RC 1605
New PACS architecture: decoupling image
management from image navigation
A529 08:30
Chairman's introduction
H.U. Lemke; Berlin/DE (hulemke@carsint.org)
Image-based diagnostic and therapeutic workflows, particularly in interventional
suites, are essential for the health care of patients but they are also a very cost-
intensive component in clinical settings. The understanding of workflows and ICT
tools for image management beyond radiology, and in particular, for image-based
interventional suites has become not only of concern to radiologists but also to
other healthcare providers, managers, and administrators. Communication, simula
tion, visualisation and navigation with images are becoming essential features in
the planning and implementation of complex PACS infrastructures in support of
diagnostic and interventional procedures (e.g. interventional radiology, minimally
invasive surgery, computer assisted surgical procedures and image guided therapy).
While the full potentialities of multidisciplinary image sharing within health care
settings are being further explored, it is now increasingly common to see intense
cooperation between radiologists and other clinicians for planning and guiding
interventions. During the session on "New PACS architectures: decoupling im
age management from image navigation", the lecturers - exceptional experts in
their respective fields - will give insights into image sharing: from hospital-based
PACS applications to remote consultation, with specific reference to the support
of surgeons (training and intraoperative guidance).
Session Objectives:
1. To introduce models of image management and workflow.
2. To present the evolution of image management outside of radiology (surgery,
interventions etc).
3. To discuss the technical requirements for better image sharing and distribution.
A530 08:35
A. Image navigation and new PACS architecture
J. Reponen; Raahe/FI
Picture archiving and communication systems (PACS) have become an instrumental
tool for storing and distributing medical images, not only within radiology but also
in other medical domains. Typically a PACS consists of imaging modalities like
computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), image storage
device and reading workstations all connected with a secure data network. New
challenges are introduced when more and more images are distributed over wide
area networks, even utilising mobile and web technologies. Thin clients are becom
ing more widely used especially in clinical setting. When PACS is used outside
radiology (e.g. in operating theatre or in clinical wards) and for other modalities
than radiology (e.g. for ECG or photographs) different types of user interfaces are
needed. A radiology information system (RIS) is mandatory in order to manage
the information stored into the archive. As more and more hospitals utilise compre
hensive electronic patient record, a seamless integration is necessary. Standardi
sation of the modules and pre-defined workflows through Integrated Healthcare
Enterprise (IHE) profiles will make interoperability easier. Regional image archives
and shared access to images make it possible to distribute workload remotely and
also decrease repetitive examinations for moving patients. Teleradiology offers a
means to share medical expertise. Legal aspects have to be discussed if PACS
storage is outsourced to a cloud-based PACS. Stored information should be backed
up, so that a full disaster recovery without unwanted breaks in service is possible.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about recent changes in PACS design and infrastructure.
2. To understand the role of data management in PACS architecture.
3. To become acquainted with different PACS architectures.
4. To understand technical, workflow and legal aspects of innovative technologies.
knowledge necessary to start the simulation of an x-ray tube as well as of how to
accelerate the calculations. Emphasis will be given to mammographic x-ray tubes.
Applications on the use of simulated x-ray spectra, such as for x-ray tube shielding
calculations and for the investigation of the effect of anode surface roughness on
patient dose and image quality will also be presented.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the basics of Monte Carlo simulations of x-ray tubes and x-ray
spectra.
2. To learn why and how to start a Monte Carlo software platform.
3. To learn how to accelerate Monte Carlo calculations.
A527 09:00
B. Monte Carlo simulations of virtual patients (anthropomorphic
phantoms)
M. Zankl; Neuherberg/DE (zankl@helmholtzmuenchen.de)
As doses in the human body cannot be measured, Monte Carlo simulations of
medical exposures are being used as a means for patient dosimetry since many
years. This requires models of the radiation source, the patient and the radiation
transport through the patient. The phantoms of the human body need to represent
all relevant organs, and these have to be assigned properties relevant for radiation
transport, such as elemental composition and radiation cross-sections. For dose
calculations for mammography, specific breast phantoms have been designed. With
the advances in computer technology, all these models have been improved and
sophisticated over the years. The development of virtual phantoms ranges from the
early stylized phantoms that described the human anatomy rather schematically
with simple geometric bodies over much more realistic voxel phantoms segmented
from medical data of individual persons to boundary representations of the body
and its organs that can be readily adapted to different sizes and statures. Since
boundary representations, such as NURBS (non-uniform rational B-splines) and
meshes, cannot be directly used by most contemporary radiation transport codes,
they have to be converted again into voxel phantoms for performing simulation
calculations after having been modified, respectively. The results of the simula
tions are mostly so-called organ dose conversion coefficients that normalise organ
doses to measurable quantities, such as air kerma free in air, dose-area product
or CTDIvol. Multiplication of the conversion coefficient with the actual value of the
normalisation quantity as measured during the examination under consideration
results then in absolute organ doses.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about requirements for anthropomorphic phantoms (virtual patients).
2. To understand the value of anthropomorphic phantoms for breast imaging.
3. To be able to compare advantages and disadvantages of several types of
anthropomorphic phantoms.
4. To learn how to estimate typical patient doses from simulations with virtual
phantoms.
A528 09:30
C. Monte Carlo simulations of x-ray detectors and x-ray images
N. Marshall; Leuven/BE (nicholas.marshall@uz.kuleuven.ac.be)
This lecture concentrates on the Monte Carlo (MC) simulation of diagnostic radiology
x-ray detectors and images, with the emphasis on detectors in the mammography
energy range. We begin with a review of the various simulation possibilities for
x-ray detectors and a discussion of the physical properties and parameters that
can be simulated. The detailed simulations possible for quantitative aspects of
detector performance are contrasted against the more limited options available
when having to simulate large area x-ray images. There will be a brief discussion of
a number of available MC codes, such as Geant4, MCNP and Penelope/MANTIS,
along with the detector modeling capabilities of each code. This will be followed by
some example detector models for MCNP: the standard semi-deterministic radi
ography tally, often used in image simulation studies and two alternative detector
models, a perfect energy integrating detector and a detector based on the energy
absorbed in the detector material. Options for generating large area x-ray images
are discussed and a hybrid (deterministic and MC) image simulation method of
modifying images generated using the MCNP image detector models to include
the physical characteristics of the x-ray imaging system. Deterministic detector
corrections include intensity variations from the heel effect, the spatial resolution
characteristics of the imaging system and detector noise. The MC simulations are
validated as a function of energy and x-ray attenuator thickness using measure
ments of scatter-to-primary ratio (SPR) and scatter fraction (SF), along with some
simple image quality parameters such as signal difference to noise ratio (SDNR).
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn basic methods for simulating imaging detectors.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S126 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
10:30 - 12:00 Room B
Interactive Teaching Session
E 1720a
Common radiological problems: cardiovascular
A533 10:30
A. Looking at the heart in chest x-rays
J. Andreu; Barcelona/ES (jandreus@gmail.com)
Despite the advance of cross-sectional techniques, the chest radiograph remains
a basic tool for the initial approach to heart diseases. In this lecture we will present
our current approach to evaluate cardiac pathology in conventional radiography
illustrating it with selected cases. The basic approach consists of seven steps,
evaluating the size and shape of the cardiac silhouette, cardiac calcifications,
pulmonary circulation and lung changes, great vessels and implanted devices, all
of them correlated with the clinical findings.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn how to detect and characterise cardiac abnormalities in the chest
radiograph.
2. To learn when further evaluation is required.
A534 11:15
B. Looking at the heart in chest CT
F. Laurent; Pessac/FR (francois.laurent@chubordeaux.fr)
Looking at the heart on a chest film may be considered at a first glance as wast
ing time since, today, many other techniques are available to offer an impressive
array of details of the morphological and functional evaluation of heart. Neverthe
less, the chest film remains often the first modality performed in many situations
in which symptoms can be either of pulmonary or cardiac origin and then, careful
analysis of heart may avoid rough mistakes in patient management. Acquired and
congenital pericardial or cardiac abnormalities may be responsible for a deformity
of the cardiac silhouette and might lead to examination of patient by a chest CT.
CT with fast scanning capabilities can acquire images of the thorax with reduced
cardiac motion artefacts, improving the evaluation of the heart in the course of a
thoracic CT. Unexpected findings of cardiac structures on both unenhanced and
enhanced acquisition can dramatically influence the patient's clinical management.
In many situations, a chest CT is performed without cardiac gating and it may be
necessary to complement the initial examination by a gated acquisition to provide
a more dedicated analysis. The normal appearance of cardiac structures and
the most common cardiac abnormalities should be known by all the radiologists.
Various conditions such as idiopathic and acquired cardiomyopathy, ischaemic
heart disease and valvular dysfunction can be identified even on non-gated scans.
Pulmonary diseases may also involve pericardium and cardiac structures and this
should be clearly identified.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn how to detect and characterise cardiac abnormalities in chest CT.
2. To learn the limitations of the interpretation of cardiac abnormalities on un-
gated chest CT.
3. To learn when further evaluation is required.
10:30 - 12:00 Room C
Interactive Teaching Session
E 1720b
Common radiological problems: palpable lower
neck mass - thyroid or not?
A535 10:30
A. Thyroid nodule
H. van Overhagen; Den Haag/NL (h.voverhagen@hagaziekenhuis.nl)
Thyroid nodules are common. Nodules can be palpated in 4-8% and are seen with
ultrasound in 10-41% of adults. Most nodules are benign. In patients who present
with a palpable nodule, carcinoma is eventually diagnosed in only 5% of cases. The
incidence of thyroid carcinoma is low compared with other malignancies. Papillary
carcinoma is by far the most common (75-80%) type. Lymph node metastasis in
A531 08:58
B. Intraoperative imaging for surgeons
A. Pietrabissa, L. Pugliese, A. Peri, F.P. Tinozzi, V. Ferrari; Pavia/IT
(andrea.pietrabissa@gmail.com)
Modern radiological scanners allow the acquisition of volumetric datasets describing
human anatomy, functionality and pathology, with high level of detail. On the other
hand, minimally invasive surgery offers excellent views of surface anatomy but is
unable to provide details on deeper or hidden structures and bears the limit of a
low-grade tactile feedback. The highly detailed information contained in radiological
images, which are partially lost when passing to the surgical room, can be expressly
used to overcome these limitations. In this setting, computer-assisted technolo
gies allow to augment real views of the patient, taken by means of cameras and
optical tracking systems, with virtual information obtained from pre-operative or
intra-operative radiological images, coherently mixing them in order to obtain an
accurate superimposition of both. This augmented-reality, or in general mixed-reality
technique, introduces many advantages for some tasks where the surgeon has to
interact with the patient (localisation of target lesion, sharp definition of nodule's
margins, identification of vascular or other relevant adjacent anatomic structures,
introduction of biopsy needle, etc). improving the physician's perception of deep
or unexposed tissues and consequently the precision level of the procedure. The
surgical robotic platforms currently available, as computer-assisted systems pro
vided with 3D stereoscopic vision, may support the application of these techniques
in many fields of surgery. Further technological development should be claimed
since the relevant implications involved with the clinical use of this promising new
approach to enhance intra-operative visualisation during minimally invasive surgery.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand why surgeons will need more intraoperative guidance.
2. To learn the role of robotics and augmented reality for the general surgeon.
3. To become familiar with patient-specific simulation.
4. To appreciate the place of surgical training and credentialing.
A532 09:21
C. Dismantling PACS: separating the image viewing from the data
storage and sharing
L.N. Sutton; Halifax/UK (laurence.sutton@cht.nhs.uk)
Traditionally, healthcare organisations have implemented a PACS solution in which
all the components, including image processing, image viewing, image data sharing
and storage and both software and hardware, have been provided and managed
by one PACS Vendor.There is now an increasing trend to consider and purchase
these components separately, particularly the aspects of data storage and shar
ing. In part, this approach is driven by the need to achieve better value for money
and, by allowing more open competition for the provision of PACS components,
will stimulate greater flexibility and innovation in the market. A more pressing
requirement, however, is to accommodate changing approaches to the delivery of
diagnostic imaging services across healthcare organisations and indeed across
regional and national boundaries. It is in this area, where the logistics of storing
data, viewing data and sharing data become critical areas of debate, not only in
terms of cost-effective methods but in terms of clinical governance and patient
safety. A multi vendor approach to all aspects of image data management will
become the norm, the success of which will be predicated upon the adoption of
international data sharing standards and frameworks. This presentation will reflect
upon the current issues with respect to the above which are providing challenges
and opportunities in England, UK, where the provision of PACS services will be
transferred from a national programme approach to local healthcare organisations.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about strategic issues of generic image archiving and distribution.
2. To understand new concepts of independent `front ends' of PACS.
3. To become familiar with new examples of PACS implementation based on
component architecture.
4. To be informed about new strategies of PACS architecture and migration.
Panel discussion:
How should we manage our images today? 09:44
1. New challenges for large-scale image sharing and image distribution.
2. Use of imaging outside radiology.
3. Regulatory issues of image sharing.
4. Practical and workflow issues of image distribution and management.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S127
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Monday
Learning Objectives:
1. To review the most common causes of elevated hemidiaphragm.
2. To evaluate alterations in diaphragmatic contour.
3. To recognise false causes of diaphragmatic elevation.
12:30 - 13:30 Room Z
Molecular Imaging
MC 23E
Theranostics: combining imaging and treatment
Moderator:
H.C. Steinert; Zurich/CH
A538 12:30
A. MR and US-guided drug delivery
C. Moonen; Ultrecht/NL (C.Moonen@umcutrecht.nl)
The goal of ultrasound-triggered, image-guided drug delivery is to increase the
therapeutic index of drugs and decrease adverse effects of drugs. The bio-effects
of ultrasound can lead to local tissue heating, cavitation and radiation force, which
can be used for 1) local drug release from nanocarriers circulating in the blood,
2) increased extravasation and cellular uptake of drugs and/or carriers and 3)
enhanced diffusivity of drugs. Thermo-sensitive liposomes have been suggested
for local drug release in combination with local hyperthermia more than 25 years
ago. Microbubbles may be designed to enhance cavitation effects. Real-time
imaging methods, such as magnetic resonance, optical and ultrasound imaging
have led to novel insights and methods for ultrasound-triggered drug delivery.
Image guidance of ultrasound can be used for 1) target identification and charac
terisation; 2) spatio-temporal guidance of actions to release or activate the drugs
and/or permeabilis membranes; 3) evaluation of biodistribution, PKPD; and 4)
physiological read-outs to evaluate the therapeutic efficacy. Liposomes may carry
both hydrophilic and hydrophobic drugs in their aqueous interior and lipid bilayer
membrane, respectively. The circulation half-life may be increased by incorporating
polyethylene glycol (PEG)-lipids in the bilayer. Recent publications have shown
that ultrasound-triggered delivery is feasible (reviewed by 1.2). Real-time imaging
methods, such as Magnetic Resonance, optical and ultrasound imaging may lead
to novel insights and methods for ultrasound-triggered drug delivery.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the role of ultrasound in local drug extravasation, intracellular
uptake and release from nanocarriers.
2. To become familiar with the role of multi-modality imaging in evaluating bio
distribution, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of local drug therapy.
3. To understand the potential of MR-guided focused US in local drug delivery.
A539 12:50
B. Imaging-guided cell-based therapy
O. Clement; Paris/FR (olivier.clement@inserm.fr)
Cellular therapies have been long used successfully in haematological disorders.
New applications of cell transplantation in organ regeneration are envisioned.
Imaging has to play a major role in this research, to monitor, optimise and eventu
ally enhance local cellular deposition and grafting. Cell labelling methods using
superparamagnetic nanoparticles have been developed, showing no adverse effect
on cell proliferation and functionalities, while conferring magnetic properties to vari
ous cell types. Magnetic labelling of living cells creates opportunities for numerous
biomedical applications as individual cell manipulation, magnetic control of cell
migration and intracellular heating or MRI cell tracking. External magnet placed over
the targeted organ can create local field gradient to induce a magnetic targeting.
This presentation will review the different methods for cell labelling, high-resolution
cellular MRI and cellular manipulations.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about potential clinical applications of cell based biotherapies.
2. To understand how imaging can be used for therapy monitoring.
3. To become familiar with methods of labelling and tracking cells using MRI.
A540 13:10
C. Imaging-guided gene-based therapy
M. Neeman; Rehovot/IL (michal.neeman@weizmann.ac.il)
Imaging has always played a key role not only in pre-therapy detection and diagnosis
and in post therapy monitoring of response to therapy, but also in providing critical
thyroid carcinoma is primarily to the paratracheal and prelaryngeal nodes (Level
VI), and the upper (Level III) and lower (Level IV) jugular nodes. In patients with
a palpable nodule, malignancy should be suspected with rapid growth, a firm or
fixated mass, in case of enlarged lymph nodes or vocal cord paralysis. In patients
with multiple thyroid nodules the cancer risk per patient is not altered. Ultrasound
is the primary imaging technique in patients with a palpable thyroid nodule. It is
best performed with the patient supine, the neck slightly extended and using a
high-frequency linear-array transducer. Several ultrasonographic features are
more often associated with benign or malignant nodules. However, while some
ultrasonographic features may strongly suggest malignancy it may be very difficult
to rule out malignancy by means of these features alone. Ultrasound-guided fine
needle biopsy can be performed in an attempt to differentiate between benign and
malignant nodules but is non-diagnostic in up to 20% of cases. Use of ultrasound,
thin needles and avoidance of suction can increase numbers of diagnostic biop
sies. A reserved approach is advised regarding biopsies of non-palpable nodules.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the optimal settings for US examination of the thyroid.
2. To be able to identify morphologic characteristics of benign and malignant
thyroid nodules.
3. To be able to identify the most common pathways of lymph node metastases
in the thyroid.
4. To learn about the role of US-guided fine needle aspiration cytology in the
thyroid.
A536 11:15
B. Outside the thyroid
N.J.M. Freling; Amsterdam/NL (N.J.Freling@amc.uva.nl)
The neck is host to a large variety of benign and malignant diseases ranging from
simple cysts to acute inflammation with complications to highly malignant sarcomas,
and imaging plays an important role to assess the nature and the extension of
disease. Patient history and clinical findings will decide which imaging technique
is best suited to resolve the diagnostic dilemma. Ultrasound is recommended to
differentiate between a cystic or solid lesion, to guide FNA, being quick and ac
curate. Pathologic flow within or around a lesion can be assessed adding Doppler
technique. In acute illnesses with anticipated complications, such as a deep neck
abscess, contrast-enhanced CT is required to evaluate local extension and dem
onstrate spread from the neck deep to the mediastinum. MRI is indicated to assess
non-inflammatory, subacute or chronic diseases, such as vascular malformations,
branchial cleft cysts, benign and malignant soft tissue tumours, brachial plexus
pathology and neurologic diseases. Vascular malformations are easily depicted
with MRI using T2 sequences in different image planes. Persistent fistulas of the
branchial system also can be depicted by MRI running from the anterior border of
the sternocleidomastoid muscle to the lateral pharyngeal wall.Assessing the origin
of a soft tissue tumour has major implications for surgery. Staging a malignant soft
tissue tumour must comprise the skull base and upper mediastinum including local
extension, pathologic neck nodes and perineural spread. Followup during chemo
therapy and postoperative monitoring of malignant disease is an important indication
for (MR) imaging, the more so in young patients, diminishing ionising radiation.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be familiar with the anatomy of the neck.
2. To be able to choose the optimal imaging technique.
3. To become familiar with the most common abnormalities in adults and children.
4. To be able to address a short list of differential diagnoses.
11:00 - 12:00 Room Z
The Beauty of Basic Knowledge: Interpretation of the Chest
Radiograph
MC 27E
The diaphragm
A537 11:00
The diaphragm
J. Caceres; Barcelona/ES (josecac@gmail.com)
The diaphragm is a frontier organ and changes in its position may be secondary to
intrinsic abnormalities (paralysis, relaxation) or be due to alterations in neighbouring
structures (loss of volume of the lung or upper abdominal processes). Diaphragmatic
hernias may simulate an elevated hemidiaphragm; diagnosis can be accomplished
with cross-sectional imaging or barium studies
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S128 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the pros and cons of each of the main imaging modali
ties in assessing a patient with (i) suspected and (ii) newly diagnosed Crohn's
disease with emphasis placed on diagnostic accuracy, practicability and patient
acceptability.
2. To learn the appearance of Crohn's disease on each modality, with emphasis
on subtle disease.
3. To learn the different disease subtypes and their relevance to subsequent
disease management.
A543 16:28
B. Disease activity assessment
F. Maccioni; Rome/IT (francesca.maccioni@uniroma1
.it)
The assessment of Crohn's Disease (CD) activity is essential for the therapeutic
planning and monitoring of drugs' effects. It is usually based on a variable combi
nation of clinical indexes, laboratory parameters, endoscopic, histological, nuclear
medicine and imaging findings. Clinical indexes include CDAI (Crohn's Disease
Activity Index), Harvey-Bradshaw index and PCDAI for children. Biological activ
ity (BA) is based on CRP, ESR, WBC, Orosomucoid plasmatic levels or faecal
calprotectin quantification. The Endoscopic Index of Severity (CDEIS) reflects
the endoscopist's judgment of lesions' severity, whilst histological indexes (as the
Geboes index) estimate the architectural changes and increase of inflammatory
cells in wall layers. Several US parameters are used as activity indexes, includ
ing wall thickening and layering, Color Doppler and contrast-enhanced patterns
(intraparietal, submucosal, transparietal outward and inward enhancement). CT is
valuable in detecting activity, though it can be used occasionally, due to radiation
exposure. Finally, MRI provides the largest number of morphological and functional
parameters to assess disease activity. These include wall thickening, increased
wall Gd-enhancement, patterns of wall enhancement, kinetics of Gd-enhancement,
increased T2-signal of the wall and mesenteric fat, increased mesenteric vascularity
and increased number and enhancement of local lymph nodes. All these param
eters were statistically correlated to clinical, endoscopic and histological indexes
of activity. Diffusion Weighted Imaging can differentiate and quantify the motion of
hydrogen linked to water molecules in intra and extracellular spaces. The feasibility
of DWI in the detection and quantification of CD activity has been recently tested,
with preliminary satisfactory results.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with the various clinical criteria for defining active disease
(clinical indices, endoscopic and histological).
2. To learn the features on MRI, US and CT that reflect disease activity and
become familiar with the evidence base for their use.
3. To appreciate the available techniques and learn an integrated paradigm ap
plicable to clinical practice.
4. To become familiar with new techniques, notably diffusion and contrast-
enhanced US, and understand their potential roles.
A544 16:51
C. Complications and followup
L. CurvoSemedo; Coimbra/PT (curvosemedo@gmail.com)
Crohn's disease usually has a chronic and relapsing evolution. During the course
of the disease, some complications and extra-intestinal manifestations may arise.
The followup of this disease should be aimed not only to assess the disease activity
but also to detect possible complications. Among the intestinal complications, the
most important include obstruction, perforation, sinus formation and an increased
risk of malignancy. Rarely, haemorrhage or complications due to malabsorption may
supervene. Other abdominal, extra-intestinal complications include intra-abdominal
abscess, hepatic abscess, gallbladder and kidney stones, primary sclerosing
cholangitis and hepatic steatosis.Among extra-abdominal complications, metabolic
bone disease, arthropathy or oculo-cutaneous manifestations may be found, as well
as an increased risk of deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolic disease.
An association with other autoimmune diseases (such as psoriasis, rheumatoid
arthritis or multiple sclerosis) has been also unraveled. Traditionally the imaging
methods used for assessment of the complications and to followup patients with
Crohn's disease include conventional small bowel follow-through or enteroclysis,
but these examinations are unable to demonstrate extra-enteric pathology. As
a result, cross-sectional methods such as CT and MRI have been gaining their
place and are now increasingly used in this setting, since they manage to provide
additional information in comparison with the conventional modalities. In the
paediatric population, US may also play an important role in this regard. Imaging
can also be of help in the treatment of some complications, such as abscesses or
haemorrhage, through interventional techniques.
support to guide therapy itself. Classical examples include the use of minimally
invasive surgical tools and the use of imaging for planning of surgery and radiation
therapy. With the development of genetic tools for therapeutic intervention, the
challenges and expectations from imaging are expanding. Imaging can be used
for guidance of the delivery and cargo release for nanoparticles carrying precious
genetic material for specific induction or silencing of gene expression in the target
cells. Through the use of light- or heat-sensitive promoters, or using image-guided
delivery of viral particles, imaging can be used to induce expression of target genes
with precise spatial and temporal control. Finally, reporter genes can be used as
biomarkers for monitoring accurate cellular response to therapy by monitoring cel
lular decisions such as cell death, cell differentiation and cell proliferation.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the use of imaging to guide delivery of gene therapy.
2. To get an introduction to the use of imaging-guided activation of gene expres
sion.
3. To become familiar with the use of reporter genes for image-guided delivery
of therapy.
16:00 - 17:30 Room C
GI Tract
RC 1901
Crohn's disease of the small bowel: which test
when?
A541 16:00
Chairman's introduction
J. Stoker1
, J. Rimola2
; 1
Amsterdam/NL, 2
Barcelona/ES (j.stoker@amc.uva.nl)
Detection of intestinal inflammatory lesions is crucial for management of patients
with Crohn's disease (CD). Awareness of the shortcomings of mere clinical evalu
ation for assessment of disease activity has grown. Ileocolonoscopy has been the
gold standard for evaluation of lesions in the colon and terminal ileum. However,
ileocolonoscopy cannot always be complete, lacks evaluation of the complete small
bowel and there are several drawbacks related to the invasiveness. Over the past
few years, cross-sectional imaging techniques, including ultrasonography (US),
computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have been
increasingly used for evaluation of patients with CD, allowing objective assess
ment of location, extension and severity of CD-related lesions. Imaging techniques
are also the accepted reference for detection of complications including strictures
and penetrating lesions such as fistulas and abscesses. Objective assessment of
inflammatory lesions is required for guiding therapeutic interventions and for as
sessing the efficacy of these interventions. The choice between imaging techniques
is often determined by local availability and expertise and technical details of these
examinations are also subject to considerable variation, which may affect accuracy.
A542 16:05
A. Detection and classification
M.A. Patak; Zurich/CH (michael.patak@usz.ch)
The aim of this lecture is to give an overview of the techniques and typical find
ings for imaging Crohn's disease (CD) and its subtypes with either multidetector
row computed tomography (MDCT) or with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
and compare the two different modalities. Optimal imaging of CD begins with the
preparation phase. The small bowel has to be distended for an optimal examina
tion. This can be done either invasively, i.e. enteroclysis or orally, which is named
enterography. For the administered intraluminal contrast, best is water with some
additives, which displays as neutral in CT and biphasic in MR. IV contrast hast to
be administered and dedicated imaging technique for MDCT and MR has to be
applied, which will be proposed. Image data are reconstructed in axial, coronal
and sagittal planes. Typical findings for CD are firstly within the bowel wall: sub
mucosal ulcerations, thickening, layering, increased contrast uptake (on different
anatomical segments) and motility alterations. Secondly, there are extraluminal
findings: mesenterial fat alteration, intraabdominal free fluids, abscess and fistula.
Furthermore, both imaging modalities are able to identify the type of the disease,
being either the active / inflammatory, the fistulising /perforating, the fibrostenos
ing or the reparative / regenerative type. Both modalities have their strength and
weaknesses which will be discussed.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S129
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Monday
2. To learn about injection and scanning protocols for optimised vascular and
parenchymal enhancement.
3. To review the influence of tissue-specific contrast media on the injection and
scanning protocols.
A547 17:00
C. PET/CT
X. Montet; Geneva/CH (xavier.montet@hcuge.ch)
Optimisation of iodinated contrast media administration during PET-CT acquisi
tion. When a CT scan of a combined PET/CT is performed as a full diagnostic CT,
including iodinated contrast media administration, the diagnostic quality of the
examinatioin is improved. Nevertheless, the possibility that contrast-enhanced CT
used for attenuation correction may introduce errors in the standardised uptake
value (SUV) will be discussed during this lecture. Different optimised contrast-
enhanced CT protocols will then be discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the role of contrast-enhanced CT in PET/CT.
2. To understand the influence of contrast-enhanced CT on attenuation correction
of PET images.
3. To learn about the injection protocol for optimised enhancement in PET/CT.
16:00 - 17:30 Room E1
Musculoskeletal
RC 1910
The knee
A548 16:00
Chairman's introduction
F.M.H.M. Vanhoenacker; Antwerp/BE (filip.vanhoenacker@telenet.be)
MRI of the knee joint is one of the most requested examinations in most MR depart
ments. Most MRI exams are performed for evaluation of internal derangement of
the joint due to trauma or (degenerative) cartilage lesions. Inflammatory disorders
and infectious processes about the knee may cause significant morbidity and
therefore early detection is of utmost importance. Soft tissue tumours (STT) and
pseudotumours around the knee joint comprise a heterogeneous group of benign
and malignant lesions. This integrated RC on the knee will provide an up-to-date
overview of the role of imaging in the diagnosis and planning of treatment strategy
of knee trauma, inflammation and soft tissue lesions. Current controversies and
remaining clinical questions include the role of high field MR imaging, imaging
evaluation of clinical instability patterns, evaluation of disease activity of inflamma
tory disorders and response to Disease Modifying Anti Rheumatic Drugs treatment
and the role of functional imaging in the evaluation of STT.
A549 16:05
A. Patterns of injury
P. Van Dyck; Antwerp/BE (pieter.van.dyck@uza.be)
Traditional classification systems for knee joint instability include straight, rotational
and combined types of knee instability. The basic consideration in this classification
is the status of the posterior cruciate ligament after injury. Correct diagnosis of knee
instability is not a simple matter. Much controversy remains as to which ligaments
are being tested during the standard clinical knee laxity tests. This sometimes leaves
the clinician, even the most experienced ones, confused as to what the laxity tests
really show. Also, the arthroscope cannot fully assess the unstable knee. Thus, the
addition of the information provided by magnetic resonance (MR) imaging can be
extremely helpful in order to establish prognosis and plan for definitive treatment.
Therefore, a thorough knowledge and recognition of the different knee ligament
instability patterns by radiologists is essential to accurately report the findings on
MR and to heighten awareness for specific injuries to improve their detection.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn the imaging appearances of soft tissue injury.
2. To learn the imaging appearances of osteoarticular injury.
3. To be familiar with the patterns of bone and soft tissue injury in the knee.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn the common complications in Crohn's disease and appreciate ex
amples of each on the common imaging modalities.
2. To appreciate the available techniques and learn an integrated paradigm ap
plicable to clinical practice.
3. To become familiar with the evidence for imaging use in assessing treatment
response.
Panel discussion:
How can imaging change patient management in Crohn's disease? 17:14
16:00 - 17:30 Room D2
Contrast Media
RC 1906
How I optimise contrast media administration
Moderator:
A.J. van der Molen; Leiden/NL
A545 16:00
A. CT
P. Leander; Malmoe/SE (peter.leander@med.lu.se)
There are different reasons for optimising contrast media (CM) use in computed
tomography (CT). The first and maybe most obvious is to obtain a highly diagnostic
procedure and we are all familiar with terms as, e.g. arterial and portovenous phase.
Different CM phases in CT is to a high extent based upon an understanding of
the pharmacokinetics of iodinated CM. As small water-soluble non-protein bound
molecules these CM are distributed by the blood circulation and throughout the
extracellular space. With modern CT-systems there are often more CM phases
employed in protocols for gaining even more information, e.g. tumour vascularity,
pancreatic parenchymal enhancement and mucosal delineation. In early CT, mostly
of technical reasons, protocols seldom took advantage of using lower voltage than
120 kV. As iodine is not ideal for the photon spectrum obtained from such high
energy nowadays lower kV is more often included in protocols. Another important
reason for optimisation of CM use is the risk of CM-induced nephropathy (CIN) and
how this could be balanced but still obtaining diagnostic information. By taking all
above into consideration the lecture will give an overview about the patient, CM,
scanning factors and CM enhancement. The lecture will give few protocols, if any,
ready to bring home, but instead understanding with "longer half-live" how CM
protocols are setup on the basis of factors as CM distribution, iodine attenuation,
risk of adverse events and more. By this approach one can become familiar and
understand any CM protocol for CT.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the pharmacokinetics of iodinated contrast media.
2. To learn about patient, contrast medium and scanning factors associated with
contrast enhancement and scan timing.
3. To become familiar with protocols for optimised contrast enhancement.
A546 16:30
B. MRI
G.M. Bongartz; Basle/CH (gbongartz@uhbs.ch)
Contrast media for Magnetic Resonance Imaging are mainly based on Gadolinium
(Gd) or other metallic compounds like Iron (Fe) or Manganese (Mn). All of these
do not actively alter the magnetic signal upon intravascular application but rather
enhance relaxivity of neighbouring molecules. The strength of its impact on the
signal intensity is strong and thus the overall amount of contrast media given is much
less compared with iodinated contrast media. Gd is by far most frequent in clinical
use. Due to its toxicity it must be fixed in stable chelates. Recently, Nephrogenic
Systemic Fibrosis (NSF) as an unexpected side-effect of Gd-compounds in renally
impaired patients has been detected and led to certain Gd-specific restrictions or
contraindications for medical use. As a key consequence, restrictive use of Gd-
compounds in renally impaired patients is mandatory. Special preparations of Gd
compounds enable tissue-specific application (like hepatocyte-specific contrast).
Following the injection of this contrast media both, documentation of the vascular
perfusion as well as of cellular activity is possible. Similarly, Fe compounds may
be applied to characterise the reticulo endothelial system. Mechanisms for contrast
and examples for typical application will be given.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the differences between iodinated contrast agents and gado
linium chelates and their impact on contrast medium administration.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S130 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
A553 16:03
Herniated disk?
X. Buy, A. Gangi; Strasbourg/FR (xavier.buy@chrustrasbourg.fr)
Pain related to disc herniation is not only due to physical compression but also to
biochemical factors. Pain management in disc herniation relies mainly on conserva
tive care combining rest, physiotherapy and oral analgesics. If conservative treat
ment fails, selective image-guided periradicular steroid injection is first considered,
aiming to reduce the inflammatory reaction irritating the nerve root. Image-guidance
is based on CT, fluoroscopy and MRI. Precise needle positioning is systematically
confirmed by periradicular contrast injection to obtain the best clinical results and to
avoid complications. When steroid injections fail, disc decompression is considered.
Conventional open surgery produces suboptimal results and is associated with a
high risk of epidural fibrosis. In opposition, percutaneous nucleotomy techniques
offer a minimally invasive alternative. Their principle is to remove a small amount of
the central nucleus to achieve a drop of pressure inside the herniation, considering
that the disc is a closed hydraulic space. Thus, percutaneous disc decompression
is only indicated for contained disc herniations. Many nucleoplasty techniques are
available. However, thermal nucleotomy devices including Laser nucleotomy and
Radiofrequency Nucleoplasty seem to offer better clinical results as they combine
mechanical decompression and thermal destruction of intradiscal pro-inflammatory
proteins. Compared with other percutaneous disc treatment devices, thermal tech
niques show a higher level of evidence with longer experience; moreover, there is
no contra-indication in case of annular perforation and no implant is left inside the
disc. Percutaneous nucleotomy techniques are associated with a very low rate of
complications. However, a successful treatment is based on a strict patient selection.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the clinical and radiological investigations.
2. To learn the radiological management for herniated disk.
3. To learn how to avoid potential complications.
A554 16:21
Vertebroplasty
A.D. Kelekis; Athens/GR (akelekis@med.uoa.gr)
It is a fact that 80% of the European population will experience at some point in
their life an incidence of back pain. Part of the back pain incidence is attributed to
vertebral fractures.As minimal interventional procedures are gaining momentum in
musculoskeletal interventional pain procedures, clinical evaluation of patients with
back pain becomes a necessity, prior to treatment. The interventional radiologist
involved in pain management, specifically with vertebral augmentation, should not
only be able to interpret imaging findings, but to correlate those to clinical find
ings and establish a comprehensive patient treatment. In this course we will try
to analyse the imaging characteristics relative to vertebral fractures and integrate
them to the treatment plan in order to achieve a successful outcome. Part of the
course will be to develop algorithms that will include the whole armamentarium
of vertebral augmentation and its relation to other techniques, thus establishing
faster pain control, stabilisation and possible healing of painful osteoporotic lesions.
Discussion will include the present controversial situation on spine augmentation
and current literature will be analysed. The aim of this presentation will be to help
the interventional radiologist to comprehend and be able to develop a "one stop"
treatment that will include diagnostic procedures, clinical correlation and a final
comprehensive therapeutic treatment for vertebral lesions.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the indications for vertebroplasty.
2. To learn the technique for vertebroplasty.
3. To understand the recent advances.
A555 16:39
Treatment of neoplasm
A. Gangi, X. Buy, G. Tsoumakidou, J. Garnon; Strasbourg/FR
(gangi@rad6
.ustrasbg.fr)
Different image-guided percutaneous techniques can be used for curative treatment
or pain palliation in patients with primary or secondary spinal tumours. Curative
ablation can be applied for the treatment of specific benign or in selected cases
of malignant localised spinal tumours. Pain palliation therapy of primary and
secondary bone tumours can be achieved with safe, fast, effective and tolerable
percutaneous methods. Ablation (chemical, thermal, mechanical), cavitation (radi
ofrequency ionization) and consolidation (cementoplasty) techniques can be used
separately or in combination. Each technique has its indications, with advantages
and drawbacks.Amultidisciplinary decision is required to choose the more efficient
and less disabling technique.
A550 16:28
B. Inflammatory disease
A. Cotten; Lille/FR (anne.cotten@chrulille.fr)
Inflammatory disorders of the knee are mainly related to infectious or rheumatic
diseases, but other disorders can be associated with a similar clinical, biological or
radiological presentation, including degenerative and crystal-induced diseases, and
tumours. The bone, the joint and / or the soft tissue can be affected. The aims of this
lecture are to present the main radiological features of the different inflammatory
disorders encountered at the knee, the usefulness of each imaging modality and
the more frequent misdiagnoses when such a condition is suspected.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn the imaging appearances of soft tissue inflammation.
2. To learn the imaging appearances of osteoarticular inflammatory change.
3. To be familiar with imaging findings of specific inflammatory conditions.
A551 16:51
C. Soft tissue tumours/tumour-like lesions
J.C. Vilanova; Girona/ES (kvilanova@comg.cat)
Because MRI of the knee is the most frequent examination, so does the frequency
of encountering incidental soft tissue tumour/tumour-like lesions in and about the
knee. Although sometimes imaging techniques are requested due to symptoms
related to a soft tissue lesion around the knee, it is important for the radiologist
to be aware of the imaging appearance to avoid misdiagnosis and inappropriate
treatment. Soft-tissue tumours/tumour-like lesions about the knee include a wide
variety of entities, ranging from cysts or anatomical variants to aggressive high-
grade sarcomas. Special vigilance in evaluation is warranted when a soft-tissue
mass is not in the typical position or does not have other characteristic features
of a cyst, when the size of the mass or the accompanying symptoms seem out of
proportion to the injury or underlying degenerative process, and when symptoms
persist beyond what is expected. It is essential to be familiar with the imaging
characteristic appearance of these lesions to allow a confident diagnosis as most
of these lesions are benign.Acomplete review of the spectrum of soft tissue lesions
will be performed: sarcomas, lipoma, haematoma, haemangioma, chondroma,
synovitis, bursae-cysts like lesions intra and para-articular, haematoma, ossifica
tions, aneurysms, adventitial disease or anatomical variants such as accessory
gastrocnemius muscle. Not only the most common lesions will be discussed but also
less common but important lesions with characteristic US and/or MRI appearance.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn the spectrum of intra and para-articular soft tissue tumours.
2. To learn the spectrum of intra and para-articular soft tissue tumour-like lesions.
3. To be familiar with US and MRI findings of specific soft tissue lesions.
Panel discussion:
What are the remaining clinical questions that imaging currently
cannot answer and how will we answer them in the future? 17:14
16:00 - 17:30 Room F2
Special Focus Session
SF 19
Spinal intervention
A552 16:00
Chairman's introduction
T. Sabharwal; London/UK (Tarun.Sabharwal@gstt.sthames.nhs.uk)
In this session several important areas within musculosketal radiological inter
ventions will be discussed: herniated disk, vertebroplasty, spinal neoplasms and
facet joint pathologies. Clinical symptoms, presentations, imaging and treatment
options will be reviewed.
Session Objectives:
1. To review clinical symptoms and radiological investigations of back pain.
2. To learn various techniques for spinal pathology treatment.
3. To be aware of recent and potential future advances in this field.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S131
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Monday
Learning Objectives:
1. To be aware of the epidemiology and clinical manifestations of the most
common microvascular, vasculitis and inflammatory diseases in the immune
competent adult patient.
2. To learn about imaging patterns of microvascular diseases.
3. To learn about imaging patterns of vasculitis, autoimmune and inflammatory
diseases.
A558 16:30
B. MRI in common neurodegenerative diseases
F. Barkhof; Amsterdam/NL (f.barkhof@vumc.nl)
Indications and imaging modality: Many neurodegenerative disorders exist, the
most common being Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease. Abnormal
protein accumulation can sometimes be shown using PET or SPECT, but MRI (or
CT) is used first to exclude structural lesions or other (vascular) pathology. Routine
MRI protocol for neurodegeneration and dementia should include 3D T1-weighted
images with coronal reformats, and axial T2, FLAIR and T2*-gradient-echo.
Structured description of findings: Reporting should include a) possible focal/
mass lesions, b) vascular pathology, c) global and regional atrophy and d) addi
tional features like calcification or microbleeds. Vascular lesions include territorial/
strategic infracts (e.g. thalamic lesions), lacunes and small vessel white matter
changes; such WMC can be graded using, e.g. Fazekas scale, and involve
ment of basal ganglia should be discussed especially in Parkinson's disease.
WMC can occur in specific locations in CADASIL (temporal pole) and FXTAS
(cerebellar peduncle). Simple rating scales exist for global and regional (medio-
temporal and posterior cortical) atrophy; age-dependent cut-off values need to be
taken into consideration. Infratentorial atrophy should be evaluated separately
for mesencephalon, pons and cerebellum, especially for movement disorders.
Interpretation and Conclusion: The report should summarise relevant findings sup
porting or refuting the suspected diagnosis taking normal ageing phenomena into
consideration. Co-morbidity (e.g. vascular loading in Alzheimer) should be men
tioned. Suggestion for additional imaging should be made if the exam is negative,
e.g. amyloid PET in the work-up of Alzheimer of dopamine SPECT in suspected
Parkinson or Lewy-body dementia.
Learning Objectives:
1. To be aware of the epidemiology and clinical manifestations of the most com
mon adult neurodegenerative diseases.
2. To learn about imaging patterns of dementias.
3. To learn about imaging patterns of movement disorders.
4. To be aware of some specific imaging features of rare neurodegenerative
disorders.
A559 17:00
C. Neuroimaging in the acutely ill/ICU patient
M. Gallucci, M. Anselmi; L'Aquila/IT (massimo.gallucci@cc.univaq.it)
Importance of bedside, clinical neurological examination on hospitalized patients
is universally recognized. Nevertheless, in ICU Patients, is often challanging or
even impossible to rule out a clinically based diagnosis or follow the clinical status
due to the presence of paralysis, the frequent compromission of consciousness,
or deep sedation. Therefore, diagnostic neuroradiology plays a major role. Most
of the acutely ill ICU pts present vascular complications, edema or intracranial
hypertension/hydrocephalus.All these pathologies can be accurately evaluated by
means of CT scan. On the other hand, metabolic complications need to be evalu
ated by MRI, being CT not sufficient in almost all cases. In a recent review, it was
estimated that 16.6 % of ICU patients needed at least one brain neuroradiological
exam, and that in 21% of cases new lesions were detected. As a consequence
of the matter, diagnosis changed in 42% of cases and treatment in 23. However,
transporting the critically ill patients out of the ICU constitues a potential risk, mostly
for haemodinamically unstable subjects. Therefore, it is common practice that
neuroimaging is reserved to selected cases, while potentially more could benefit
of such tests. Recently, mobile CT scans had been introduced, optimized for
performing good quality non contrast and contrast enhanced CT, CT angiography
and CT perfusion exams at the patient's bed, thus letting to overcome transport
related risks. More advanced neuroimaging studies, like MRI, MRS or catheter
angiography, can be reserved as a second level exam for selected pathologies,
including the diagnosis of brain death.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the most common neuroimaging findings in the acutely ill/ICU
patient.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn the imaging criteria and advances for planning cases.
2. To learn different treatment options in tackling bone neoplasms.
3. To understand complications and limitations.
A556 16:57
Facet pathology
N. Karunanithy; London/UK (nara121
@doctors.org.uk)
Clinical and imaging evaluation of facet joint syndrome. To describe the relevant
anatomy and techniques of facet joint injection. To describe the relevant anatomy
and techniques of medial branch of dorsal ramus injection and denervation (rhizo
tomy). Critical evaluation of the available evidence for these techniques. Discussion:
Facet joint syndrome is a common cause of back pain. Although the typical clinical
presentation is with low back pain that may radiate to the buttocks, considerable
variation is symptoms can occur. Also there is often a mismatch between clinical
and imaging findings. Plain film radiography and MRI form the mainstay in the imag
ing evaluation. However, there has been recent interest in the role of SPECT-CT.
Facet joint injections can safely be performed under fluoroscopy or CT guidance.
The choice of agent used for the injection is variable and includes local anaesthetic
alone (diagnostic), steroid and local anaesthetic or sodium hyaluronate. Medial
branch nerve denervation has been proposed as an alternative to joint injections
for the management of facet syndrome to achieve longer term symptom relief. Tech
niques for denervation include radiofrequency ablation, cryoablation and chemical
ablation. Conclusion: Image-guided interventional techniques have a number of
applications in the treatment of facet joint syndrome. Appropriate patient selection
and understanding of the benefits and limitations of the various techniques can
optimise outcome for our patients.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the clinical symptoms of back pain.
2. To become familiar with the anatomy and related technique.
3. To be informed about potential advances in this field.
Panel discussion:
What are the new advances in the above fields that may change
current practice? 17:15
16:00 - 17:30 Room G/H
Neuro
RC 1911
How I report
Moderator:
M. Mechl; Brno/CZ
A557 16:00
A. MRI in microvascular and inflammatory diseases
P. Vilela; Almada/PT (ferrovilela@sapo.pt)
Small-vessel cerebrovascular disease is the most frequent disorder of the adult
brain, systemic hypertension being its commonest cause. The small-vessel
cerebrovascular disease manifestations comprise ischaemic and haemorrhagic
lesions. The former include focal lesions, as the lacunes, and diffuse lesions like
the subcortical white matter changes (also known as leukoaraiosis). The haemor
rhagic lesions may manifest as lobar haematomas and/or as microhaemorrhages.
The imaging patterns of small-vessel cerebrovascular disease are described. One
of the major differential diagnoses of small-vessel cerebrovascular disease is the
white matter changes associated with normal ageing. Although the task of defin
ing the normal and abnormal white matter changes in the elderly population is
difficult, the normal MRI brain findings found in this age group are discussed. The
different rating scales for age-related and small-vessel white matter changes are
also reviewed. The other main differential diagnoses include white matter lesions
associated with dementia and other neurodegenerative disorders, with inflammatory
disorders (vasculites), with vasculopathies, with adult-onset leukodystrophies and
with demyelinating disorders. Vasculitis is a heterogeneous group of inflammatory
disorders that cause a vessel wall inflammation. The vasculitis can be primary,
like the Primary Angiitis of the Central Nervous System, or secondary to several
causes, as systemic, malignancy and infectious disorders and drug-induced. The
most common vasculitis MR imaging patterns are reviewed. Finally, an algorithm
of magnetic resonance imaging pattern recognition in distinguishing different
microvascular and inflammatory diseases is presented.
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S132 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
CT. Morphologic criteria on thin-section CT scans include bronchial dilatation with
respect to the accompanying pulmonary artery (signet ring sign), lack of tapering of
bronchi and identification of bronchi within 1 cm of the pleural surface. Bronchiecta
sis may be classified as cylindric, varicose or cystic, depending on the appearance
of the affected bronchi. It is often accompanied by bronchial wall thickening, mucoid
impaction, and small-airways abnormalities. Besides CT nowadays MRI of the lung
is able to image the relevant morphological features of bronchiectasis. Additionally
functional changes due to bronchiectasis can be studied.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn more about the imaging findings in bronchiectasis, especially at MRI.
2. To be informed about the role of imaging in primary diagnosis, surveillance
and therapy monitoring.
3. To become familiar with the role of imaging in surgical planning.
16:00 - 17:30 Room N/O
Head and Neck
RC 1908
Differentiating skull base lesions
Moderator:
C.R. Habermann; Hamburg/DE
A563 16:00
A. Olfactory apparatus lesions
T.P.J. Duprez; Brussels/BE (thierry.duprez@uclouvain.be)
Medical imaging has nowadays integrated the diagnostic armamentarium of anos
mic patients regarding not only qualitative assessment of the olfactory tract but
also quantitative evaluation of olfactory bulb volumes which are known to closely
correlate to the olfactory function. Many clinical studies in various pathological
conditions have evidenced the value of such measurements in the work-up of olfac
tory dysfunction for both aetiological and prognostic purposes. Imaging work-up
also plays a role in the medico-legal evaluation of post-traumatic anosmia together
with electrophysiological and clinical olfactory testings. Technical improvements in
fibre tracking (FT) using diffusion-tensor imaging (DTI) and appropriate designs of
olfactory stimulation at BOLD-based functional MRI (fMRI) are expected to allow
insights into the neurophysiological processes and circuitry of olfaction in a very
near future. Imaging work-up of the anosmic patients will be the corner stone of
this lecture. The relevance of the different imaging techniques will be detailed.
Optimisation of MR sequences parameters will be discussed. Beyond the work-up
of anosmia, a comprehensive overview of the most common lesions of the olfactory
tract seen in clinical practice will be given.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn how to image the olfactory apparatus.
2. To become familiar with olfactory anomalies.
3. To learn differentiating lesions in anosmic patients.
A564 16:30
B. Cavernous sinus and pterygopalatine fossa lesions
A. Borges; Lisbon/PT (borgalexandra@gmail.com)
The central skull base (CSB) makes up the floor of the middle cranial fossa and
is mainly composed by the sphenoid and temporal bone anterior to the petrous
ridge. Two important structures constitute potential crossroads for disease spread
between the intra- and extracranial compartments: the cavernous sinuses, located
intracranially, lateral to the body of the sphenoid bone and the pterygopalatine
fossa, in the extracranial head and neck, squeezed between the posterior wall of
the maxillary sinus and the pterygoid plates. The cavernous sinuses are paired
venous dural-lined structures traversed by the cavernous carotid artery and cranial
nerves III, IV, V1, V2 and VI, bordered posteriorly by Meckel's cave and anteriorly
by the orbital fissures. The pterygopalatine fossa resembles an inverted pyramid
tapering superiorly into the inferior orbital fissure and opening inferiorly into the oral
cavity through the palatine canals. It laterally communicates with the infratemporal
fossa, medially with the nasal cavity and posteriorly with foramen rotundum and
the vidian canal. Meningiomas, neural tumours and cavernous carotid aneurysms
are the most common pathologic processes originating primarily from the cavern
2. To comprehend the various neurological complications that can occur in the
intensive care unit and to become familiar with their most typical imaging pat
terns.
3. To consolidate knowledge of the best neuroimaging protocols for the acutely
ill/ICU patient and establish the imaging protocol accordingly to the clinical
setting.
16:00 - 17:30 Room I/K
Chest
RC 1904
Phenotypes in obstructive airway disease: how do I
image, analyse and report?
Moderator:
P.A. Grenier; Paris/FR
A560 16:00
A. Asthma and associated conditions
P.Y. Brillet; Bobigny/FR
Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the airways responsible for recurrent
episodes or airflow limitation. It is associated with airway hyperresponsiveness
and remodelling. The role of CT is limited to patients with severe disease or for
differential diagnosis. CT is important for the diagnosis of associated conditions
(mainly, allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis and Churg Strauss syndrome).
Special attention should be paid to acquisition protocols in young patients. Usual
findings include bronchial (thickening of bronchial wall, decrease of lumen and distal
bronchiectasis) and bronchiolar (mucoid impactions, air trapping) abnormalities.
The role of imaging for characterisation of phenotypes will be discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn more about the imaging findings in asthma and associated conditions,
especially at low-dose and expiratory CT.
2. To be informed about the potential to grade the severity of the disease from
CT.
3. To learn how to report findings indicative of asthma and associated conditions.
A561 16:30
B. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
N. Sverzellati; Parma/IT
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is one of the leading causes of
morbidity and mortality worldwide. It is a heterogeneous disease affecting the
airways, the parenchyma as well as the vasculature with different severities during
the course of the disease. Computed tomography (CT) with the aid of dynamic
expiratory scanning has become the standard modality to objectively visualise
and quantitate emphysema, airway wall thickening and air trapping. In addition,
recent evidences suggest that CT can provide useful measures of the presence
and severity of pulmonary vascular disease for clinical correlation. An appropri
ate CT examination based on the use of the minimum possible radiation dose
allows a phenotypical definition of COPD patients. Thus, differentiating between
an emphysema-predominant and an airway-predominant phenotype via CT may
clearly impact followup strategy and therapeutic decision making in clinical practice.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn more about the imaging findings in COPD, including low dose and
expiratory CT.
2. To become familiar with the concept of CT phenotyping: airway obstruction
vs. alveolar destruction.
3. To be informed about the radiological findings of remodelling of airways and
pulmonary vasculature.
A562 17:00
C. Cystic fibrosis and other bronchiectatic diseases
M.U. Puderbach; Heidelberg/DE (m.puderbach@dkfz.de)
Several different diseases go along with the development of bronchiectasis.
Bronchiectasis may result from chronic infection, proximal airway obstruction, or
congenital bronchial abnormality. In cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis is one of the key
features of lung involvement. Bronchiectasis can present with a variety of nonspe
cific clinical symptoms, including haemoptysis, cough and hypoxia. Bronchiectasis
is defined as localised or diffuse irreversible dilatation of the cartilage-containing
airways or bronchi. The imaging gold standard for bronchiectasis is thin-section
Postgraduate Educational Programme
B S133
C D E F G H
A
European Congress of Radiology 2012
Monday
(due to its effect on aortic connective tissue and also by producing severe hyperten
sion). Hereditary diseases include Marfans syndrome (dedifferentiation of vascular
smooth muscle cells, enhanced elastolysis of aortic wall components, defective
fibrillin in the extracellular matrix), Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (hereditable connec
tive tissue disorders leading to tissue fragility), annuloaortic ectasia and familial
aortic dissection (elastolysis, deposits of mucopolysaccharid-like materials, cyctic
medial degeneration). Acquired conditions, such as hypertension, inflammation,
autoimmune processes, alter arterial wall composition in numerous ways, causing
smooth muscle cell necrosis and fibrosis of elastic structures, leading to stiffness
and vulnerability to pulsatile forces, thereby creating a substrate for aneurysms and
dissections. Clinical signs include severe chest pain, severe back pain, diastolic
murmur, multiple pulse deficits, hypotension/shock; abdominal pain, syncope and
stroke may also occur as less common clinical signs. Beside discussion of the
predisposing factors, clinical signs and prognosis of acute aortic dissection, a brief
description of variant anatomy (aortic spindle, ductus diverticulum) and structures
causing diagnostic dilemma (pericardial recess, left inferior pulmonary vein, left
superior intercostal vein, right atrial appendage) will be given.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about epidemiology and etiology of acute non-traumatic aortic dis
sections.
2. To learn the clinical signs, pathologic changes, consequences, and natural
history of aortic dissection.
3. To learn the classification systems for aortic dissections.
A568 16:28
B. Acute aortic dissections: imaging and image-based classification
J. Lammer; Vienna/AT (johannes.lammer@akhwien.at)
The most commonly used classification is the Stanford classification. In type A
dissections the ascending aorta is involved, and in type B dissection the ascending
aorta is not involved. The De Bakey classification subdivides the dissection in a
type I dissection which involves the entire aorta, a type II dissection which involves
the ascending aorta and a type III dissection of the descending aorta only. In 2001,
Erbel et al. published (European Heart Journal; 22: 1642-1681) a new classification:
class 1: classical aortic dissection with an intimal flap between true and false lumen;
class 2: intramural haematoma; class 3: discrete dissection without haematoma,
eccentric bulge at tear site; class 4: penetrating aortic ulcer; class 5: iatrogenic and
traumatic dissection. Clinical symptoms: the typical patient with aortic dissection
is male in his 60s with a history of hypertension who suffers with abrupt onset of a
sharp, ripping chest pain. Malperfusion of organs: compression of the true lumen
may cause malperfusion of the coronary and cerebral arteries, the spinal cord, all
abdominal organs and the limbs. This malperfusion may change the symptoms.
Imaging: contrast-enhanced CT is the imaging modality of choice. The report has
to describe the classification, the entry site, the grade of true lumen compression,
organ malperfusion, pericardial and pleura effusions and false lumen ectasia.
However, aortic valve insufficiency which can be a complication of type A dissec
tions is demonstrated by echocardiography, transesophageal ultrasound or MRI.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn how to diagnose aortic dissection.
2. To understand the pros and cons of different imaging modalities.
3. To learn how to classify aortic dissections by use of CTA and MRA.
4. To learn the indications for treatment.
A569 16:51
C. Acute aortic dissections: imaging of complications
M.H.K. Hoffmann; Ulm/DE (martin.hk.hoffmann@googlemail.com)
Complications occurring after acute aortic dissections should be separated into
those related to the disease per se and those related to post-treatment conditions.
Life-threatening complications related to the disease should be familiar as immedi
ate consequences for treatment may ensue. Most of these are either located in
the aortic root or related to mal-perfusion syndromes. The aortic root with very
thin walled structures of the sinus of valsalva is located within the pericardial sac.
The structure is prone to rupture and may produce life-threatening pericardial
tamponade or present clinically as sudden onset of severe aortic regurgitation. All
imaging modalities suitable for diagnostic workup in such conditions have to be
rapidly accessible and performable. This precludes lengthy MR imaging procedures
and renders ultrasound and CT as the mostly used modalities. The condition that
has to be recognised as the most important inductor of malperfusion syndromes
in the descending aorta is progression of dissection into aortic branches and
the true lumen collapse. Both conditions are easily discernible with CT imaging.
Complications related to treatment should be sub-classified into those after pure
surgical treatment and those related to endograft repair. The acute surgical com
ous sinuses. The pterygopalatine fossa is mainly afflicted by disease spread from
neighbouring structures namely infectious and malignant processes via perineural
spread. Primary lesions are much less common, the most important of which is
juvenile nasopharyngeal carcinoma. CT and MRI depict the bony and soft tissue
anatomy of these structures and according to location, pattern of spread and imag
ing features can differentiate the most common lesions in this area.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn the anatomy of the middle cranial fossa.
2. To become familiar with different types of middle cranial fossa lesions.
3. To learn how to differentiate such lesions.
A565 17:00
C. Jugular fossa lesions: how to differentiate?
H. Tanghe; Rotterdam/NL (tanghe@planet.nl)
The jugular foramen is an opening in the skull base between the temporal and oc
cipital bone.Asymmetry between left and right is the rule because of the asymmetry
of the intracranial venous drainage. Despite several studies the exact anatomy is
uncertain. Several anatomical structures go through the foramen: arteries, veins
and cranial nerves. The radiological evaluation of the foramen requires high-quality
thin-section imaging with both CT and MR. Angiography is seldom used for diag
nostic purposes without preoperative embolisation. It is important to recognise the
"pseudo lesions" of the foramen, like the normal asymmetry and the flow artefacts.
The most common tumour of the jugular foramen is the paraganglioma. This benign
tumour is locally aggressive, hyper vascular and causes significant erosion and
enlargement of the jugular foramen. The extension follows fixed pattern. When one
of these hallmarks is not present, consider another diagnosis. The schwannoma of
the lower cranial nerve causes a smooth enlargement of the foramen, with intact
cortical outline. Frequently the largest part of the tumour is located in the cerebello-
pontine angle. Cystic components are frequent. The jugular foramen meningioma
also causes a smooth enlargement of the foramen. Its extension pattern is different
from a schwannoma. It is the most common tumour that can give calcifications in
the foramen. Sometimes the imaging characteristics are atypical and do not match
any of these three most common tumours. Consider then a diagnostic angiography
and a biopsy. In children, a common lesion of the foramen is histiocytosis.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn the anatomy of the jugular fossa using CT, MRI and angiography.
2. To learn what lesions can be seen in this fossa.
3. To learn how to differentiate these lesions on a topographic basis.
16:00 - 17:30 Room P
Vascular
RC 1915
Non-traumatic acute aortic dissection
A566 16:00
Chairman's introduction
A.M. Belli; London/UK (Anna.Belli@stgeorges.nhs.uk)
Aortic aortic dissection is a life-threatening condition with a high mortality rate. The
epidemiology, aetiology, risk factors, clinical signs, classification and complications
of aortic dissection will be discussed. As acute aortic dissection is increasingly
managed by endovascular means, it is important for all radiologists to understand
the relative merits of various imaging modalities in making the diagnosis, the ana
tomical requirements for assessing suitability for endovascular repair as well as
understanding the indications for endovascular intervention. The session will be
followed by a panel discussion of imaging strategies which give the best informa
tion for endograft planning.
A567 16:05
A. Etiology, clinical signs and prognosis of acute non-traumatic
aortic dissection
V. Berczi; Budapest/HU (Berczi@hotmail.com)
Aortic dissection, a highly lethal disease, is defined as longitudinal cleavage of the
aortic media by a dissecting column of blood. The mortality rate of untreated aortic
dissection is 1-2% per hour for the first 24-48 hours, or 75% within the first 2 weeks
and 90% at 1 year. Predisposing factors include hypertension, inherited arterio
pathies characterised by cystic medial necrosis, pre-existing aortic aneurysm, a
bicuspid aortic valve, aortic coarctation, different vasculitides and the use of cocaine
Postgraduate Educational Programme
S13 C
B D E F G H
A European Congress of Radiology 2012
A572 17:00
C. Imaging of neonatal chest emergencies
A. Paterson; Belfast/UK (anniep@csi.com)
In this talk, the differences between term and premature infants presenting with
acute respiratory distress will be reviewed. The imaging diagnosis and followup
of both "medical" and "surgical" chest diseases will be presented. There is a wide
spectrum of conditions to be covered, and these include surfactant deficiency
disease (and complications of its treatment), retained fetal lung fluid, meconium
aspiration syndrome, neonatal pneumonia, chylothorax and persistent pulmonary
hypertension. Structural lung abnormalities that may require urgent surgical
intervention include congenital lobar overinflation, congenital pulmonary airway
malformation, congenital diaphragmatic hernia and oesophageal atresia tracheo-
oesophageal fistula. For all of these conditions, the chest radiograph remains the
most commonly used and important imaging modality. Due to time constraints,
congenital upper airway malformations and neonates with congenital heart disease
will not be discussed.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn about the etiologies of respiratory distress syndrome.
2. To become familiar with imaging findings.
3. To learn about the differential diagnoses.
plication with most deleterious effects is related to spinal cord ischaemia. The
condition also applies to endograft repair. It is therefore beneficial for the radiologist
involved either in pre-surgical imaging or interventional treatment to acquire thor
ough knowledge of the spinal cord blood supply. Endograft complications of interest
encompass endoleak formations, stent migrations and endoluminal stent collapse.
Learning Objectives:
1. To learn the most common complications of aortic dissection.
2. To learn the most appropriate imaging strategy for diagnosis of complications.
3. To understand the clinical significance and treatments of the most common
complications.
Panel discussion:
Which imaging modality is best for planning of endovascular
management? 17:14
16:00 - 17:30 Room Q
Paediatric
RC 1912
Chest imaging: what to use and when to use it
Moderator:
W. Hirsch; Leipzig/DE
A570 16:00
A. Thoracic trauma and foreign body inhalation
M.L. Lobo; Lisbon/PT (mluisalobo@gmail.com)
Thoracic trauma in children is most commonly seen in a polytrauma context and is
associated with significant morbidity and mortality. Blunt trauma accounts for the
majority of cases, often resultant from motor vehicle accident and pedestrian crash.
Common thoracic injuries include pulmonary contusion, rib fractures, pneumothorax
and haemothorax. Diaphragmatic and mediastinal injuries, such as aortic rupture
and tracheobrocheal tear, are rare but potentially life threatening. Different patterns
of injury are seen in children due to anatomical and physiological differences, and
these should be recognised. Chest radiography is the first and most important
imaging modality. MDCT allows accurate diagnosis for most traumatic injuries
and is usually performed for severe chest and/or polytrauma. Adapted paediatric
protocols are essential. Foreign body inhalation is a common paediatric domestic
accident, with potential serious or even fatal consequences. Clinical history is the
key for the diagnosis. With a definite history, bronchoscopy is the modality of choice
for both diagnosis and treatment. However, in many cases the aspiration event is
not witnessed and the diagnosis is often delayed or overlooked. The majority of
aspirated foreign bodies are non-opaque and imaging findings largely result from
complete or incomplete airway obstruction. Chest radiography is the first imaging
modality. Expiratory films (or lateral decubitus or fluoroscopy) are very useful to
demonstrate air-trapping. Chest MDCT offer excellent details of the tracheobronchial
tree and pulmonary parenchyma and is usually reserved for more complex cases
and/or long-standing foreign bodies.
Learning Objectives:
1. To become familiar with lesions observed in thoracic trauma.
2. To learn about strategies for imaging.
3. To become familiar with the classical and atypical signs of foreign body inhala
tion.
A571 16:30
B. Infiltrative diseases of the chest
G. Staatz; Mainz/DE (staatz@radiologie.klinik.unimainz.de)
High-resolution CT of the chest is the imaging technique of choice for the evaluation
of most infiltrative diseases of the chest. In children dose-adapted protocols should
be used and recommendations for suitable protocols will be given in the course.
The typical HRCT features of interstitial lung disease are ground-glass opacity,
consolidation, pulmonary nodules, tree-in but sign, bronchiolar wall thickening,
mucoid impaction, air trapping, septal thickening, mosaic perfusion and honey
combing. Most frequent diseases in children to be dealt with are bronchiectasis,
cystic fibrosis, asthma, constrictive bronchiolitis, bronchiolitis obliterans and extrinsic
allergic alveolitis and they will be demonstrated with use of a systematic approach.
Learning Objectives:
1. To understand the role of chest CT.
2. To learn about the typical CT findings of interstitial lung disease.
3. To become familiar with the most frequent diseases and learn about a sys
tematic approach.
4