EPMA JEPMA J1817epmajThe EPMA Journal1878-50771878-5085SpringerPMC3405436PMC3405436.13405436340543610.1007/s13167-011-0108-81081ArticleEPMA-World Congress 2011
1782011920112Suppl 12124713766170820112707201228072012© European Association for Predictive, Preventive and Personalised Medicine 2011pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesissue-copyright-statement© European Association for Predictive, Preventive and Personalised Medicine 20111st Congress-Day September 15th, Thursday
Satellite Symposia
Venue: University Bonn, Poppelsdorf, Nußallee 10
Educational Symposium
“Inflammation and Autoimmunity: Risk Assessment and Predictive Approaches through the Analytical Armamentarium”
Lecture Hall A, 1 pm–3:30 pm
Chairmen: Prof. S. Suchkov, MD, PhD
Prof. T. Marshall, PhD
1. Brief Opening Ceremony 1.00 pm
Prof. Dr. S. Suchkov
The I.M.Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University and Moscow State Medical & Dentistry University, Russia
2. Introductory: The concept of predictive, preventive & personalized medicines as the concerted players in the advanced healthcare 1.05 pm
Prof. Dr. O. Golubnitschaja
University of Bonn, Germany
Secretary-General, European Association for Predictive, Preventive and Personalised Medicine, EPMA, Brussels, Belgium
3. Predictive Medicine as being Illustrative: Antibodies as Tools to challenge for The New 1.30 pm
Prof. Dr. S. Suchkov
The I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University and Moscow State Medical & Dentistry University, Russia
Prof. Dr. A. Notkins
NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA
4. Predictive Medicine as being Illustrative: Interplay between Microbiome and the Host’s Immunity as a Factor to be used for Prediction 2.00 pm
Prof. Dr. T. Marshall
Murdoch University of Western Australia
5. “Round-table” discussion 2.30 pm
6. Setting up aSectionof the EPMA for young researchers, clinicians and medical students: Election of theExecutive Committeemembers 3.00 pm
Prof. Dr. O. Golubnitschaja
University of Bonn, Germany
Secretary General, EPMA
7. Closing 3.30 pm
Posters related to the topic:
Features of the innate and adaptive immunity in patients with intracranial infectious and inflammatory diseases
M. Sautin, N. Cherepakhina, T. Bodrova, S. Suchkov.
Peoples’ Friendship University of Russia, Moscow, Russia; I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russia; Moscow State Medical & Dentistry University, Moscow, Russia; Higher School of Economy, Moscow, Russia.
Post-infectious clinical-immunological syndrome and its role in the state-of-the-art model of immunopathogenesis of chronic infectious diseases
M.M Agirov2,5, J.A. Tabaksoeva2, K.A. Akhmedilova2, N.E. Cherepakhina1,3, Z.S. Shogenov2, T.A. Bodrova4, S.V.Suchkov1,2
1I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University (FMSMU), Moscow, Russia; 2Russian State Medical University (RSMU), Moscow, Russia; 3Federal Agency of Medical and Biological Problems under the Government of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russia; 4Department of Economy of Health Services, The Higher School of Economy, Moscow, Russia; 5University of World Politics and Law, Faculty of Economy of Medical Technologies.
Antithyroid autoantibody population as a source of antibody specificity and functionality: clinical significance of the phenomenon of the serological orchestra in monitoring of patients with Graves’ disease
Bogatyreva Z.I., Andreeva A.V., Suchkova E.N., Notkins A.L., Suchkov S.V.
University of World Politics and Law, Faculty of Economy of Medical Technologies, Div of Endocrinology, Municipal Clinical Hospital №81, Moscow, Russia;Department of Endocrinology,AGMA and Alexandro-Mariinskay Clinical Hospital, Astrakhan, Russia;Dept of Pathology, I.M. Sechenov First MMSU, Moscow, Russia; Dept of Endocrinology and Diabetology, and the Dept of Clinical Immunology, MGMSU, Moscow, Russia; National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA
Associative correlation between clinical manifestations of PICIS and CRID: modern trends in the pre-early diagnostics
K.A. Akhmedilova2, M.M. Agirov2, J.A. Tabaksoeva2, N.E. Cherepakhina1,3, T.A. Bodrova4, Z.S. Shogenov2, S.V.Suchkov1,2
1I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University (FMSMU), Moscow, Russia; 2Russian State Medical University (RSMU), Moscow, Russia; 3Federal Agency of Medical and Biological Problems under the Government of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russia; 4Department of Economy of Health Services, The Higher School of Economy, Moscow, Russia
Satellite Symposium
Individualised Nutrition in Preventive and Personalised Medicine
Lecture Hall B, 1 pm–3:30 pm
Chairman: Prof. Dr. G.M. Trovato, University of Catania, Italy
Speakers:
• Prof. Dr. I. Huybrechts, Faculty of Medicine, Ghent University. Food intake of European adolescents. Guidelines, adherence and compliers’ biomarkers.
• Dr. J. Twigt, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Preconception nutritional and lifestyle counseling applied in a tertiary clinical setting, uptake of advice and the association with IVF/ICSI treatment outcomes.
• Prof. Dr. G. Carruba, Department of Oncology, ARNAS-Civico, Palermo, Italy. A traditional Mediterranean diet changes metabolic profiles of endogenous hormones and reduces cancer risk: the evidences.
• Prof. Dr. P. Toniolo, Division of Epidemiology, Obs-Gyn, NY School of Medicine, NY University, New York, USA. Nutrition and cancer trends.
• Prof. Dr. D. Catalano, University of Catania, Italy. Tailored dietary prescription and Clustering of Clinical training, skills and expertise.
• Dr. F. M. Trovato, University of Catania, Italy. Dietary profile and physical activity assessment: a step toward a personalized approach.
• Dr. C. Pirri, University of Catania, Italy. Nutritional EBM approaches in the most common challenges and disease.
• Dr. N. Shapira, Medical & Functional Nutrition, R&D Foods & Diets, Institute for Nutrition Research, Rabin Center, Beilinson Hospital. Petach-Tikva, Israel. Higher women risk vs. men’s advantage with high Omega-6 PUFA intake: a gender paradox hypothesis
Panel Discussion
Closing remarks: Prof. Dr. G.M. Trovato, University of Catania, Italy. The need of nutritional paradigms and the use of e-learning tools in Medical
Curricula and Training
Satellite Symposium
EPMA / Springer
Education in Predictive, Preventive and Personalised Medicine
Lecture Hall A, 4 pm–6 pm
Chairmen: Dr. V. Costigliola, President of EPMA
Dr. P. Butler, Editorial Director, Biomedicine, Springer
Speakers:
• Dr. P. Butler, Editorial Director, Biomedicine, Springer
• Dr. M. Roelandse, Associate Editor, Biomedical Unit, Springer
• Prof. Dr. P. Evans, Director of Education of the EPMA-BOARD in UK
Panel Discussion
Moderator: Prof. Dr. O Golubnitschaja, Editor-in-Chief, The EPMA J. & Book-Series “Advances in PPPM”, EPMA / Springer
Panellists:
• Prof. Dr. P. Evans, Director of Education of the EPMA-BOARD in UK
• Prof. Dr. M. Mozaffari, Associate Editor,The EPMA J. & Book-Series “Advances in PPPM”
• Dr. S. Mandel, Associate Editor, The EPMA J. & Book-Series “Advances in PPPM”
• Prof. Dr. D. Desiderio, Associate Editor, The EPMA J.
• Prof. Dr. H. Iso, Associate Editor, The EPMA J.
• Prof. Dr. M. Scarpa, Associate Editor, The EPMA J.
2nd Congress-Day, September 16th, Friday
Venue: Parliament of Federal Republic of Germany – Bundeshaus,
Platz der Vereinigten Nationen 2
Congress Opening Ceremony: 9 am–9:20 am
Healthcare in Overview across the globe
9:30 am–12:00 am
Chairman: Prof. Dr. O. Golubnitschaja, Secretary-General of EPMA
Speakers:
• Prof. Dr. F. Paul, National Representative of EPMA in Germany
• Dr. K. Grosios, National Representative of EPMA in UK
• Prof. Dr. H. Iso, National Representative of EPMA in Japan
• Dr. M. Kapalla, National Representative of EPMA in Slovak Republic
• Prof. Dr. K. Richter, National Representative of EPMA in Macedonia
• Dr. D. Dimitrov, National Representative of EPMA in Bulgaria
• Prof. Dr. M. Dündar, Co-National Representative of EPMA in Turkey
• Prof. Dr. W. Sai Ho Chan, National Representative of EPMA in Taiwan
Panel Discussion
Moderator: Dr. V. Costigliola, President of EPMA
Panellists:
• Dr. A. Benini, Missionary of the Organisation of United Nations
• Dr. R. Maksimovic, Missionary of the World Health Organisation
• Dr. P. Bilinski, Chief of Sanitary Inspector responsible for public health in Poland
• Prof. V. Paunescu, the Presidency health politics councelor, Romania
Lunch: 12 am–1 pm
National & International Granting Strategies in PPPM
Innovative Programmes
Economy of Personalised Medicine
1 pm–2:20 pm
Chairman: Prof. Dr. O. Golubnitschaja
Speakers:
• Prof. Dr. M. Goldman, Director, Innovative Medicine Initiative, EU-Commission, Brussels
• Dr. C. Longson, Director, National Institute for Health & Clinical Excellence, UK
• Dr. L. Kristiansen, Medical Sciences, European Science Foundation, Strasbourg, France
• Prof. Dr. Paltsev, Vice-Director of the I. Kurchatov National Center for Science and Technologies, Russia
• Dr. J. Greuel, Adjunct Professor of Finance & Healthcare Management IE Business School, Madrid, Spain / Managing Director, Bioscience Valuation BSV GmbH, Germany
Panel Discussion
Moderator: Prof. Dr. M. Ferrari, President of EUSPM
Panellists:
• Dr. J.-L. Sanne, Directorate for Personalised Medicine, EU-Commission, Brussels, Belgium
• Prof. A. Streinu Cercel, Ministry Secretary of State, ministry of Health, Romania
• Speakers
Patient Needs
Challenges for Stakeholders in Predictive, Preventive & Personalised Medicine
2:30 pm–4:00 pm
Chairman: Prof. Dr. M. Scarpa, “Brains for Brain” Research Foundation
Speakers:
• Mr. M. Hadder, NRW-Representative, German Federation of Diabetics, Germany
• Mr. J. Bowis, President of Health First Europe, Vice-President of the European Health Forum Gastein, Chairman of the Health Advisory Board of GlaxoSmithKline
Panel Discussion
Moderator: Dr. G. Vittadini, Director of Technology Opportunities, Bracco Imaging
Panellists:
• General Practitioners: Dr. V. Costigliola, President of EPMA
Dr. J. Mendive, National EPMA-Representative in Spain
• Industry: Dr. A. Jansen, Director, DiaDexus
• Patient Organisations: Prof. Dr. P. Schwarz, Representative of “European Coalition for Diabetes”, ECD
• Insurance: Dr. L. Duta, the National Insurance House President, Romania
Innovative PPPM-Centres
Overall Concept
Medical Imaging for Disease Prediction and Prevention
Innovative Diagnostic Tools
New Perspectives in Healthcare
4:10 pm–5:20 pm
Chairman: Prof. Dr. G. Frija, Paris, France
Speaker:
• European Society of Radiology: Prof. Dr. G. P. Krestin, Erasmus MC, University Medical Centre Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Panel Discussion
Moderator: Prof. Dr. O. Golubnitschaja, Molecular Diagnostics, University of Bonn, Germany
Panellists:
• “One Day Clinic International”: Mr. B. Dereine, President of ODC, Luxembourg Dr. V. Costigliola, Medical Director, ODC International, Brussels, Belgium
• Laboratory Medicine: Dr. M. Pelsers, Dr. von Stein, “Laboratory Stein GmbH”, Germany
• Bioinformatics: Dr. M. Kapalla, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia; Negentropic Systems, s.r.o, Ruzomberok, Slovakia
• Medical Imaging: Prof. Dr. G. Krestin, Prof. Dr. G. Frija
• Innovative molecular diagnostic tools: Prof. Dr. Ch. Gerner,
Cancer Proteomics, University of Vienna
Dr. Th. Joos, NMI, Germany, Dr. K. Krapfenbauer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Vienna, Austria, Dr. P. Schulz-Knappe, Protagen GmbH, German
Educationin Predictive, Preventive & Personalised Medicine: Challenges
Innovative Programmes
Didactic Materials
5:30 pm–6:30 pm
Chairman: Dr. P. Butler, Editorial Director, Biomedicine, Springer
Speakers:
• Dr. J. Delgado, Head of Unit Vocational Education and Training Policy, Leonardo da Vinci Programme, EU-Commission, Brussels, Belgium
• Dr. M. Roelandse, Associate Editor, Biomedical Unit, Springer
Panel Discussion
Moderator: Prof. Dr. O. Golubnitschaja, Editor-in-Chief,The EPMA J. & Book-Series “Advances in PPPM”, EPMA / Springer
Panellists:
• Prof. Dr. P. Evans, Director of Education of the EPMA-BOARD in UK
• Dr. V. Costigliola, Associate Editor,The EPMA J. & Book-Series “Advances in PPPM”
• Prof. Dr. O. Topolcan, National Representative of EPMA in Czech Republic
• Prof. Dr. M. Mozaffari, Associate Editor,The EPMA J. & Book-Series “Advances in PPPM”
• Dr. S. Mandel, Associate Editor, The EPMA J. & Book-Series “Advances in PPPM”
• Prof. Dr. D. Desiderio, Associate Editor, The EPMA J.
• Prof. Dr. H. Iso, Associate Editor, The EPMA J.
• Prof. Dr. M. Scarpa, Associate Editor, The EPMA J.
Congress dinner:Rhine-river cruise, 7 pm–10 pm
3rd Congress-Day, September 17th, Saturday
Venue: University Bonn, Poppelsdorf, Nußallee 10
Specialised Session
Predictive, Preventive and Personalised Medicinein Cancer
Lecture Hall A
9:00 am–12:00 am
Chairmen: Prof. Dr. D. Desiderio, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, USA
Prof. Dr. R. Danesi, University of Pisa, Italy
Keynote Speakers:
• Prof. Dr. D. Characiejus, Medical Faculty, Vilnius University, Lithuania, “First Do No Harm” and the Importance Of Prediction in Oncology.
• Dr. X. Zhan, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, USA. The Use of Variations in Proteomes to Predict, Prevent, and Personalize Treatment for Clinically Nonfunctional Pituitary Adenomas. (awarded article, The EPMA J.)
• Dr. Ch. Swanton, Translational Cancer Therapeutics Laboratory, London, UK
Short oral presentations:
• Dr. M. Mallmann et al., University of Bonn, Germany, Prediction and Prognosis in Breast cancer (awarded article, The EPMA J.)
• Prof. Dr. Christopher Gerner, Department of Medicine I, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. Early cancer diagnosis and novel therapeutic options resulting from systematic proteome profiling of tumour-associated stroma cells.
• Dr. A. González Neira, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO). Madrid, Spain. EPMA-Spain. Pharmacogenomics in Cancer Therapy
• Dr. M. Del Re & Dr. R. Danesi, University of Pisa, Italy. The glutathione-S-transferase (GST) P1 313G is a risk allele for the development of grade ≥2 neurotoxicity in patients treated with oxaliplatin.
• Dr. E. Moiseeva, Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Moscow, Russian Federation. Towards Personalised Paradigm of Experimental Anticancer Research With “3S” Concept
• Prof. Dr. M. Piesta & Prof. Dr. O. Topolcan, Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine in Pilsen, Charles University in Prague, Czech Republic; Prognostic significance of miR-21 and miR-143 expression in tissue samples of Colorectal Carcinoma and Colorectal liver metastases.
• Dr. S. Kovalenko, Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Novosibirsk, Russia, VNTR at HER2/neu Gene Amplification Border in Breast Cancer—the “Weakest Link” in Gene Amplification?
Panel Discussion
Moderator: Dr. W. Spek, Managing Director, EuroBioForum
Panellists:
Speakers
Poster Overview: Dr. S. Hagan, Glasgow Caledonian University, Scotland, Editorial BOARD, The EPMA J.
Posters related to the topic:
Identification of Calponin-h2 as potential serum-based marker for the early diagnosis of breast cancer
Manuel Debald, Sebastian Franken2, Lukas Carl Heukamp3, Andrea Linke4, Matthias Wolfgarten1, Klaus-Jürgen Walgenbach1, Christian Rudlowski1, Stefan Holdenrieder4, Michael Braun1, Gunther Hartmann4, Walther Kuhn4, Gisela Walgenbach-Brünagel4
1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Centre for Integrated Oncology, University of Bonn, Germany; 2Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Bonn, Bonn; 3Institute of Pathology, Centre for Integrated Oncology, University of Bonn, Germany; 4Institute for Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, Centre for Integrated Oncology, University of Bonn, Germany.
Vitamin D and Cancer Diseases
Fuchsova R., Topolcan O., Pazdiora P., Svobodova S., Vrzalova J., Krakorova G., Spisakova M., Treska V., Treskova I., Pesek M., Finek J. Faculty Hospital and Medical Faculty in Pilsen, Charles University, Czech Republic.
Multiplex panel for ovarian carcinoma
Jindra Vrzalova1,3, O Topolcan1,3, Z Novotny2, J Presl2, M Pesta3
1Immunoanalytic Laboratory, Dep. of Nuclear Medicine, Faculty Hospital in Pilsen; 2Dep. of Gyneacology, Faculty Hospital in Pilsen, Czech Republic; 3Central Isotopic laboratory, Fac. of Medicine in Pilsen, Charles University in Prague. Czech Republic.
Cancer-associated immune-mediated syndromes: Pathogenic values and clinical implementation
A.M. Merkulova1, A.V. Kostalevskaya1, S.V. Suchkov1,2
1I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University; 2Moscow State Medical Dentistry University.
Incorporation of National Cancer Control Plane in Georgian Health Care System
M.Maglakelidze, N.Jokhadze, T.Rukhadze, R.Gagua
National Cancer Center of Georgia, Association of Oncologists of Georgia
Specialised Session
Predictive Diagnostics and Personalised Medicinein Paediatrics
The Model Of Neurodegenerative Disorders
Lecture Hall B
9:00 am–12:30 am
9:00–9.20 M. Scarpa, I D. Begley UK
Keynote Lecture
• Brain, rare neurological diseases and European health care systems. Mr. John Bowis, OBE, UK
9:20–10:00 Theme 1 – Personalised Medicine for Brain Rare Diseases: The family expectation
• Living with a person affected by a rare disease: impact on the family and carers –
• Promoting awareness brain diseases in Europe: enabling the dialogue between science and society to prevent, predict, personalise the Medicine – Mrs. Mary Baker, MBE—President EFNA
• Medical science and prevention of paediatric diseases: G. Tsangaris G
10:00–11:15 Theme 2 – Paediatric Personalised Medicine and Brain Rare diseases: The science effort
• Birth asphyxia as the major complication in newborns: Moving towards improved individual outcomes by prediction, targeted prevention and tailored medical care. O. Golubnitschaja, Secretary-General EPMA, D
• Prediction of Neurodegenerative disorders: The search for biomarkers, I. Blasig D, JM Heard F
• Understanding pathogenesis: fundamental insights and new therapeutic opportunities F. Platt, UK
• The right therapy for the patients at the right moment: the scientist perspective C. Giaquinto for GRIP (General Research in Paediatrics, EU project)
• The right therapy for the patient at the right moment: the Biotech effort SHIRE
11:30–12:00 Discussion
12:00–12:20 keynote lecture
• The burden of neurological diseases of childhood in Europe: what is the future?
Prof. Timothy Cox, UK
Closing remarks
Poster Overview: Prof. Dr. M. Dündar, Editorial BOARD, The EPMA J.
Posters related to the topic:
Drugs may contribute oral-facial clefts in newborn baby
Velickova, N., Gacova, M., Kamcev, N., Angelovska, B., Dimova, C.
Faculty of medical science University “Goce Delcev” – Stip.
Comparative study of allele frequencies of PAI-1, MTHFR, FV, FI and GpIIIa gene polymorphisms in children with Henoch–Schönlein purpura, Schamberg Disease and healthy children
Shirinbekova N.V., Voronina E.V., Voitovich A.N., Larionova V.I.
St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, St. Petersburg, Russia.
Anti-Streptolysin O (ASO) titer and anti-basal ganglia antibodies (ABGA) in a large cohort of Tourette patients: possible perspective of more targeted preventive and therapeutic approaches
R. Rizzo1, F. Chiarotti2, M. Buttiglione3, F. Cardona4, M. Gulisano1, N. Nardocci5, G. Orefici2, E. Veneselli6, F. Vitiello3, and D. Martino8
1Child and Adolescent Neuropsychiatry, Materno-Infantile and Radiological Sciences Department, University of Catania, Italy; 2Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy; 3Dept. of Human Pharmacology and Physiology, Univ. of Bari, Italy; 4Department of Child and Adolescent Neuropsychiatry, University of Rome “La Sapienza”, Rome, Italy; 6Besta Neurological Institute, Milan, Italy; 7Istituto G. Gaslini, Genoa, Italy; 8Dep.of Neurol. And ,Psych. Sciences, Univ. of Bari, Italy
The personalized approach to drug dosing of Valproic Acid at women with epilepsy, who are carriers of mutations of Folate Cycle Genes
D. Dmitrenko, M.V Pilugina, N. Shnayder.
Krasnoyarsk State Medical University named after Prof. V.F. Vojno-Jasenetsky, Krasnoyarsk, Russia
Lunch:12 am–1 pm
Specialised Session
Predictive, Preventive and Personalised Medicinein Cardiovascular Diseases
Lecture Hall A
1 pm–3:45 pm
Chairmen: Prof. Dr. H. Iso, Osaka University, Japan
Prof. Dr. P. Evans, British Heart Foundation, Imperial College London, UK
Keynote Speakers:
• Prof. Dr. H. Iso, Osaka University, Japan, PPPM in Cardiovascular Pathologies: Japanese health success in combating cardiovascular diseases.
• Prof. Dr. P. Evans, British Heart Foundation Cardiovascular Sciences Unit, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, UK The influence of Sulforaphane on vascular health and its relevance to nutritional approaches to prevent Cardiovascular Disease.
• Prof. Dr. H. Rosolova, Charles University in Prague, Medical Faculty in Pilsen, Czech Republic, Cardio-metabolic risk prediction should be superior to cardiovascular risk assessment in primary prevention of Cardiovascular Diseases.
• Prof. Dr. J. Kastrup, The Heart Centre, Rigshospitalet University Hospital Copenhagen, Denmark. Stem cells therapy for cardiovascular repair in ischemic heart disease: How to predict and secure optimal outcome?
• Dr. A. Jansen, DiaDexus, Cardiovascular risk assessment: view of industry.
• Dr. F. Depasse, Diagnostica Stago, Paris, France.
Short oral presentations:
• Dr. H. Yatsuya, Department of Public Health, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Japan. Adiposity and cardiovascular disease risk in Japan: --implications to public health screening program of obesity for the prevention of cardiovascular disease.
• Dr. Y. Kokubo, Department of Preventive Cardiology, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, Osaka, Japan. Associations of impaired glucose metabolism and dyslipidemia with cardiovascular disease: What have we learned from Japanese cohort studies for individualized prevention and treatment?
• Dr. K. Yamagishi, et al., 1University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba; 2Osaka Medical Center for Health Science and Promotion, Osaka; 3Osaka University, Suita; 4Ibaraki Prefectural University of Health Sciences, Ami. N-terminal fragment of the prohormone brain-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) and cardiovascular risk factors amongst Japanese population: The Circulatory Risk in Communities Study.
• Dr. J. Polivka, & Prof. Dr. Topolcan, O. 1Faculty of Medicine of Charles University in Pilsen and Teaching Hospital Plzen, Dpt. of Neurology; 2Immuno-Analytic Laboratory; 3West-Bohemian University Plzen, Czech Republic. Optimisation of Stroke Care in Concept of Predictive, Preventive and Personalised Medicine.
Panel Discussion
Moderator: Prof. Dr. Ch. Gluud, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark; Danish National Coordinator, ECRIN.
Panellists:
• Dr. E. Jorgensen, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark
• Speakers
Poster Overview: Dr. A. Benini, University Copenhagen, Denmark, Editorial BOARD, The EPMA J.
Posters related to the topic:
The effect of Perindopril on Endothelin and Nitric Oxide Production and Circadian alteration of Cardiovascular Indicis in hypertensive rats
T. Kezeli1, N. Gongadze2, G. Sukoian1, N. Dolidze1, T. Rukhadze1
1Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, State University; 2Department of Pharmacology, State Medical University, Tbilisi, Georgia. E-mail: tamarakezeli@hotmail.com
AHSG gene polymorphism affects plasma levels of non-high-density lipoprotein cholesterol in Caucasians. Pavel Suchanek1,2, Jaroslav A Hubacek1,2, Ivana Kralova Lesna1,2
1Institute for Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic; 2Cardiovascular Research Centre, Prague, Czech Republic.
The effect of the supplementation omega 3 fatty acids to lipids and anthropometric parameters in the obese young P. Suchanek1,2, J.A.Hubacek1,2,3, I. Kralova Lesna1,2, V. Pinekerova1, R. Stupalova1, N. Stankova1volunteers.
1Institute for Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic; 2Centre for Cardiovascular Research, Prague, Czech Republic, 3South Bohemia University, Faculty of Public Health and Social Studies, Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic.
Large Vessel Aneurisms in the Era of Genomics and Proteomics: Horizons of Predictive Medicine
D.I. Cherepakhin4, Yu.V. Belov1, E. Charchyan1, S.V. Suchkov2,3
1B.V. Petrovsky Russian Research Center for Surgery (RRCS), Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russia; 2I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russia; 3Moscow State Medical Dentistry University (MSMDU), Moscow, Russia; 4 N.I. Pirogov Russian State Medical University (RSMU), Moscow, Russia.
Predictive testing of thrombophilia-related genetic variations in the Czech population
Koudová, M.; Vlčková, R.; Bittóová, M.; Majer, M.; Slepičková, I.; Lavická, E., Hlaváčová, M.; Izrael, G.; Indráková, V., Karas, J. GHC Genetics, s.r.o.—Private Medical Facility, Prague, Czech Republic
Specialised Session
Predictive, Preventive and Personalised Medicinein Neurodegenerative Diseases
Lecture Hall B
1 pm–3:45 pm
Chairmen: Dr. S. Mandel, Technion, University of Haifa, Israel
Prof. Dr. A. Tasker, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
Speakers:
• Dr. A. Roses, Duke University and Zinfandel Pharmaceuticals, Inc., USA. Discovery, Development, Validation and qualification of markers with clinical utility to the delay of onset of Alzheimer’s Disease clinical trial.
• Prof. Dr. G. P. Krestin, Erasmus MC, University Medical Centre Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Application of imaging in prediction, prevention and treatment monitoring of neurodegenerative diseases.
• Dr. S. Mandel, Eve Topf Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases Research and Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel. Biomarkers for Prediction and Targeted Prevention of Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s Diseases: Evaluation of Drug Clinical Efficacy. (awarded article, The EPMA J.)
• Dr. I. Grossman, Cabernet Pharmaceuticals, USA, Alzheimer’s disease: diagnostics, prognostics and the road to prevention. (awarded article, The EPMA J.)
• Dr. I. Barber, Senior VP Global Marketing, Diagnostics Division, ExonHit Therapeutics, Paris, France
• Prof. Dr. A. Tasker, Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Prince Edward Island, Charlottetown, PEI, Canada. New animal models of progressive neurodegeneration: tools for identifying presymptomatic therapeutic targets.
Short oral presentations:
• Dr. O. Weinreb et al., Eve Topf Centers of Excellence for Neurodegenerative Diseases Research, Rappaport Family Research Institute, Israel. Technological Aspects of Personalized Approaches in Treatment of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis. (awarded article, The EPMA J.)
• Dr. K. Yeghiazaryan et al., Molecular Diagnostics, Department of Radiology, University of Bonn, Germany Key molecular pathways affected by glaucoma pathology: Is predictive diagnosis possible? (awarded article, The EPMA J.)
• Prof. Dr. F. Paul, Charité Berlin, Germany, The role of optical coherence tomography in predicting and monitoring disease activity in MS.
Panel Discussion
Moderator: Dr. I. Grossman, Cabernet Pharmaceuticals, USA
Panellists:
• Prof. Dr. L. Spiru, President “Ana ASLAN” International Foundation, Bucharest, Romania
• Prof. Dr. D. Muresanu, President of the Society for the Study of Neuroprotection and Neuroplasticity (SSNN), Romania
• Speakers
Poster Overview: Prof. Dr. F. Paul, Charité Berlin, Germany, Editorial BOARD, The EPMA J.
Coffee break:3:45–4:15 pm
Specialised Session
Predictive, Preventive and Personalised Medicinein Diabetes Care
Lecture Hall A
4:15 pm–7:00 pm
Chairmen: Prof. Dr. M. Mozaffari, Georgia Health Sciences University, Augusta, Georgia, USA
Prof. Dr. T. Josifova University Hospital Basel, Eye Clinic, Switzerland
Speakers:
• Dr. C. Sena, Medical Faculty, University of Coimbra, Portugal. Potential new strategies in Diabetes therapeutics. (awarded article, The EPMA J.)
• Dr. W. Abebe, Georgia Health Sciences University, Augusta, Georgia, USA, Endothelial dysfunction in diabetes: potential application of circulating markers as advanced diagnostic and prognostic tools. (awarded article, The EPMA J.)
• Prof. Dr. T. Josifova, University Hospital Basel, Eye Clinic, Switzerland Visual Loss in Diabetic Patients—do we prevent it or do we treat only the complications?
• Dr. S. Li Calzi, University of Florida, USA, Endothelial progenitor dysfunction in the pathogenesis of diabetes retinopathy: treatment concept to correct diabetes-associated deficits. (awarded article, The EPMA J.)
• Prof. Dr. J. Coelho, Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Coimbra, Portugal. Drug delivery systems: Advanced technologies potentially applicable in personalized treatments. (awarded article, The EPMA J.)
Short oral presentations:
• Dr. R. Krishna, Department of Periodontics, College of Dental Medicine, Augusta, USA. Characteristics of inflammation common to both diabetes and periodontitis: are predictive diagnosis and targeted preventive measures possible?
• M.Sc. M. Cebioglu, Molecular Diagnostics, Department of Radiology, University of Bonn, Germany. Cancer predisposition in Diabetes: Risk factors considered for predictive diagnostics. (awarded article, The EPMA J.)
• Prof. Dr. B. Baban, College of Dental Medicine, Georgia Health Sciences University, Augusta, Georgia, USA. Inflammatory markers as potential predictive indicators for diabetic nephropathy.
• Dr. D. Dimitrov, National Representative of EPMA in Bulgaria. Bariatric Medicine: Multidisciplinary approach for obesity prevention.
• Prof. Dr. V. Larionova, Russia, St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russia. Polymorphic genetic markers are of significance in developing of the diabetes mellitus type II in metabolic syndrome patients.
Panel Discussion
Moderator: Prof. Dr. L. Salminen, Ophthalmologic Clinic, University of Tampere, Finland, National Representative of EPMA in Finland
Panellists: Speakers
Poster Overview: Prof. Dr. J. Coelho, Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Coimbra, Portugal, Editorial BOARD, The EPMA J.
Posters related to the topic:
Ankle—brachial index in type 2 diabetes patients and cardiovascular risk
B. Nussbaumerova, H. Rosolova, F. Sefrna, I. Sipova, P. Sifalda. 2nd Medical Department, Charles University in Prague—Medical Faculty in Pilsen, Czech Republic.
Measurement of Angiogenesis Promotors and Cytokines Concentrations in Intraocular Fluid of Patients with Proliferative Diabetic Retinopathy for treatment tailoring possibility Jindra Vrzalova, Kozova Marketa, Rusnak Stepan, Ricarova Renata, Topolcan Ondrej
Immunoanalytic Laboratory and Eye Department of University Hospital and Medical Faculty in Pilsen, E. Benese 13, 305 99 Plzen, Czech Republic.
MSCs as tools for restoring morphofunctional deficiency and modulating immune responses at the preclinical stage of T1D: milestones and handicaps. D.S. Kostyushev1, M.A. Paltsev2, S.V. Suchkov1,3
1I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University; 2National Research Center “Kurchatov Institute”; 3Moscow State Medical Dentistry University.
Association of ACE I and FABP2 genes polymorphism in cases with Type-2 Diabetes mellitus in Northern India
Farzana Mahdi1, Debdoot Banerjee1, Nazia Rizvi3, Rajendra Sapkota2, Swati3, Nehal Ahmed Khan2, Syed Tasleem Raza1
1Era’s Lucknow Medical College & Hospital, Lucknow, India; 2Baba Farid Institute of Technology, Dehradun, India; 3Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University, Lucknow, India.
Nutrition of pacients with Diabetes mellitus type 2 in relation with smoking adiction – survey post- monica 2008/2009 in Czech Republic
Galovcová M., Adámková V., Cífková R., Petržílková Z., Bruthans J., Lánská V.
Department of Preventive Cardiology, Institute for Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Prague.
Specialised Session
Tailored Prevention, Personalised Nutrition, Body Culture & Sport
Lecture Hall B
4:15 pm–7:00 pm
Chairmen: Prof. Dr. H. Boecker, University of Bonn, Germany
Dr. P. Roberti di Sarsina, Non-Conventional Medicine, High Council of Health,
Ministry of Health, Italy
Speakers:
• Prof. Dr. J. Ionescu, Research Department of the Spezialklinik Neukirchen, Germany; Department of Medical Nutrition, Donau-University Krems, Austria.Specialised Clinic Neukirchen, Germany, Personalized anti-inflammatory nutrition for atopic eczema and psoriasis patients.
• Dr. P. Roberti di Sarsina, Non-Conventional Medicine, High Council of Health, Ministry of Health, Italy
• Dr. F. de Meester, DMF-PL, Gliwice, Poland “Innovative PsychoSomatic Markers for prediction, prevention and personalised treatment of non-communicable diseases”
• Prof. Dr. G. Trovato, Catania University, Italy. Lifestyle in health and disease: Mediterranean diet as a paradigm of an EBM and PPPM approach.
• Prof. Dr. K. Richter, Clinic for Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Clinic Nuernberg & Faculty for social work, GSO University Nuernberg, Germany. Shift Work and Breast Cancer.
Short oral presentations:
• Dr. J. Kinkorová, Charles Univesity, Prague, Czech Republic, Health – NCP –Net. Health NCP of the Czech Republic
• Prof. Dr. H. Boecker, Radiological Clinic, University of Bonn, Germany, On the emerging role of neuroimaging in determining functional and structural brain integrity induced by physical exercise: impact for Predictive, Preventative, and Personalized Medicine.
• Dr. T. Cesuroglu, Dr. A. Brand. Implementation of Personalized Health Care in Health Services in the Context of Public Health Genomics – Looking for the Broader Picture. Institute for Public Health Genomics, Maastricht University.
• Dr. N. Moiseeva, I Belenova, A. Kunin, The Voronezh N.N.Burdenko, State Medical Academy, Russia Individual (personalized) caries prevention: strategy and tactics.
Panel Discussion
Moderator: Prof. Dr. J. G. Ionescu, Specialised Clinic Neukirchen, Germany
Panellists:
Speakers
Poster Overview: Prof. Dr. G. Trovato, Catania University, Italy, Editorial BOARD, The EPMA J.
Posters related to the topic:
Predictive diagnostic value of biomarkers for Renal Failure in Medical Emergency Relationship of NGAL (Neutrophil Gelatinase Associated Lipocalin) with underweightness and malnutrition
G. Fabio Martines, Clara Pirri, Francesca Trovato, Salvatore Toro,Antonia Tonzuso, Giuseppe Carpinteri, Daniela Catalano e Guglielmo Trovato
MCAU e Diagnostica e Terapia Medica – Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria “Policlinico-Vittorio Emanuele”, Università di Catania, Italy.
Tailored medical treatments in obesity. Adherence to the mediterranean diet promote a lower inflammatory profile and minor insulin resistance and lipid metabolic alterations
Clara Pirri, Francesca M. Trovato, Antonia Tonzuso, Alessia Pennisi, Fabio G. Martines, Guglielmo M. Trovato, Daniela Catalano
Department of Internal Medicine - Medical Diagnostics and Therapy - University of Catania.
Personalized nutritional approach as the core treatment for NAFLD. Greater adherence to mediterranean diet is a targeted prevention
Francesca M. Trovato, Clara Pirri, Antonia Tonzuso, Alessandro Pennisi, Fabio G. Martines, Guglielmo M. Trovato, Daniela Catalano
Department of Internal Medicine - Section of Medical Diagnostics and Therapy - University of Catania.
AD36 human adenovirus seropositivity. A novel obesity biomarker associated with enhanced response to dietary interventions
Guglielmo M. Trovato1, Giuseppe Fabio Martines, Clara Pirri, Francesca M. Trovato, Patrizia Pace, Antonia Tonzuso, Alessia Pennisi, Salvatore Toro, Daniela Catalano
1Department of Internal Medicine, Diagnostica e Terapia Medica, Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia, Università di Catania, Catania, Italy.
A predictive diagnostic serological biomarker of NAFLD AD37 human adenovirus as a putative causative factor Guglielmo M. Trovato1, Giuseppe Fabio Martines1, Clara Pirri1, Francesca M. Trovato1, Angelo Castro2, Adriana Garozzo2, Daniela Catalano1
1Department of Internal Medicine, Diagnostica e Terapia Medica, Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia, Università di Catania, Catania, Italy; 2Department of Microbiological and Gynaecological Sciences, Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia, Università di Catania, Catania, Italy.
Predictive value of dominant nodule in Hashimoto Thyroiditis. A clue for a personalized approach for greater risk of Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma
Guglielmo Trovato, Paolo Amico, G. Fabio Martines, Marine Castaing, Antonietta Torrisi, Giada Maria Vecchio, Lucia Salvatorelli, Daniela Catalano, Gaetano Magro
Department G.F. Ingrassia, Anatomic Pathology, and Department of Internal Medicine, Diagnostica e Terapia Medica, “University of Catania, Catania, Italy. E-mail: g.magro@unict.it
Uro-fecal disorders and dyspraxia. fMRI as an useful tool for personalized medicine. Preliminary results Bernardo Ventimiglia, Andreas Tsirgiotis, Silvia Motta, Tiziana Puglisi, Guglielmo Trovato
European Neurosciences Study Group. Servizio di Neuro Urologia ed Urodinamica Dipartimento delle Specialità Medico Chirurgiche. Università di Catania.
Ayurveda, the Paradigm for Personalized Medicine. Antonio Morandi1,2, Carmen Tosto1, Dacia Dalla Libera1,2,3
1Ayurvedic Point, C.so Sempione 63, 20149 Milan, Italy; 2SSIMA, Italian Scientific Society for Ayurvedic Medicine, C.so Sempione 63, 20149 Milan, Italy; 3IRCCS San Raffaele, DIMER, Dept of Neurology, Via Olgettina 48, 20132 Milan, Italy.
Salutogenesis and Ayurveda: Indications for Public Health Management
Antonio Morandi1,2, Dacia Dalla Libera1,2,3
1Ayurvedic Point, C.so Sempione 63, 20149 Milan, Italy; 2SSIMA, Italian Scientific Society for Ayurvedic Medicine, C.so Sempione 63, 20149 Milan, Italy; 3IRCCS San Raffaele, DIMER, Dept of Neurology, Via Olgettina 48, 20132 Milan, Italy.
Gknowmix.Com: A Gateway to Genomic Healthcare Maritha J Kotze, Craig Watt, Theresa Janse van Rensburg, Tony Bunn
Department of Pathology, University of Stellenbosch, Tygerberg, South Africa www.gknowmix.com
Personality’s Profiles of teenagers and students: A comparative study performed in Timisoara, Romania Cristina Petrescu1, Oana Suciu1, Sorin Ursoniu1, Brigitha Vlaicu1.
Economic concerns about global healthcare: meeting the economic challenge of predictive, preventive, and personalized medicine
Christine Ausweger a, Eva Burgschwaiger a, Andrea Kuglera, Reinhard Schmidbauera, Isabell Steineka, Yordan Todorov a, Dietmar Thurnher b and Kurt Krapfenbauer b,c,
a University of Economics and Business, Althanstrasse 14, A-1090 Vienna, Austria
b Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Medical University of Vienna, Waehringer Guertel 18–20, A-1090 Vienna, Austria
c European association for predictive, preventive & personalized medicineBrussels, EPMA headquarters, Woluwe-Saint-Pierre, avenue des Mimosas, 1150 Brussels, Belgium
Influence of fluorescence and electromethry in estimated characteristic and remineralization therapy of teeth
N.S. Moiseeva. Voronezh N.N
Burdenko State Medical Academy, Studencheskaya str., 10, 394000, Voronezh, Chair of therapeutic stomatology SEIHVT « Voronezh state medical academy of a name of N.N. Burdenko » of Ministry of Health And social development of the Russian Federation.
Can pain management protocol be evidence based, physiological, safe and personalized?Integrated concept Rostyslav V. Bubnov, The Center of ultrasound diagnostics and interventional sonography, clinical hospital “Pheophania” of State Affairs Department, Kyiv, Ukraine , 03680, Kyiv
4th Congress-Day, September 18th, Sunday
Venue: University Bonn, Poppelsdorf, Nußallee 10
Plenary Lecture:
Dr. S. Srivastava, EDRN, NIH / NCI, USA
Lecture Hall A
9 am–9:45 am
Specialised Session
Biomarker Discovery
Validation, Standardisation & Practical Application in Medical Practice
Lecture Hall A
10:00 am–1:00 pm
Chairmen: Prof. Dr. M. Ferrari, Centre for Genomics, Bioinformatics, and Biostatistics, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy
Prof. Dr. J. Kzhyshkowska, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg,
Germany.
Speakers:
• Prof. Dr. I. Gozes, Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler School of Medicine, Israel. Preventive, Predictive, Personalized and Participatory Healthcare Impacted by Climate, Culture and Community in the Computerized World.
• Prof. W. Lieb, Institute for Community Medicine, Ernst Moritz Arndt University Greifswald, Germany. Approach to Individualized Medicine – (GANI_MED) – Standardisation of clinical data for research use.
• Dr. Th. Joos, NMI Natural and Medical Sciences Institute at the University of Tübingen, Germany. Immunoassays in multiplex for biomarker discovery and validation.
• T. Waerner & K. Krapfenbauer, Boehringer-Ingelheim RCV GmbH & CoKG,, Vienna, Austria, The role of laboratory medicine in healthcare: Quality Requirements of immunoassays, standardisation and data management in prospective medicine.
Short oral presentations:
• Dr. E. Moiseeva et al., Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Moscow, Russia The “4s” concept: How to augment the predictive value of preclinical research. Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Moscow, Russian Federation
• Dr. M. Pilugina, Krasnoyarsk State Medical University named after Prof. V.F .Vojno-Jasenetsky,, Role of Laboratory Testing of Polymorphic Allele Variants of Gene CYP2C9 of Isoenzyme 2C9 of Cytochrome P450 in Predictive, Preventive and Personalised Medicine on Epileptology.
• Dr. P. Schulz-Knappe, Protagen AG, Dortmund, Germany. Autoantibody Biomarkers for Prostate Cancer Detection.
• Dr. J. Walkenhorst, PROvendis, Germany Knowledge Transfer and Patenting Strategy in Predictive Medicine.
Panel Discussion
Moderator: Dr. M. Kapalla, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia;
Negentropic Systems, s.r.o, Ruzomberok, Slovakia
Panellists
Speakers
Poster Overview: Dr. K. Krapfenbauer, Boehringer-Ingelheim RCV GmbH, Austria
Posters related to the topic:
Multiplex x MAP analysis – analytical tool for personalised medicine
Vrzalová Jindra, Topolčan Ondřej
Immunoanalytic laboratory, Faculty Hospital and Faculty of Medicine in Pilsen, Charles University in Prague, Czech Republic.
Systematic Development of Novel Antibody Biomarkers for Diagnostic Protein
1Angelika Lueking, 1Axel Kowald, 2Georg Bartsch, 2Helmut Klocker, 1Heike Göhler, 1Peter Amersdorfer, 1Stefan Muellner, 1Peter Schulz-Knappe
1Protagen AG, Dortmund, Germany; 2Dept. Of Urology, Innsbruck Medical University, Austria
Evaluation of the Immunization Strategy Implementation in the Republic of Macedonia for the period 2004–2009
N. Kamchev1, M. Zdravkovska2, V. Ivanovska1, G. Kamcheva1
1Faculty of Medical Sciences, University Goce Delcev, Stip, Republic of Macedonia; 2Medical Faculty, University Ss. Cyril and Methodius, Skopje, Republic of Macedonia.
Reproducibility of 3-Part Differential Hematology Analyzer Medonic CA620: a study after 3 years and 90 000 samples Tatjana Ruskovska, Nikola Kamcev, Gordana Kamceva, Nikola Siljanovski
Faculty of Medical Sciences, University “Goce Delcev”, Stip, Macedonia.
Activity of Antiseptic Solutions in relation to their physicochemical properties
Biljana Gjorgjeska, Cena Dimova
Faculty of Medical Sciences, Krste Misirkov bb, POB 201, 2000 Stip, Republic of Macedonia.
Specialised Session
Patient-specific Modelling
Bioinformatics in PPPM
Lecture Hall B
9:50 am–11:20 am
Chairman: Prof. Dr. H. Lemke, Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery, CARS
Speakers:
• Prof. Dr. H. Lemke, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, USA Patient specific modelling and model guided therapy.
• Dr. A. Shabo, IBM Research Lab in Haifa, Israel. Meaningful use of patient-centric health records for personalized medicine.
• Prof. Dr. W. Niederlag, Krankenhaus Dresden-Friedrichstadt, Dresden. Medical and information technology aspects for personalised medicine.
• Dr. M. Marcus-Kalish, Interdisciplinary Center for Technology Analysis and Forecasting, Tel Aviv University, Israel. Multilevel, Multisource Bio- Medical rule discovery system – essential enabler to preventive, predictive and personalized medicine.
• Prof. Dr. H. Podbielska, Wroclaw University of Technology, Poland, Computer-assisted modeling of ocular parameters for personalized treatment in ophthalmology.
Panel Discussion
Moderator: Prof. Dr. H. Podbielska, Wroclaw University, Poland
Panellists:
Speakers
Posters related to the topic
Question of choise, decision making in diagnostic imaging and intervention mistake prediction. Mathematical modeling approach
R. V. Bubnov1, I. M. Melnyk2
1 The Center of ultrasound diagnostics and interventional sonography, clinical hospital “Pheophania” of State Affairs Department, Kyiv, Ukraine, 3680, Kyiv, Zabolotny ave., 21, 2 International Research and Training Center for Information Technology and Systems NAS and MES of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine
Specialised Session
Bio-Banking
Ethics
Lecture Hall B
11:30 pm–1:00 pm
Chairman: Prof. Dr. R. Hewitt, European, Middle Eastern and African Society for
Biopreservation and Biobanking, France
• Prof. Dr. R. Hewitt, European, Middle Eastern and African Society for Biopreservation and Biobanking, France. The European, Middle-Eastern and African Society for Biopreservation and Biobanking (ESBB): Current status and plans for the future.
• Prof. Dr. P Riegman, Erasmus MC Tissue Bank, Erasmus MC Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Biobanking access rules and exchangeability in multi center medical research networks.
• Prof. Dr. Ch. Chabannon, Institut Paoli-Calmettes & Université d’Aix-Marseille, France. Hospital organization to provide access to samples and clinical data for translational and clinical research in oncology.
• Prof. Dr. P. Hofman, Nice CHU Biobank, Pasteur Hospital, Nice, France. Experience of collecting patient informed consent for research use of biospecimens in the Nice Chu Biobank, a member of the Canceropôle Paca Biobank Network.
• Prof. Dr. H. Everaus, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, Ethical aspects of personalized medicine.
Panel Discussion
Moderator: Prof. Dr. H. Everaus, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia
Panellists:
Speakers
Dr. Leitsalu, Tartu
Poster Overview: Prof. Dr. H. Everaus, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia
Posters related to the topic:
Making the link: biobank and medicine. Liis Leitsalu1*, Andres Metspalu1,2,3
1Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia; 2Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia; 3Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia.
Awarding Ceremony:A Prize for Best Poster Presentation byThe EPMA J
Closing Ceremony
Lecture Hall A
1:15 am–1:45 am
Lunch:1:45 pm–2:30 pm