3398dghealthDigital healthDigit HealthSAGE PublicationsPMC5999057599905759990572994254110.1177/2055207615592513UK policy on social networking sites and online health: From informed
patient to informed consumer?
HuntDaniel KoteykoNelya GunterBarrie 1School of Languages, Linguistics and
Film, Queen Mary University of London, UK2Department of Media and Communication,
University of Leicester, UK✉Daniel Hunt, School of Languages,
Linguistics and Film, Bancroft Building, Queen Mary University of London, Mile
End Road, London, E1 4NS, UK. Email: d.hunt@qmul.ac.uk
22620151205520761559251320552076155925132562018© The Author(s) 2015This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/) which
permits non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work
without further permission provided the original work is attributed as
specified on the SAGE and Open Access page(http://www.uk.sagepub.com/aboutus/openaccess.htm).

## Abstract

## Background
Social networking sites offer new opportunities for communication between and
amongst health care professionals, patients and members of the public. In
doing so, they have the potential to facilitate public access to health care
information, peer-support networks, health policy fora and online
consultations. Government policies and guidance from professional
organisations have begun to address the potential of these technologies in
the domain of health care and the responsibilities they entail for their
users.

## Objective
Adapting a discourse analytic framework for the analysis of policy documents,
this review paper critically examines discussions of social networking sites
in recent government and professional policy documents. It focuses
particularly on who these organisations claim should use social media, for
what purposes, and what the anticipated outcomes of use will be for patients
and the organisations themselves.

## Conclusion
Recent policy documents have configured social media as a new means with
which to harvest patient feedback on health care encounters and communicate
health care service information with which patients and the general public
can be ‘empowered’ to make responsible decisions. In orienting to social
media as a vehicle for enabling consumer choice, these policies encourage
the marketization of health information through a greater role for
non-profit and commercial organisations in the eHealth domain. At the same
time, current policy largely overlooks the role of social media in mediating
ongoing support and self-management for patients with long-term
conditions.

Keywords: Social media, social networking sites, eHealth, health policy, discourse analysis

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2015 Feb 19; Accepted 2015 May 28; Collection date 2015 Jan-Dec.

## Background
The use of electronic communication networks to support the public’s health
behaviours can be traced back to long before the era of the Internet. Their
procurement and application by the United Kingdom (UK) government has formed part of
a wider utilisation of information and communications technologies (ICTs) to enhance
public participation in health care and economise the costs of public services in
general. There was a belief on the part of government administrators that the use of
ICTs could result in better, more accountable public services and empower citizens
to become engaged with these services as stakeholders. Information technologies were also seen as one vehicle for delivering the set
of consumer-oriented policies that began to underpin the UK government’s thinking
about health care during the 1980s and 1990s and which embraced the idea of ensuring
patients were made better informed. A major priority for these policies was to find
ways of delivering greater and higher quality health information to people and to
invite the public and patients to become more proactive in taking charge of their
personal well-being. 
Under such auspices, government health authorities and private health agencies in the
UK have trialled telephone services such as National Health Service (NHS) Direct and
launched closed-community electronic networks operating via kiosk interfaces in
local doctors’ surgeries, health centres, hospitals and other outlets. The objective
of such initiatives was not just to make everyone better informed but also to
provide actionable information that could empower patients with a wide range of
health issues. The assumption behind such interventions was that if the public took better
care of themselves, they would stay healthier for longer, seek treatment of health
problems sooner and give better quality information about symptoms to health
professionals, thereby speeding up and enhancing the quality of relevant diagnosis
and treatment. The government’s promotion of such services have also had an economic
agenda aimed at managing the costs of health service provision for a growing and
ageing population. – 
However, the expectation that remote, expert support services would be widely used
and would, in turn, remove the strain of patient demand on regular health services
did not become a reality. For example, NHS Direct had little significant impact on
levels of face-to-face consultations and demands for treatment. Those who used it
liked it, but many did not choose to use it and a technological divide persisted
especially in the form of the non-using poor, ethnic minority groups and elderly,
who are typically most in need of help. Hence, the idea that by utilising modern communications technology people
would inevitably become empowered, involved and better equipped to take care of
themselves has proven optimistic. To a great extent such optimism was founded upon a
crude technological determinism, the notion that if people are offered technological
tools then they will use them and personal benefits will directly follow.

## Health, the Internet and social media
This optimism continued to characterise beliefs about newer forms of mediated health
communication afforded by the emergence and growth of the Internet during the
1990s. , Internet-based
communication was envisaged to provide cost-effective solutions for reaching out
with diverse health support services to many different types of people and
particularly to those whose needs were greatest, such as the elderly. , The Wanless Report, for example,
encouraged investment in information technology to support the emergence of the
‘engaged’ and empowered patient who could take greater responsibility for his or her
own care, and thereby relieve pressure on state services. 
In contrast to this promissory rhetoric, however, the sizeable body of social science
research into patients’ use of the Internet has revealed more ambivalent health
effects. For example, using websites to learn about others’ experiences of the NHS
services might lead to patients navigating the health care system more efficiently
and with a clearer understanding of their care pathways. However, this information
may also generate unrealistic expectations for consultations, undermine faith in
individual clinicians and fuel demand for more expensive forms of treatment.
Similarly contingent outcomes hold for exposure to information on individual
conditions and self-management, which may engender both feelings of greater control
over one’s illness or disempowerment in the face an overwhelming volume of online content. Much of this research testifies to the significant volume of online health
communication that takes place away from government health websites, particularly in
peer-to-peer communities dedicated to the sharing of experiences and mutual support. The uncertain outcomes of patients consuming online health information and
the volume of communication taking place away from state-authored websites suggest
that the health care implications of public Internet use are unlikely to align
straightforwardly with the aspirations of policy from the start of the century.
One of the most significant technological developments of the past 15 years has been
the growth of social media, and particularly social network sites (SNSs) such as
Facebook and Twitter. A central feature of SNSs is the opportunity to create a
personal profile and articulate connections to other users, typically in the form of
‘friends’, ‘followers’ or ‘connections’. In addition, SNSs enable people to publish
personal content, maintain established social contacts, extend their social network
and seek information directly from other people or organisations. This means that
users can make inquiries or tender requests for advice, help and support from a huge
audience of individual and organisational advisers that is specifically tailored to
their personal needs. Social media thus contrast with more static websites that
might be used for health reasons. The vast majority of content on NHS Choices
(www.nhs.uk),
for instance, is centrally authored and user contributions in the form of comments
remain relatively peripheral. SNSs multiply opportunities for patients to establish
peer-led support networks and offer new communicative platforms for supporting
public involvement in health care both as informal consumers and as citizens with a
more prominent voice over the shape of changes to the design, delivery and
evaluation of health care. These same channels provide government, third-sector and
commercial health organisations with additional means with which to influence the
public’s health behaviours by increasing the volume and accessibility of health care
information. SNSs also allow increased interaction between health care organisations
and between individual professionals, facilitating the growth of online networks
between institutions and clinicians. The various relationships which SNSs can
mediate can be summarised as: 
– Professionals to patients/public,
– Patients/public to professionals,
– Professionals to professionals and
– Patients/public to patients/public.
Given this communicative potential, the growth in public social media use has
energised clinical interest in the implications of SNSs for health care. By creating opportunities for increasing multi-way communication between
health care services, individual professionals and members of the general and
clinical populations, social media could contribute in valuable ways to health care
provision, including improving care quality through facilitating patient feedback,
disseminating public health messages, strengthening professional networks and
supporting ongoing disease management. Realising these potentials within state health care systems, however, will
depend upon government and professional policy both supporting the use of social
media and keeping pace with public practices around SNSs. In light of this, this
review paper examines discussions of SNSs in recent government and professional
policy documents and seeks to identify how social media have been configured as
technologies for use in health care.

## eHealth policy analysis: Sample and analytical framework
In order to illuminate contemporary policy understandings and expectations around
SNSs, we examined discussions of social media platforms in 40 policy papers,
guidance documents and reports dating from 2005, a year that marked a significant
increase in the public uptake of SNSs. To capture a broad range of policy
perspectives on social media (and particularly its potential for health care),
documents were purposively sampled to include policy discussions arising from a
range of UK government and professional contexts. These included print and Web-based
publications from central government departments, the NHS, health care-related
third-sector and professional organisations such as Royal Colleges and the General
Medical Council (GMC). Using the search terms ‘social media’ and ‘social
networking’, documents where initially identified using the National Institute for
Health and Care Excellence (NICE) Evidence Search and the UK government (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications) and NHS England
publication stores (http://www.england.nhs.uk/publications/). Additional searches using
the same terms were undertaken on the websites of the UK Royal Colleges, NHS
Confederation, NHS Employers, and associations representing medical specialties.
Documents were included if they involved substantive discussion of the roles of
social media in relation to health and health care. Several additional documents
were identified through the references in our initial collection of papers, allowing
the inclusion of earlier documents that have shaped more recent discussions of
social media, such as early Cabinet Office guidance that has been built upon in
recent Department of Health recommendations. A list of the documents collated for
analysis is included as an Appendix.
Analysis of these documents drew specifically on a discourse analytic framework for
the examination of policy developments. A central premise of this method is the role of language in constructing
coherent accounts of the world, creating meaning and defining relationships between
individuals, institutions and their actions. Hence, in adopting a discourse analytic
framework, we aimed to illustrate the particular elements that make up the complex
political and professional narratives in which social media and SNSs feature.
Discourse analysis is particularly well suited to examining public discussions
around complex issues, in which language choices function rhetorically to realise
particular representations of a topic and to shape the discursive ground on which
future argument and action takes place. Metaphors, for example, have been shown to play an important role in the
domain of health communication as they often underlie attempts to define how an
issue should be understood and how problems in that domain can be resolved. Hence, from our discourse analytic perspective, the policy and guidance texts
we analyse below function simultaneously as both descriptions of the role of SNSs in
health care and as ‘sensitive barometers of social processes and change’ that
illustrate wider social and political debates around health care. Discourse analysis is therefore an appropriate approach for examining
documents relating to contemporary health care, in which the complexity of a
changing health care system create opportunities for redefining the roles of health
care organisations, professionals and service users as well as their relationships
to SNS use. The particular discourse analytic model we employ focuses on three
elements that form the basis for policy discussions and professional guidance on
social media.

## Agents and motives
The organisations and social actors identified as active stakeholders in SNSs
along with the actions and motivations with which they are associated. This
category is realised typically through naming strategies and descriptions of
social actors, as well as the actions they perform. The choice between different
possible naming strategies – such as ‘patients’, ‘the public’ and ‘consumers’ –
can itself be revealing of the positions adopted within the texts we analyse,
with contrasting ways of referring to individuals or groups encoding
expectations about their behaviours and motives.

## Rights and responsibilities
A primary function of policy and professional guidance is setting out and
enacting change to social and organisational structures. This includes
apportioning responsibilities to groups, organisations and individuals for
bringing about change, as well as their corresponding entitlements in light of
social and institutional changes. In this case, rights and responsibilities are
focused around who is entitled to use SNSs, for what reasons, and what
obligations SNS use entails for different individuals and groups.

## Assumptions about natural relationships
What are the associations and connections between the individuals and groups who
are discussed? What personal and political outcomes are assumed to follow from
their use of SNSs and how do these warrant particular courses of action? Here
attention is paid to predication (attribution of quality or property to a person
or object), particularly through the use of metaphors.
The following sections address each of these elements in turn to demonstrate
salient features of how SNSs are represented in recent policy and professional
health care discourse.

## Social media stakeholders and their motives
A key distinction throughout the collated documents is between the use of SNSs by
political and health care professionals and the organisations they represent on the
one hand, and lay members of the public on the other. As these groups were
consistently described as having contrasting roles and motivations in relation to
social media we discuss them separately here, while their different rights and
responsibilities are considered in the following section.

## Organisational users, promotion and transparency
The collated documents nominate a range of organisations and professionals as
users of SNSs and ascribe motivations to them that reflect the agendas of their
authoring organisations. For example, papers from across central government
departments have expressed optimism about the potential of social media to
facilitate more efficient policy development and ‘help Government to communicate
with citizens in the places they already are’. – The government’s
motivations here are explicitly democratic – the ‘Government wants to be a part
of the conversation’ – with policy consultations mediated by SNSs purportedly allowing
engagement with diverse sections of the population and increasing public
accountability. Similarly, the Department of Health’s (DH’s) public consultation
reports include suggestions for greater use of social media platforms to seek
patient feedback on healthcare services and to engage the public in future
health policy formation. – In
reiterating these suggestions in subsequent policies (for example, NHS England’s
Transforming participation in health and care), the government suggests a consensus between the public and their reforms
to the health care system, as well as implying a clear link between public
feedback and future policy. For example, the Department’s central policy theme
‘no decision about me, without me’, set out in the white paper ‘Equity and
Excellence: Liberating the NHS’, reappears as the title of a consultation document and a goal in
subsequent NHS England publications. , In this way, policy
statements have been repeated across various documents to signify alignment
between proposed health care reforms and a general principles of personalisation
and patient involvement in which SNSs are believed to play a role. This link
between social media, public opinion and policy development is also articulated
explicitly in the Department of Health’s ‘Power of Information’, which states
that the ‘social networking generation demands and expects a more interactive,
personalised relationship with health and care services’. Hence the DH positions itself as responding to the shaping influence of
technology on public expectations of public services.
As well as government and NHS organisations as a whole, documents from
professional bodies argue that social media can be used effectively by
individual health care professionals. For example, NHS ‘executives’ are also
identified as valid users of SNSs who should be motivated by the value of public
accountability to open up ‘the black box of NHS management’ to the media and
public through social media. Similarly, guidelines from various Royal Colleges encourage their members
to use SNSs to contribute to public debates on health care policy and practice,
to network with their colleagues and to facilitate public access to accurate
health information. – These
guidelines represent healthcare staff not solely as medical professionals, but
also as social and political actors who can influence public conversations on
health by growing their online networks and providing an expert perspective to
those seeking information. However, discussion of these uses is frequently
juxtaposed against concerns about patients’ confidentiality rights when health
care professionals communicate about specific cases. , Accordingly, these
documents carry an over-arching scepticism on the part of these organisations
regarding the potential for SNSs to be used a medium for individual
consultations that involve direct communication with individual patients. 

## Individual patients as self-motivated consumers
In keeping with an explicit focus on the users of health care services, documents
produced by the DH and NHS also nominate patients and members of the lay public
as central actors in the social media field. These discussions are anchored
around a view of the public as members of the ‘social networking generation’, a
term which elides the age-related, socio-economic and individual differences in
how SNSs are used. The social networking generation are predicated with ‘wanting’ and
‘demanding’ a ‘more interactive, personalised relationship with health and care services’. As such, the public is said to uniformly demand greater information on
their health and health care options, increased choice over services and a
greater role in deciding which treatments they receive. , Rather
than patients per se, therefore, a consistent emphasis on ‘choice’ reflects a
discourse of health consumerism that frames the public as self-motivated health
consumers, voluntarily seeking out ways to improve their own health because they
‘want to do their own research, reflect on what their clinicians have told them
and discuss issues from an informed position’. This discourse is rendered more explicitly through nominative choices
that redefine patients as ‘clients’ who build ‘consumer knowledge’ rather than coping strategies and who are represented by a ‘consumer
champion’, HealthWatch England. 
As well as furthering trends towards patient consumerism apparent in earlier
health care policy, this construction of healthcare users also rhetorically warrants the DH
and NHS England’s claims that their role is to provide information through
social media in order to facilitate consumer choices. That is, the public are
presented as consumers motivated to use information in order to have a greater
role over their health care decisions in the same policies which outline the DH
and NHS England’s commitments to provide such information.
With this focus on using social media platforms to satisfy the demands of
consumer choice, the peer support potential of SNSs remain largely peripheral in
mainstream policy and professional documents. Nevertheless, some organisations
outside of the DH, NHS England and Royal Colleges acknowledge the potential for
SNSs to mediate patients’ self-management practices through peer communication
and advice sharing. – For
example, the NHS Confederation outlines several online platforms with social
networking components which are overseen by professionals and used to deliver
preventive and on-going psychological support for patients. In contrast to the prevailing discussion of social media as a medium for
corporate communication, these papers recognise the therapeutic opportunities of
using SNSs as a venue in which lay knowledge and peer support can be shared and
expert interventions can be delivered. This is particularly the case, they
argue, for stigmatising conditions where individuals may be reluctant to engage
in face-to-face care. For example, the NHS Confederation’s ‘Joining the
Conversation’ describes Big White Wall (www.bigwhitewall.com), a mental
health SNS that facilitates peer-peer and peer-professional interactions as well
as integrating self-administered tests and individual and group therapies. In
marked distinction to the majority of the collated documents, therefore, this
perspective recognises that lay patients have specific social and emotional
needs related to their diagnoses that can be addressed by on-going communication
with other patients and professionals via SNSs. In doing so, these documents
acknowledge the possibility that, as well as providing data for improving
service planning and delivery, peer networks on social media can produce
therapeutically beneficial outcomes for their members in terms of improved
self-management practices and personal wellbeing. Nevertheless, these
discussions remain marginal relative to the DH’s substantive configuration of
social media as a platform for increasing service transparency and patient
choice, and guidance from Royal Colleges, which is concerned with regulating
professional conduct online.

## Rights and responsibilities of SNS use
Guidelines from expert bodies consistently argue that the use of SNSs in relation to
health care takes place against a background of professional responsibilities.
Ensuring that individual clinicians fulfil these responsibilities when using SNSs is
intended to curtail online activities that might otherwise risk their privacy,
reputation and patients’ health. Across the current guidelines, health care
providers are repeatedly exhorted to act with the same professionalism online as
they would offline. This is conveyed both through overt attempts to define how they
‘should’ behave and more implicitly through reference to professional standards
against which clinicians are judged:
[C]onduct online and conduct in the real world should be judged in the same
way, and should be at a similar high standard. 
The standards expected of doctors do not change because they are
communicating through social media rather than face to face or through other
traditional media. […]Using social media also creates risks, particularly
where social and professional boundaries become unclear. 
As these quotes illustrate, social media environments are presented as an extension
of offline professional contexts that involve new opportunities for behaviours that
could jeopardise the integrity of the individual and their profession. In seeking to
manage these risks, the British Medical Association’s social media guidance argues
that the responsibility of clinicians to act professionally outweighs their right to
contribute freely to social media discussions:
The freedom that individuals have to voice their opinions on forums and blogs
however is not absolute and can be restricted by the need to prevent harm to
the rights and reputations of others. 
Accordingly, these guidelines highlight the serious sanctions faced by clinicians who
share confidential information, harass others or act unprofessionally
online. , 
The responsibility of clinical commissioning groups to seek and account for the
preferences of their communities is a clear theme in documents from the DH and the
NHS Commissioning Board. In these papers, commissioning groups’ use of social media
constitutes one aspect of the broader public engagement activities with which they
should respond to community needs and ‘place patients and the public at the heart of
everything that [they] do’. Commissioners’ obligation to provide information for health service users is
also reflected in the DH’s claims regarding its own duty to provide transparent
information for the public and in the NHS’s undertaking to ‘empower [patients] to
make informed choices’. In this regard, a responsibility to collect, analyse and publish health care
data – particularly that which captures patients’ experiences – has been conferred
upon the different levels of the health care service from the DH down to individual
health care professionals.
However, despite alluding to the current ‘social networking generation’ and their
demands for interactive, personalised health care, the DH and NHS England do not
represent their role in these reforms as to directly establish content for patient
support through SNSs. Rather, they define their responsibilities in terms of
providing information on services for patient-consumers and clinical commissioning
groups and establishing the conditions in which independent organisations are given
the ‘space to innovate’ online services for patients. In doing so, the DH also presents its ambition to shape a competitive health
market of online care services:
[T]he health and care system of the future will direct us, as patients and
the public, towards accredited health apps to help us keep ourselves healthy
and, as appropriate, manage our conditions. […]The default position [of the
DH] for stimulating the market will be through encouraging internet traffic
to third party sites via linking through the single portal or from the
endorsement which comes from association with the NHS, rather than directly
commissioning or providing the services. 
Despite its commitment to information provision, therefore, this passage indicates
the DH’s retreat from state-provided patient support services on SNSs and a
concomitant promotion of an increased role for ‘third-party’ charitable
organisations and private enterprise in the social media and health domain. This
statement can also be seen to distance the NHS from the possibility of patient
consultations through social media, which carry risks for patient confidentiality
and inappropriate advice provided in conditions where professionals have only
digital representations through which to understand a patient’s condition. 
In parallel with the state’s obligation to provide health service information, a
clear theme of patient and public responsibility features throughout the policy
documents, again conveyed through explicit descriptions of how the public ‘should’
act in relation to health:
We are also clear that increasing patient choice is not a one-way street. In
return for greater choice and control, patients should accept responsibility
for the choices they make, concordance with treatment programmes and the
implications for their lifestyle. 
As this passage articulates, the agenda of personalisation through which contemporary
health care policy is refracted also confers increased obligations upon individual
patients to be involved in their health care and accountable for their decisions in
return for greater choice. , Juxtaposed against the previous extract from the DH’s ‘The
Power of Information’, this passage also reveals an irony around the motif of ‘greater choice and
control’ in relation to social media; it apportions increased choice and
accountability to patients whilst patient choice is simultaneously restricted to
private and third-sector services over which they have little control.

## Assumptions about natural relationships: From information to empowerment
Recent government and NHS documents consistently associate levels of health
information with improved health service performance and aspects of patient
‘empowerment’, which is defined as the capacity to make informed choices around
health care. Accurate health care information is defined as an ‘essential service’
that ‘allow[s] us to understand our own health, adopt healthier lifestyles and
choose treatment and care that is right for us’. Such claims reiterate the correlation of information and patient empowerment
apparent in health policy documents that addressed earlier forms of Internet
technologies at the turn of the 21st century. , In the present data, this
assumed relationship underscores the DH’s central policy of increasing the two-way
flow of healthcare information through online platforms, including social networking
sites. The supposedly enabling, empowering potential of information has been encoded
in successive DH publications through metaphorical constructions that construe
information as a commodity and a ‘tool’ with which the public can be ‘equipped’ to
seek appropriate care and make informed, responsible choices. , , , While assuming
an active role for the public in utilising online information, these metaphors have
been criticised for obscuring questions of who accesses information online, how it
is interpreted within each patient’s individual circumstances and whether they have
the capacity to act upon it in a meaningful way. , The framing of information as
a potentiating commodity also supports the policy documents’ expectations of patient
responsibility. Specifically, by assuming a one-to-one relationship between health
care information and patients’ capacity for making accountable decisions, these
documents warrant greater expectations of involvement from patients in return for
the centralised provision of health information. References to information as a
‘tool’ reflects a broader set of mechanical terminology through which SNSs
themselves are construed; SNSs are ‘tools’ to be ‘exploited’ to deliver services and
described as one of several ‘mechanisms’ that can be ‘harnessed’ to source public
feedback. , , These metaphors anticipate a controlled and skilful deployment
of government services on social media that simultaneously elides their uptake and
interaction amongst the public. 
There is also a sense in which the empowering effects of information derived from
social media may be conferred as much on the managers of health organisations as on
patients themselves. As well as delivering information to patients, social media are
cited as a means to generate service ‘insight’ both by soliciting patient feedback
directly and by capturing naturally occurring interactions on SNSs to inform changes
to services. In facilitating the transmission of feedback from the public to health
organisations, SNSs are thus also configured as a complement to existing
professional instruments for assessing service performance. , , , The purported
‘empowerment’ of social media may therefore be realised as much by furnishing those
responsible for auditing health care services with a more pervasive means of
scrutinising services and their individual staff members as it is by increasing
public involvement in health care. 
Finally, an additional outcome of social media use is briefly outlined by the
Department of Health’s ‘Liberating the NHS: An information revolution’, which
suggests that a greater range of information providers – including SNS venues –
could result in variable content quality and patient confusion. This claim goes some way to acknowledging the complexity of users’ responses
to online health information and the imbrication of risk and empowerment in public
social media use. According to the DH, this risk should be addressed centrally
through the provision of a government ‘kite mark’ system to indicate the quality of
online information, a policy congruent with the managerial approach to the online
health domain advocated in subsequent DH documents.

## Discussion
Recent policy and professional publications have clearly recognised the increased use
of social media platforms by government actors and health care professionals for
collegiate networking and communication involving health care service users. There
has been recognition of the potential of these online platforms to facilitate the
flow of government health policy to professionals, patients and public and to
stimulate patient feedback to government on policy and professionals on practice.
Policy papers from the DH and NHS indicate that government policy for social media
use is embedded within an over-arching information strategy focused on using the
Internet to publicise data on NHS services, increase patient choice and gather
business-relevant ‘insight’. The explicit motivation for this policy is to improve
patient involvement in all levels of health care by supplying patients with
information, which the ‘social networking generation’ is assumed to uniformly want.
In this respect, there is a clear continuity between publications that discussed
earlier information and communications technologies and recent policy and
professional documents on SNSs. Indeed, just as social media is configured as an
emerging vehicle for delivering information, recent health care policies which
address social media constitute a vehicle for reiterating long-standing discourses
of public involvement participation in healthcare, health consumerism, and the
uncritical association of information access with patient empowerment. , For the DH,
construing the promotion of consumer health care models as a response to the demands
of the ‘social networking generation’ also provides an effective way of
depoliticising the changes to the health care system enacted by their recent
policies.
In orienting to models of consumer health care, such policies have not only public
interest objectives but also economic ones; if patients can be ‘equipped’ with
personalised government health information they will purportedly take greater
responsibility for their own health and seek professional care in a more informed fashion. From this perspective, recent health policy might be reinterpreted as
carrying less emphasis on information for supporting patient choice and more on
information for patient compliance, with social media conceived as a means of
disseminating information to discipline the public’s health-related
behaviours. , 
The current policy emphasis on patient choice also extends to an expanding online
healthcare economy, with government retreating from certain online activities to
‘stimulate’ a digital patient marketplace involving charities and private businesses. Social media, therefore, constitute another domain in which the government
has sought to model the provision of health care services on market principles.
While it may be too early to assess the impacts of this policy, we believe there are
several reasons to be cautious regarding state marketisation of the social media and
health sphere. An active market will mean an increased range of information and
support providers. While this may be appealing in enabling the public to find
personally suited content, multiple competing sources of information that do not
carry the recognised authority of the NHS could also lead to greater uncertainty of
the veracity of information, rendering patients inactive rather than empowered. Secondly, by promoting third-sector and commercial social media organisations
as eHealth providers, government policy is encouraging the public to participate in
a digital health economy in which the emotional labour of users’ online
contributions and help-seeking is routinely commodified and exploited for commercial
ends in ways that are obscured from users themselves. This can include refining
consumer-driven advertising and generating research data but may also involve the
sale of user-generated information to other organisations. Thirdly, the collection of user-generated data by multiple online providers
may also stifle opportunities for furthering research and health care provision in
cases where organisations are reticent to share data with competitors, even when
this could lead to improved service provision and patient care.
Expansion of patient choice also means the sharing of risk among these health care
suppliers and, in turn, the reduction of risk potentialities for government as it
hands over the provision of individual patient support and advice services to
non-government organisations, whether these are third sector, private sector or
patient-operated. This allows government to restrict its own predominant use of
dynamic online technologies to the comparatively less risky functions of mass
information dissemination and sourcing patient feedback. Comparable risk-avoidance
strategies can be seen to underlie professional guidance that warns against
consultations with patients through social media while encouraging professional
participation online interactions that involve fewer risks to patients.
Our introduction outlined four broad types of communication enabled by SNSs in health
care: professionals to patients/public, patients/public to professionals,
professionals to professionals and patients to patients. Instances of the first
three of these are well accounted for in the documents we analysed. However, the
fourth has received less recognition, with few publications from government or
professional organisations acknowledging the potential of SNSs to mediate patients’
self-management of illness through peer communication. Recent government and NHS
policy, in particular, largely side-steps a commitment to using social media to
support the self-care of patients’ chronic conditions, a function for which health
researchers and many lay individuals already use SNSs. For example, despite being
increasingly well documented in research literature, these policy papers make no
mention of the care potential of patient networks present on prominent SNSs such as
Facebook, YouTube and Twitter. , For example, weekly
‘Tweetchats’ using the hashtag ‘#UKDOC’ (UK Diabetes Online Community) address
specific aspects of self-management for type 1 diabetes, involving hundreds of
participants and ad hoc input from clinicians. Similarly, Mazanderani and colleagues
describe networks of multiple sclerosis sufferers using YouTube videos to generate
experiential evidence on the efficacy of controversial procedures and thereby
advocate for their wider uptake. In addition, research conducted on the use of the health-specific SNS
PatientsLikeMe by individuals with epilepsy reports that participants had improved
understanding of seizures, symptoms and treatment as well as a greater sense of
control over their condition. , In contrast, current policy
focuses on marshalling patient expertise in the form of service feedback. As such,
it falls short of fully recognising or planning for a state role in the full range
of activities which the current generation of online applications already provides
for patients. This is surprising given the burgeoning clinical literature on
SNS-mediated care and the fact that the DH has previously acknowledged the
importance of offline social networks in the self-management of chronic illness. 

## Conclusion
Our analysis indicates that recent digital health policy caters effectively to the
preferences of self-sufficient patients in need of information and feedback on
services but less so for those who need more direct day-to-day support for chronic
health problems. While a more informed, health-literate public is a laudable
ambition of these policies, optimism surrounding the role of SNSs in health care is
premised on the renewed assumption of a direct correlation between expert
information on the one hand and patient empowerment and responsibility on the other.
This assumption overlooks the fact that individuals may lack the material and social
capital to utilise health care information within the context of their own lives and
may even be using SNSs to seek alternative modes of healing. , , 
The DH’s ostensible retreat from providing direct support services through SNSs for
patients with long-term conditions may encourage patient-driven SNSs networks to
flourish online. Equally, the dearth of NHS services to support specific conditions
via SNSs may mean that patient support is increasingly filtered through commercial
organisations that dominate SNSs traffic and whose motivations include both patient
welfare and profit margins. In each case, the content of these SNS interactions will lie outside of state
influence and their implications may therefore also fall far beyond the expectations
of current policy. This policy is also somewhat surprising given that the current
NHS Choices website continues to receive 30 million unique visitors each month (a
figure far in excess of comparable sites) suggesting a sustained desire for
state-authored health content online. Similarly, the NHS Choices Facebook and
Twitter accounts, which publish general and seasonal health and lifestyle
information, maintain 75,000 and 165,000 subscribers, respectively. In addition to
underscoring public interest in content published by the NHS on social media, the
activity of these pages indicates that the NHS continues to publish some content on
SNSs, despite a limited policy commitment in this area.
While this paper has attempted to shed light on recent policy developments and
professional guidance related to social media and health care, it is limited by the
relatively short time span in which the sampled papers have been published. This
time frame makes it difficult to ascertain long-term shifts in policy discussions
around social media. This is particularly the case for the guidance documents from
professional bodies that we examined which, with one exception, were all published between 2012 and 2013. As such, it will remain important
to consider the uptake and outcomes of the recent policy and professional guidance
documents considered here, as well as to track changes in how the potentials of
social media are discussed. Specific questions that could be fruitfully pursued in
future research therefore include: Are public views contributed by social media
factored into large-scale and local health service changes, and what are the
long-term implications of the increased role of commercial and third-sector
organisations in providing direct support for patients through social media? In the
context of health policies that increasingly emphasise patient responsibility for
health in return for health care information, it will also be important to examine
whether there are demonstrable health benefits from the transmission of health
service information through social media, and to whom these benefits do and do not
accrue.

## Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the paper’s reviewers for their insightful and helpful comments on
a previous draft of this manuscript.
The University of Leicester Research Ethics Review board approved the project to
which this paper contributes (Project Reference: nk158-f4cc9).
This manuscript was reviewed by James Munro, Patient Opinion, and one other reviewer
who wishes to remain anonymous.

## Appendix

## Department of Health
Department of Health Informatics Directorate. NHS Information Governance:
Guidance: Blogging and social networking. Department of Health,
2009.
Department of Health Informatics Directorate. NHS Information Governance:
Guidance: Social Interaction – Good Practice. Department of Health,
2012.
Department of Health. Digital Health: Online conversations and your
responsibilities as a civil servant, http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20140522191340/http://digitalhealth.dh.gov.uk/your-responsibilities-as-a-civil-servant/
(accessed January 2015).
Department of Health. Digital Strategy: Leading the culture change in
health and care. Department of Health, 2012.
Department of Health. Equity and Excellence: Liberating the NHS (Cm
7881). Stationery Office, 2010.
Department of Health. High quality care for all: NHS Next Stage Review
Final Report (Cm 7432). Stationery Office, 2008.
Department of Health. Liberating the NHS: An Information Revolution. A
summary of consultation responses. Department of Health, 2011.
Department of Health. Liberating the NHS: Greater choice and control.
Department of Health, 2012.
Department of Health. Liberating the NHS: No decision about me, without
me. Government response. Department of Health, 2012.
Department of Health. The Power of Information: Putting all of us in
control of the health and care information we need. Department of
Health, 2012.
Department of Health. Digital Health: Case Study: Social media
monitoring, http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20140522191340/http://digitalhealth.dh.gov.uk/digital-strategy/case-studies/social-media-monitoring/
(accessed January 2015).
Wooton, S. Department of Health Digital Health Blog: How to use social
media to engage with stakeholders, https://digitalhealth.blog.gov.uk/2013/06/11/how-to-use-social-media-to-engage-with-stakeholders/
(2013, accessed January 2015).
Wooton, S. Department of Health Digital Health Blog: Social media advice
for DH staff, https://digitalhealth.blog.gov.uk/2013/06/11/social-media-guidelines-for-dh-staff/
(2013, accessed January 2015).
Wooton, S. Department of Health Digital Health Blog: Why you don’t need a
social media strategy, https://digitalhealth.blog.gov.uk/2013/06/11/why-you-dont-need-a-social-media-strategy/
(2013, accessed January 2015).

## NHS organisations
NHS Commissioning Board. Patient and Public Voice (Board Paper
NHSCB28022). NHS Commissioning Board, 2013.
NHS Confederation. Alive and clicking: Information that benefits all. NHS
Confederation, 2012.
NHS Confederation. Joining the conversation – social media and mental
health services. NHS Confederation, 2011.
NHS Employers. HR and social media in the NHS: The essential
guide for HR directors and managers. NHS Confederation,
2013.
NHS Employers. Social media for chief executives: The essential guide.
NHS Confederation, 2013.
NHS England. Transforming Participation in Health and Care. NHS England,
2013.
White C. Smart guides to engagement: Using social media to engage, listen
and learn. NHS Networks, 2012.

## Other government departments and agencies
Cabinet Office. Government Digital Strategy. Cabinet
Office, 2012.
Cabinet Office. Template Twitter strategy for Government Departments.
Cabinet Office, 2009.
National Information Board. Personalised Health and Care 2020: Using Data
and Technology to Transform Outcomes for Patients and Citizens. National
Information Board and Department of Health, 2014.
NICE. NICE local government briefings: Community engagement to improve
health. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, 2014.
The Government Digital Service. Social media guidance for civil
servants. Home Office, 2012.

## Guidance from professional organisations
British Dietetic Association. Making sense of social
media. British Dietetic Association, 2013.
British Medical Association. Using social media: Practical and ethical
guidance for doctors and medical students. BMA, 2011.
British Thoracic Society. Technology and Respiratory Health Working Party
Report. British Thoracic Society, 2012.
General Medical Council. Doctors’ use of social media.
GMC, 2013.
Hagell A. Association for Young People’s Health Research Summary: Health
implications of new technology. AYPH and ChiMat, 2012.
Health and Care Professions Council. Focus on standards: Social
networking sites. HCPC, 2012.
Nursing and Midwifery Council. Social Networking Sites, http://www.nmc-uk.org/Nurses-and-midwives/Advice-by-topic/A/Advice/Social-networking-sites/
(2012, accessed January 2015).
RCPSYCH Social Media Group. RCPsych Social Media Strategy and
Guidelines. Royal College of Psychiatrists, 2013.
Royal College of Anaesthetists. Guidelines for Fellows and Members on the
use of Social Media. RCOA, 2014.
Royal College of Anaesthetists. What to expect from the RCoA on
social media. RCOA, 2014.
Royal College of General Practitioners. Social media highway
code. RCGP, 2013.
Royal College of Nursing. Positioning nursing in a digital
world. London: RCN, 2013.

## Third-sector organisations
Right Here. How to … provide youth-friendly mental health and wellbeing
services. Mental Health Foundation and Paul Hamlyn Foundation, 2015.
The King’s Fund. Future Trends: Digital Technologies, http://www.kingsfund.org.uk/time-to-think-differently/trends/information-technologies/new-ways-using-digital-technologies
(2012, accessed January 2015).

## Funding
This work was funded by the UK Economic and Social Research Council (Grant number:
ES/K005103/1). The funders had no role in this publication.

## Conflicting interest
None declared.

## Ethical Approval
Not applicable.

## Guarantor
DH

## Contributorship
The authors jointly conceived the study. DH was responsible for the data analysis and
all authors drafted, reviewed and edited the manuscript.

## Peer Review
This manuscript was reviewed by James Munro, Patient Opinion and one other reviewer
who wishes to remain anonymous.

## References