3767dcnDevelopmental Cognitive NeuroscienceDev Cogn NeurosciElsevierPMC6989748698974869897482566003210.1016/j.dcn.2014.12.004Introduction
SchlaggarBradley LMD PhD LunaBeatrizPhD 1Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine, United States2University of Pittsburgh, United States3220151111322020© 2014 Published by Elsevier Ltd.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoCollection date 2015 Feb.

We are grateful to Elsevier and the Editors of Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience for devoting this special issue to the inaugural meeting of Flux: The International Congress for Integrative Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience, which took place on September 19–21, 2013 in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
The concept and motivation for the Flux Congress emerged from the recognition that our burgeoning discipline, focusing on issues of increasing scientific and health relevance, required a venue for established and emerging investigators to convene. We thought hard about whether we wanted or needed another meeting. For us, the decision was inevitable. The application of neuroimaging approaches to characterize the neural basis of human development has been growing exponentially since the handful of first studies were published in the mid-nineties, to the hundreds of publications now appearing yearly. Despite this growth, the investigators who toil in developmental cognitive neuroscience found no clear conference “home” and only sporadically found each other in satellite venues at larger neuroscience or behavioral developmental meetings where developmental neuroscience was scattered or restricted to small sections. Important, one-time meetings emerged that focused on developmental cognitive neuroscience, reflecting a growing interest and excitement at having a dedicated platform to interact with like-minded colleagues. Additionally, publications in the field were asking similar questions but using diverse/disparate approaches and “reinventing the wheel”, indicating that facilitated communication would certainly help advance the field. These factors motivated us to take a bold step and commit to forming a specialized annual meeting and to establish Flux: The Society for Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience.
We chose the name Flux, which is not an acronym, to emphasize that the primary goal of the discipline of developmental cognitive neuroscience is to investigate dynamic change in neural systems through development. The purpose of the Flux Society and its annual conference is: To advance the understanding of human brain development by serving as a forum for professional and student scientists, physicians, and educators to: exchange information and educate the next generation of developmental cognitive neuroscience researchers; make widely available scientific research findings on brain development; encourage translational research to clinical populations; promote public information by discussing implications on the fields of education, health, juvenile law, parenting, and mental health, and to encourage further progress in the field of developmental cognitive neuroscience. Specifically, Flux has three main aims. The first aim is to advance the field by informing members of the range of work being done and to provide a forum for scientific discourse at oral presentations, posters, and other activities that encourage such discourse. The second aim is to provide a venue that includes colleagues studying animal and postmortem models, levels of investigation that can inform the mechanisms that underlie neuroimaging findings so we can work, as a discipline, towards bridging levels of investigation to attain an integrative understanding of development. The third aim is to include talks and discussions regarding best practices (i.e., methods and analyses) as well as innovative approaches to advance further our ability to generate outstanding science.
We believe that these aims can be achieved, in part, by the creation of a Flux Congress and Society. This special issue of DCN is an important testament to the range, diversity, high quality, and integrative nature of the work in our nascent, but rapidly maturing field.