440plosonePLoS ONEPLoS OnePLOSPMC6991960699196069919603199970310.1371/journal.pone.0227279Changes in gene expression in human skeletal stem cells transduced with constitutively active Gsα correlates with hallmark histopathological changes seen in fibrous dysplastic bone
RaimondoDomenicoData curation, Formal analysis RemoliCristinaData curation, Formal analysis AstrologoLetiziaData curation BurlaRominaData curation La TorreMattiaData curation VernìFiammettaData curation TagliaficoEnricoData curation CorsiAlessandroData curation Del GiudiceSimonaData curation PersichettiAgneseData curation GiannicolaGiuseppeData curation RobeyPamela GInvestigation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing RiminucciMaraConceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing SaggioIsabellaConceptualization, Data curation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing TintutYinEditor 1Department of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy2Department of Biology and Biotechnology, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy3Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy4National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, NIH, DHHS, Bethesda, MD, United States of America5Department of Anatomical, Histological, Forensic Medicine and Orthopaedics Sciences, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy6School of Biological Sciences, NTU Institute of Structural Biology, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore7University of California, Los Angeles, UNITED STATESCompeting Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.
¤Current address: Department of Urology and Department for BioMedical Research, Urology Research Laboratory, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland
✉* E-mail: isabella.saggio@uniroma1.it (IS); mara.riminucci@uniroma1.it (MR)
#Contributed equally.
3012020151e0227279e0227279422020This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.

## Abstract
Fibrous dysplasia (FD) of bone is a complex disease of the skeleton caused by dominant activating mutations of the GNAS locus encoding for the α subunit of the G protein-coupled receptor complex (Gsα). The mutation involves a substitution of arginine at position 201 by histidine or cysteine (GsαR201H or R201C), which leads to overproduction of cAMP. Several signaling pathways are implicated downstream of excess cAMP in the manifestation of disease. However, the pathogenesis of FD remains largely unknown. The overall FD phenotype can be attributed to alterations of skeletal stem/progenitor cells which normally develop into osteogenic or adipogenic cells (in cis), and are also known to provide support to angiogenesis, hematopoiesis, and osteoclastogenesis (in trans). In order to dissect the molecular pathways rooted in skeletal stem/progenitor cells by FD mutations, we engineered human skeletal stem/progenitor cells with the GsαR201C mutation and performed transcriptomic analysis. Our data suggest that this FD mutation profoundly alters the properties of skeletal stem/progenitor cells by pushing them towards formation of disorganized bone with a concomitant alteration of adipogenic differentiation. In addition, the mutation creates an altered in trans environment that induces neovascularization, cytokine/chemokine changes and osteoclastogenesis. In silico comparison of our data with the signature of FD craniofacial samples highlighted common traits, such as the upregulation of ADAM (A Disintegrin and Metalloprotease) proteins and other matrix-related factors, and of PDE7B (Phosphodiesterase 7B), which can be considered as a buffering process, activated to compensate for excess cAMP. We also observed high levels of CEBPs (CCAAT-Enhancer Binding Proteins) in both data sets, factors related to browning of white fat. This is the first analysis of the reaction of human skeletal stem/progenitor cells to the introduction of the FD mutation and we believe it provides a useful background for further studies on the molecular basis of the disease and for the identification of novel potential therapeutic targets.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2019 Sep 18; Accepted 2019 Dec 16; Collection date 2020.

## Introduction
Fibrous dysplasia (FD) of bone is a crippling disease of the skeleton that can involve one (monostotic) or several (polyostotic) bones, as an isolated disorder or as a part of the McCune-Albright syndrome (MAS, OMIM #174800). FD/MAS is caused by activating mutations of the GNAS locus encoding for the α subunit of the G protein-coupled receptor complex (Gsα) [ – ]. G protein-coupled hormone receptors bind to adenylyl cyclase (AC), necessary for the generation of intracellular cAMP that mediates hormone signaling. In FD/MAS, activating mutation involves a substitution of arginine at position 201 by histidine or cysteine (GsαR201H or R201C) [ ]. These mutations inhibit the intrinsic GTPase activity of Gsα, which leads to prolonged stimulation of AC [ ]. cAMP causes dissociation of the inactive Protein Kinase A (PKA) tetramer, thereby freeing the catalytic subunits to mediate serine–threonine phosphorylation of target molecules. Several signaling pathways are implicated downstream of excess cAMP in the manifestation of MAS in various tissues [ ]. However, the etiology of FD remains largely unknown. In bone, Gsα/cAMP activation increases c-fos expression and this has been demonstrated in FD lesions from patients with MAS [ , ]. Gsα activity increases the expression of c-fos and other proto-oncogenes through the activation of cAMP-dependent PKA in osteoblastic precursors. Fos binds with jun to form hetero-dimeric complex activator protein 1 (AP-1), which is also highly expressed during the proliferative phase of osteoblast development [ ]. Moreover, AP-1 can suppress the expression of late markers of mature osteoblasts, such as osteocalcin [ ]. The abnormally differentiated, misfunctioning osteoblasts in FD lesions express elevated levels of IL-6, PDGFβ and sex steroid receptors through a cAMP-dependent mechanism that may be important in osteoclast activation [ ]. The increased cAMP level could negatively affect the half-life of Cbfa1/RUNX2 protein, the osteogenic master gene. Changes in expression of these aforementioned genes suggest abnormalities in bone-forming cells, which may contribute to the pattern of inappropriate cell differentiation [ ]. In 2010, Kiss et al. examined differential expression of 118 genes in affected versus unaffected human bone tissue of women with FD and they detected marked differences in the transcription profile of 22 genes controlled via G-protein coupled pathways and the BMP cascade, as well as genes coding for extracellular matrix proteins, and in particular, upregulation of a novel gene, ATP2A2 (ATPase Sarcoplasmic/Endoplasmic Reticulum Ca2+ Transporting 2), in FD bone [ ]. Along this same line, using microarray analysis, Zhou et al have recently analyzed craniofacial lesional samples from FD patients, identifying ADAMTS2 (A Disintegrin and Metalloproteinase with Thrombospondin Type 1 Motif 2), overexpressed in FD tissues, but rarely expressed in normal bone [ ]. Members of the ADAMTS family are involved in controlling extracellular matrix turnover, which in turn, controls several processes including angiogenesis and cell migration. The super-activation of ADAMST2 suggests that extracellular matrix turnover plays a role in FD pathophysiology.
Except for the results described above, no other data are available on the molecular signature of human fibrous dysplastic bone and the manner in which the fundamental effect of constitutively active Gsα’s activity is translated into the distinct histological changes that characterize FD bone and marrow is not well understood. Elucidating the molecular mechanisms of these changes would benefit not only the pursuit of a precise understanding of the when and how a particular FD-unique histological feature develops, but also the quest for therapeutic targets that best relate to the actual, and likely pleiotropic, misfunction of osteogenic cells. These changes, which we have also described through a mouse model representing a direct replica of human FD [ ], include: i) the replacement of normal marrow tissue with a fibroblastic tissue devoid of hematopoiesis; ii) the lack of adipocytes within the affected marrow; iii) deposition of excess, structurally abnormal bone; iv) defective bone mineralization; v) enhanced osteoclastogenesis; and vi) abnormal vascularity [ , ]. In fact, each of these cardinal features can be traced to an alteration of a physiological function served by normal skeletal progenitors, which are known to: i) provide a microenvironment for hematopoiesis; ii) develop into adipocytes; iii) generate osteoblasts; iv) produce phosphate-regulating factors; v) cue osteoclast progenitors to differentiate into osteoclasts; and vi) guide and organize marrow microvessels, with which they physically associate as mural cells [ – ].
Global analysis of the transcriptome and proteome of Gsα-mutated cells is expected to assist in dissecting the diverse downstream effects of constitutively active Gsα on the functions of the relevant cells. In vitro studies conducted so far have capitalized on the use of populations of bone marrow stromal cells derived from the abnormal, fibrotic bone marrow spaces of FD lesions [ ]. However, conducting transcriptome or proteome analysis using human clinical material; i.e., a comparison between isolated normal and mutated cells (separated by clonal dilution) has two important limitations: 1) the involvement of multiple variables (patient age, lesion age, anatomical site, type of histopathological changes, concurrent changes in distant, e.g., endocrine, organs affecting bone secondarily) and 2) postulates a large numbers of cells that are not easy to achieve in a rare disease, and independent samples in order to attain statistical significance. Both problems, however, can be circumvented if a reliable way for stable transduction with the causative mutation of the cell type of interest is at hand. We have shown that bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs, a subset of which are skeletal stem cells, SSCs) can be prospectively isolated from BM by relying on a set of surface markers [ ], and that lentiviral technologies can be effectively used to transfer the disease phenotype in these cells [ ].
A transduced cell model represents the biological context of choice for studying the acute effects of Gsα mutation, thereby overcoming these limitations. In fact, the strictly paired comparison between mutant cells and their respective controls minimizes the requirements in sample size, and the possibility of describing an effect not directly related to Gsα mutation. Unquestionably, the use of control infection samples is important to identify possible off target or toxic effects of the transduction procedure in this model.
Therefore, one can create stably transduced and reasonably purified populations of skeletal progenitors while retaining untransduced cells from the same donor and tissue sample as controls. By addressing the two major hurdles that stand in the way of conducting high throughput studies using pathological human cells, this approach likely introduces an unrelated bias. Stable ex vivo transduction of skeletal progenitors using lentiviral vectors best portrays effects emerging within a short time frame, affecting a few generation of cells in the lineage, downstream of the transduced progenitor. However, many of the downstream effects that can be envisioned would be less represented. Nonetheless, this can actually be seen as a desirable (albeit incomplete) outcome, as it highlights those cellular changes that drive the initial development of tissue changes.
With these aims and limitations in mind, we conducted a global analysis of the transcriptome changes brought about by lentiviral-driven GsαR201C expression in BMSCs/SSCs using a microarray approach to explore the key molecular events in FD development, and we then attempted to correlate the results to known cardinal features of FD lesions as defined by histopathology in order to develop potential diagnostic markers or therapeutic targets for FD.

## Results and Discussion

## Gene chip analysis of GsαR201C hBMSCs
Thus far, the quest for therapeutic approaches, like attempts to interpret the genesis and mechanisms of the disease, have been dominated by almost exclusive consideration of the effect of constitutively active Gsα, with the idea that reverting the effects of mutant Gsα activity in relevant cells would necessarily lead to a cure. However, multiple lines of evidence point to a more complex scenario, in which tissue changes that have a direct bearing on morbidity at the tissue and organ level may well emanate from a complicated and prolonged in vivo history–of the mutated gene, cell, tissue, and organ [ , – ].
Keeping these concepts in mind, skeletal stem/progenitor cells isolated from bone marrow of three independent healthy donors and characterized as described previously [ , – ] (henceforth referred to as human bone marrow stromal cells, hBMSCs) were stably transduced with a lentiviral vector expressing the constitutively active form of the Gsα protein carrying the R201C mutation (LV-GsαR201C) [ ] or with control vector (LV-ctr) or untransduced (mock-treated) controls. Cultures of mock-treated, LV-GsαR201C and LV-ctr transduced hBMSCs were amplified in basic expansion medium. Ten days following infection, we checked GsαR201C expression by Western blotting ( ). Immunoblotting using anti-HA antibody, which highlights the exogenous GsαR201C expression demonstrates the presence of the mutant protein. We performed in parallel immunoblotting using anti-Gsα antibody showing the presence of a 1.4 fold in average more intense band resulting from the merge of the endogenous Gsα and exogenous GsαR201C signals. Fifteen days following infection, total RNA was isolated and used for hybridization to an Affymetrix chip to characterize the changes in transcriptomic profile and their relationship to the molecular mechanisms potentially leading to the overall phenotypic changes associated with GsαR201C mutations in vivo.
 Gsα RNA expression 1.6 fold quantification in the infected samples was consistent with immunoblotting data ( ). Unsupervised hierarchical cluster analysis of differential gene expression of cells from three donors (D01, D02, D03), revealed unique expression profiles associated with the expression of the R201C mutation (R) compared to the mock-treated cells (M) and to the cells transduced with LV-ctr (C) ( ). Differentially expressed genes were identified by comparing overlapping gene lists obtained using three independent analysis of paired samples as described in detail in the methods section, such as Affymetrix GCOS comparison analysis, dChip Compare Sample procedure, and paired t-test implemented in Partek® GS ( ). Combining these approaches, 408 genes differentially expressed at ± 2.5-fold levels or greater were identified in comparison to normal and LV-ctr-transduced cells (Figs and and ). Among the modulated probes, 111 genes were modulated by more than 10-fold ( ), and 95 genes (approximately 23%) were under-expressed, while 313 genes were over-expressed (approximately 76%) ( and ).
 To gain more insight into the biological functions of differentially expressed genes, we performed analysis of biological pathways and Gene Ontology (GO) terms associated with the differentially expressed genes by using the list of under- and over-expressed genes as input for the Enrichr tool (http://amp.pharm.mssm.edu/Enrichr/)). Enrichr's Combined Score (ECS), a combination of the p-value and z-score, was used to prioritize the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes- (KEGG)-enriched pathways and GO results. The most significant KEGG pathways enriched in under-represented genes include TGFß (Transforming Growth Factor-ß) signaling genes, WNT (Wingless-Type MMTV Integration Site) signaling genes and genes involved in osteoclast differentiation ( ). GO cellular components examined in the context of under-represented genes identified multiple immune cell-related components ( ). In the same list of significantly under-represented genes, the GO biological processes impacted by the FD mutation showed a significant involvement with categories related to the negative regulation of apoptotic processes and that of cell-cell adhesion ( ). GO cellular function-enriched results further highlighted that the FD mutation caused epigenetic alterations through the modulation of histone deacetylase activity ( ). Pathway analysis of the highly over-representative cluster demonstrated enrichment of mostly cell cycle processes, cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, signaling pathways regulating pluripotency of stem cells, chemokine signaling pathway ( ). GO analysis indicated the BMP receptor complex, the positive regulation of cell proliferation and chemokine activity respectively ( ) as the highest enriched cellular component, biological process and molecular function.
 

## Bone formation in GsαR201C hBMSCs
In order to relate significantly modulated genes and functional categories to FD pathological traits, we further analyzed the modulated genes by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA), identified the top ten physiological functions given by IPA core analysis ( ), and reclustered the identified genes into groups related to fundamental tissue changes that occur in FD, taking into account known hBMSC autocrine and paracrine properties. FD tissue pathology includes abnormal bone formation, adipocyte defects, hematopoiesis defects, undermineralized bone, excess of bone resorption, excess of vascularization [ , ]. These can be directly (in cis) or indirectly (in trans) be related to hBMSCs [ ], which have the potential of differentiating into chondrocytes, osteoblasts, hematopoiesis-supportive stroma and adipocytes [ ], and have paracrine effects on angiogenesis, hematopoiesis and osteoclastogenesis [ , , ].
With this perspective in mind, we observed that the FD mutation affected genes in the WNT signaling pathway, known to regulate bone mass and development [ , ]. WNT4 and WNT5A were upregulated by the FD mutation, as well as the receptor, Frizzled Class Receptor 1 (FZD1), along with Secreted Frizzled Related Proteins (SFRP1, SFRP2 and SFRP4), which are thought to be WNT inhibitors. The GsaR201C mutation also modulated matrix and mineralization-related genes including Matrix Gla Protein (MGP), Stanniocalcin-1 (STC1), Matrix Metalloproteinases (MMPs such as MMP2, MMP13) and A Disintegrin and Metalloproteinase Domain 12 (ADAM12) ( ). MGP is a potent inhibitor of extracellular matrix calcification by sequestering Ca2+, and transgenic mice overexpressing it in osteoblasts exhibit a reduction in bone mineral levels [ ]. STC1, also induced by GsαR201C mutation, is linked with mineralized ossification centers [ ], and with calcium and phosphate transport [ ]. MMP13, MMP2 and ADAM12 are expressed during skeletal development by chondrocytes, and by synovial cells in arthritis and osteoarthritis [ ]. Their activation by the GsαR201C mutation suggests an induction of an intense extracellular remodeling activity in FD [ ]. In line with this interpretation, A Disintegrin and Metalloproteinase Domain with Thrombospondin Type 1 Motif 2 (ADAMTS2), was described as an FD biomarker [ ], and MMP2 was defined by Kiss et al as one out of eight upregulated discriminative genes in FD bone tissue [ ]. Related to skeletal development, we also observed that T-Box Protein 3 (TBX3) was upregulated. Its function has been linked to stimulation of proliferation of osteogenic precursors and a block of differentiation of cells into mature osteoblasts, which could add a further level of impairment of bone development in FD bone [ ].
 Taken together, these data indicate that in the initial development of FD lesions, changes in hBMSC transcription induced by the GsαR201C mutation influences bone formation by alteration of WNTs, osteoblast formation and bone matrix remodeling.

## GsαR201C effects on hBMSC adipogenic differentiation
In hBMSCs overexpressing GsαR201C, several factors involved in adipogenesis and adipose metabolism were found upregulated ( ). Among these we found Lipoprotein Lipase (LPL), an important adipocyte marker implicated in fatty acid accumulation [ ]. The metabolic factors, Phosphatidic Acid Phosphatase 2a (PPAP2A), a negative regulator of insulin signaling [ ] and of lipolysis [ ] were also upregulated in GsαR201C hBMSCs. These modulations are typical of mature adipocytes suggesting an activation of adipocytic differentiation of GsαR201C. However both in FD lesions and in GsαR201C-expressing mice, there is a lack of adipocytes [ , ]. These data taken together suggest a complex, non-linear, interplay of factors involved in adipogenesis in the FD condition. Prolactin (PRL), a factor stimulated by cAMP activators [ ] was also induced. PRL promotes early pre-adipocyte differentiation [ ] via the activation of the adipogenic transcription factors such as CCAAT/Enhancer Binding Protein Beta (C/EBPB) and Peroxisome Proliferator Activated Receptor Gamm (PPARG) [ , ]. The C/EBPB/PPARG route of adipogenic modulation is also stimulated by LIF Receptor Alpha (LIFR), which was upregulated in GsαR201C hBMSCs [ ]. Although C/EBPB and PPARG were not directly found to be significantly upregulated, PPARG Coactivator 1 Alpha (PPARGC1A), a transcriptional co-activator of PPARG [ ], was overexpressed by GsαR201C. As indicated previously, GsαR201C induced the WNT non-canonical pathways. This leads to enhanced osteoblastogenesis, but also to inhibition of adipogenesis [ ]. Taken together, these results suggest a complex alteration of the adipogenic program in GsαR201C transduced hBMSCs.

## GsαR201C hBMSCs and browning of fat
Adipocytes are subdivided into different classes including white adipocytes, brown adipocytes, inducible brown adipocytes referred to as “beige” or “brite” adipocytes [ , ], and marrow adipoctyes appear to represent a fourth class. Excess cAMP, the fundamental downstream effector of Gsα activating mutations observed in GsαR201C hBMSCs mutant cells [ ], is the prime stimulator of beige fat induction. Beige fat develops from specific precursor cells that may include pericyte-like cells [ ]. Although limited information is available, bone marrow fat has been noted to exhibit brown fat-like features [ ]. Given this notion, we explored whether the abnormal adipocytic differentiation program induced by the FD mutation in hBMSC precursors would push the cells towards a specific fat subtype. We took as a reference the transcriptional markers described for beige fat by Wu and coworkers [ ]. We then analyzed the modulation of expression of these genes in GsαR201C hBMSCs array raw data. This analysis indicated that GsαR201C hBMSCs displayed an expression profile with numerous elements that overlap with the beige fat profile, including the overexpression of CEBPA, Insulin Like Growth Factor 1 Receptor (IGF1R) and PPARGC1A ( ). We believe that this preliminary information suggests that the FD mutation could be involved in browning of white fat and that this process deserves further investigation in the FD phenotype.
 

## Vascularity in GsαR201C hBMSCs
A high number of genes correlated to vascularization in GsαR201C hBMSCs ( ), suggesting that the mutation drives alteration of angiogenic processes through the activity of BM skeletal progenitors. Among the modulated genes, we observed high expression of Angiopoietin-Like 2 (ANGPTL2). This gene encodes for a factor belonging to the angiopoietin-like family of proteins, which are structurally related to angiopoietins but do not bind to Angiopoietin’s receptor, TIE-2. This family of proteins has been linked to neoplastic transformation and metabolic disease [ ]. In addition, it has been shown that ANGPTL2 may be involved in chronic inflammatory conditions [ ]. A second pro-angiogenic factor modulated in GsαR201C hBMSCs was PGF (Placental Growth Factor) ( ), a member of the family of factors controlling vascular endothelium formation normally observed at an embryonic stage. It is also associated with pathological angiogenesis, through a phospholipase C-dependent pathway, and protein kinase C via the activity of MAP kinases [ ]. We also observed that GsαR201C induced Sphingosine-1 Phosphate Receptor 1 (S1PR1) and 3 (S1PR3), two G protein coupled receptors important for downstream stabilization of new vessels [ , ]. Along with these factors, GsαR201C induced the chemokine gene, C-X-C Motif Chemokine Ligand 6 (CXCL6), which acts as a chemoattractant for endothelial cells during angiogenesis [ ]. On the other hand, the under-expression of Krüppel Like Factor 2 (KLF2) by GsαR201C mutant cells further underlines the proangiogenic effect of the mutation, since this is a factor identified as a potent inhibitor of angiogenesis through the negative regulation of Hypoxia inducible Factor 1 Alpha Subunit (HIF-1α), downstream of the proangiogenic factors, such as Interleukin 8 (IL-8), Angiopoietin 2 (ANG2), and Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) [ ].
 

## Hematological and immune system in GsαR201C hBMSCs
The physical and molecular support of hBMSCs is essential to promote the differentiation of cells in the hematopoietic lineage [ ]. Genes belonging to the hematological and immune systems were modulated by GsαR201C mutation ( ), including factors involved in cell proliferation (e.g., C-C Motif Chemokine Ligand 2 (CCL2) [ ]), and in the balance between cell survival and apoptotic processes (e.g., Transferrin (TF) [ ], TNF Superfamily Member 11 (TNFSF11) [ ]). The upregulation of genes with proliferation and anti-apoptotic activities suggest survival of transduced cells, but is presumably an acute early reaction to the presence of the mutation, since an increase in apoptosis is observed in FD lesions [ ]. Cytokines and chemokines were also upregulated by GsαR201C ( ). This suggests a stimulating/signaling activity involved in the chemotaxis of cells of the myeloid lineage (erythrocytes, monocytes, basophils, eosinophils, neutrophils) and lymphocyte lineage (B and T cells). The activation of chemotaxis proposes that GsαR201C hBMSCs could be involved in the activation of immune cell trafficking, humoral and cell-mediated immune responses and inflammatory phenomena in FD. Also in this case, presumably this is an acute early reaction to the presence of the mutation, since in FD lesions, which are the results of chronic expression of GsαR201C mutation, lack of hematopoiesis and absence of inflammation was observed [ , ].

## Stimulated osteoclastogenesis in GsαR201C mutant hBMSCs
There is a tight connection between cells in the hematopoietic lineage and bone remodeling, and many chemokines involved in inflammatory responses are also responsible for the regulation of osteoclastogenesis. C-X-C Ligands (CXCLs) such as CXCL1, CXCL13 and CXCL2 are highly over expressed in GsαR201C mutant hBMSCs ( ), are able to attract osteoclast precursors to the bone environment [ ], to enhance the proliferation of osteoclast precursor cells of bone marrow-derived macrophages [ ] and to stimulate Tumor Necrosis Factor Ligand Superfamily member 11 (TNFSF11, also known as RANKL) expression [ ], which has recently been shown to be over-expressed in human FD and in transgenic models of the disease [ , ]. Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) produced by osteoblasts is also a potent stimulator of bone resorption, and Phospholipase A2 Group IVA (PLA2G4A), highly expressed in our system, plays a key role in PGE2 production [ ]. Altogether, these data suggest strong osteoclast activation, consistent with the pronounced osteoclastogenesis observed in FD lesions [ ] and in the FD mouse model [ ].

## Conclusions and comparison to FD samples
Multiple lines of evidence point to the complexity of the pathophysiology of FD, in which multiple factors have to be taken into account for understanding the disease and for designing successful therapeutic strategies. The overall FD phenotype can be attributed to alterations of skeletal stem/progenitors that develop into osteogenic or adipogenic cells (in cis), which are also known to provide support to angiogenesis, hematopoiesis, and osteoclastogenesis (in trans) ( ). We thus reasoned that the analyses of these processes upon introduction of the FD mutation would offer a new perspective view of the development of the disease. Our data suggest that the FD mutation profoundly alters the properties of skeletal stem/progenitor cells by directing hBMSCs towards formation of disorganized bone with a concomitant altered fat development. In addition, the mutation created an altered in trans environment that diverted the overall system towards neovascularization and osteoclastogenesis.
It will be interesting to analyze in vivo how these observations correspond to the evolution of the disease. In fact, we have already observed that specific aspects that were prospectively defined through the data presented here were also observed in vivo. For example, increased osteoclastogenesis is known to occur in human FD tissue and we observed that the same effect was elicited by the mutation in the animal model of FD, and this could represent a targetable pathway of treatment for FD patients [ ]. The comparison with human samples will also be of interest, however, keeping in mind a caveat based on the fact that studies on human FD have been performed on samples obtained when the disease stage is overt. One such example is the array analysis performed by Zhou and co-workers on craniofacial samples obtained from FD patients. In particular, it was interesting to observe that some aspects that we observed on skeletal stem/progenitors were also present in FD samples ( ). ADAM proteins and other matrix-related factors were indeed upregulated in both experimental systems. Along with this, in both systems Phosphodiesterase 7B (PDE7B) was over-expressed, which can be considered as a buffering process, activated to compensate for excess cAMP as we already observed in a previous study in human skeletal progenitors [ ]. Moreover, we want to highlight the over-expression of CEBPs in both systems, factors related to browning of white fat.
Given the link between parathyroid hormone and the skeletal phenotype, we made a comparative analysis between our microarray data and those described by Li and co-workers on rat samples treated with parathyroid hormone (PTH) [ , ]. To compare the expression profiles we considered our microarray data for FD and the list of modulated genes corresponding to human orthologues of rat regulated genes identified by Li and co-workers. This analysis highlighted 7 genes which were over-expressed in both FD and PTH samples, including PLAU and ANGPTL2, which can be associated with vascularity alterations, IGFBP5 with bone formation, and LIFR correlated with adipogenesis (Figs and ).
Finally, we tested differentially expressed genes by qPCR for validation ( and ). The genes were chosen among the commonly regulated and those related to specific trans and cis FD related alterations. Eight transcripts, corresponding to 6 upregulated and 2 downregulated genes in the microarray analysis, were tested by qPCR. Tested genes were qualitatively modulated as on microarray.
This is the first analysis of skeletal stem/progenitor cell responses to introduction of the FD mutation and we believe it provides a useful background for further studies on the molecular basis of the disease and for the identification of novel potential therapeutic targets.

## Materials and methods

## hBMSCs
hBMSCs were cultured in α-MEM, 2mM L-glutamine, 20% FBS, 100U/ml penicillin, 100μg/ml streptomycin (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) [ , – ]. 293T cells (ATCC CRL-11268) were used for viral production and maintained in DMEM (Invitrogen), 10% FBS, 100U/ml penicillin and 100μg/ml streptomycin.

## Vectors
Lentiviral vectors (LV-GSαR201C and LV-ctr) were constructed, produced and titrated as previously described [ ]. The LV-vector integrated copy number was calculated by qPCR as described in [ ] and was established as ~1 copy of integrated lentiviral sequence per transduced cell. hBMSCs were transduced with LV-GSαR201C and LV-ctr or mock treated as previously described [ ].

## Western blotting
For Western blotting, ten days following infection protein extracts were obtained as previously described [ ]. Filters were then incubated with anti-Gsα (sc-823 Santa Cruz Biotechnology), anti-actin-HRP conjugated (sc-1615, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and anti-HA (sc-805 Santa Cruz Biotechnology) antibodies. Anti-rabbit HRP-conjugated (sc-2357, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) has been used as secondary antibody.

## qPCR, gene expression profiling and data analysis
Total cellular RNA was isolated from the cell populations using an RNeasy RNA isolation kit (Qiagen) as described in [ ]. Disposable RNA chips (Agilent RNA 6000 Nano LabChip kit) were used to determine the concentration and purity/integrity of RNA samples using an Agilent 2100 bioanalyzer. cDNA synthesis, biotin-labeled target synthesis, HG-U133 plus 2.0 GeneChip (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) array hybridization, staining and scanning were performed as described in [ , ]. The amount of a transcript mRNA (signal) was determined by the Affymetrix GeneChip Operative Software (GCOS) 1.2 absolute analysis algorithm [ ]. All expression values for the genes in the GCOS absolute analyses were determined using the global scaling option. Alternatively, probe level data were converted to expression values using the Robust Multiarray Average (RMA) procedure [ , ] or dChip procedure (invariant set) [ , ]. Data were then filtered and analyzed using dChip®, Partek GS® and R (Bioconductor). In particular, the R-AffyQC Report, R-Affy-PLM, R-RNA Degradation Plot and dChip QC were used to perform all quality controls. Under- and over-expressed genes were obtained merging the overlapping genes coming from three approaches: 1) Paired pair-wise comparisons, between the LV-GsαR201C transduced hBMSCs and the two controls, mock and LV-ctr-transduced hBMSCs, were performed using the Affymetrix GCOS comparison algorithm and identifying probe sets showing an “increased” or “decreased” call and a signal log ratio greater than 1 or less than -1 in comparison of all replicates of only LV-GsαR201C transduced hBMSCs vs mock. 2) Alternatively, differentially expressed genes were obtained using the dChip Compare Sample procedure. Briefly, the comparison criteria utilized in dChip requires the fold change and the absolute difference between the paired sample means to exceed user defined thresholds (in the present study, 2 and 200 respectively). The “Use lower 90% confidence bound” was selected to use the lower confidence bound of fold changes for filtering. The lower confidence limit is intended as a conservative estimate of the real underlying fold change. False Discovery Rate (FDR) was used to adjust p-values for multiple comparisons by 100 random permutations of the group labels. 3) Finally, a paired t-test was performed between transduced and untreated groups using Partek GS® selecting genes with a p-value less than 0.01 and a contrast greater than 2-fold change. Partek GS® was also used to manage the gene lists coming from different analysis. The data set containing the Affymetrix probe identifiers selected as under- and over-expressed in LV-GsαR201C transduced hBMSCs was uploaded into EnrichR (http://amp.pharm.mssm.edu/Enrichr/) and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (www.ingenuity.com). Enrichment analysis of under- and over-expressed genes was performed with the publicly available tool, EnrichR (http://amp.pharm.mssm.edu/Enrichr), that provides access to various gene-set libraries [ , ]. EnrichR currently contains annotated gene sets from 102 gene set libraries organized in 8 categories. We considered pathways and Gene Ontology terms as enriched if their p-value was lower than 0.05 and ranked them Combined Score (CS). The CS is a combination of the p-value and z-score calculated by multiplying the two scores as follows: CS = log(p)*z where p is the p-value computed using Fisher's exact test, and z is the z-score computed to assess the deviation from the expected rank.
qPCR were performed as described in [ ] using the following primers:
CRYAB F: 5’-CAGAGGAACTCAAAGTTAAGG
CRYAB R: 5’-ATGAAACCATGTTCATCCTG
LPL F: 5’-ACACAGAGGTAGATATTGGAG
LPL R: 5’-CTTTTTCTGAGTCTCTCCTG
MGP F: 5’-ATAAAAACCTCACAGCCTTC
MGP R: 5’-CCATAACACAAAGTTACTACCG
PGF F: 5’-AGCTCCTAAAGATCCGTTC
PGF R: 5’-GACGGTAATAAATACACGAGC
SFRP2 F: 5’-GACCTAGACGAGACCATC
SFRP2 R: 5’-ATACCTTTGGAGCTTCCTC
PPAP2A F: 5’-CACTTTATCTTCAAGCCAGG
PPAP2A R: 5’-ACTAATATTGCAACCAGAGC
BAMBI F: 5’-AAGGTGAAATTCGATGCTAC
BAMBI R: 5’-TCAAGAAGTCTAGAGAAGCAG
MMP13: 5’-AGGCTACAACTTGTTTCTTG
MMP13: 5’-AGGTGTAGATAGGAAACATGAG
qPCR reactions were performed with the Applied Biosystems PRISM 7300 Real Time PCR System with QuantiTect SYBR Green PCR Kit. To obtain quantification with respect to mock cells, quantification cycle values (Cq) were exported and ansalysed with Excel, the data were calculated with the 2–ΔΔCq method as described in [ ]. LV-GsαR201C treated hBMSCs relative fold change were then subtracted to mock relative fold change. Data are reported as means of duplicates or more data obtained from two independent biological samples. For qPCR analysis p is the p-value computed using Student’s t test (*p < .05, ** p < .01 ***p < .001).

## Ethics approval
Established human bone marrow stromal cell line (hBMSCs) were obtained from healthy donors with informed consent per institutionally approved protocols by the Ethical Committee of Sapienza University of Rome, Policlinico Umberto I venue (Ref. 5313, version n 2.0–26.04.19) [ , – ].

## List of abbreviations
Fibrous dysplasia (FD); G protein-coupled receptor complex (Gsα); Gsα mutation involving a substitution of arginine at position 201 by histidine or cysteine (GsαR201H or R201C); McCune-Albright syndrome (MAS); bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs); skeletal stem cells (SSCs); lentiviral vector expressing the constitutively active form of the Gsα protein carrying the R201C mutation (LV-GsαR201C); lentiviral vector with control vector (LV-ctr); untransduced (mock-treated) controls; R201C mutation transduced cells (R), mock-treated cells (M), cells transduced with LV-ctr (C); Gene Ontology (GO); Enrichr's Combined Score (ECS); Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG); Affymetrix GeneChip Operative Software (GCOS); Robust Multiarray Average (RMA); False Discovery Rate (FDR).
A Disintegrin and Metalloprotease (ADAM); Phosphodiesterase 7B (PDE7B); CCAAT-Enhancer Binding Proteins (CEBPs); adenylyl cyclase (AC); Protein Kinase A (PKA); activator protein 1 (AP-1); Interleukin 6 (IL-6); Platelet-derived growth factor β (PDGFβ); Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP); ATPase Sarcoplasmic/Endoplasmic Reticulum Ca2+ Transporting 2 (ATP2A2); Transforming Growth Factor-ß (TGFß); Wingless-Type MMTV Integration Site (WNT); Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA);Frizzled Class Receptor 1 (FZD1); Secreted Frizzled Related Proteins (SFRPs); Matrix Gla Protein (MGP); Stanniocalcin-1 (STC1); Matrix Metalloproteinases (MMPs); A Disintegrin and Metalloproteinase Domain 12 (ADAM12); A Disintegrin and Metalloproteinase Domain with Thrombospondin Type 1 Motif 2 (ADAMTS2); T-Box Protein 3 (TBX3); Lipoprotein Lipase (LPL); Phosphatidic Acid Phosphatase 2a (PPAP2A); Prolactin (PRL); CCAAT/Enhancer Binding Protein Beta (C/EBPB); Peroxisome Proliferator Activated Receptor Gamm (PPARG); LIF Receptor Alpha (LIFR); PPARG Coactivator 1 Alpha (PPARGC1A); Insulin Like Growth Factor 1 Receptor (IGF1R); Angiopoietin-Like 2 (ANGPTL2); MAP kinases (MAPK); Sphingosine-1 Phosphate Receptor 1 (S1PRs); C-X-C Motif Chemokine Ligand 6 (CXCL6); Krüppel Like Factor 2 (KLF2); Hypoxia inducible Factor 1 Alpha Subunit (HIF-1α); Interleukin 8 (IL-8); Angiopoietin 2 (ANG2); Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF); C-C Motif Chemokine Ligand 2 (CCL2); Transferrin (TF); C-X-C Ligands (CXCLs); Tumor Necrosis Factor Ligand Superfamily member 11 (TNFSF11, also known as RANKL); Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2); Phospholipase A2 Group IVA (PLA2G4A).

## Availability of data and material
The data discussed in this manuscript have been deposited in NCBI's Gene Expression Omnibus [ ] and are accessible through GEO Series accession number GSE109818 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE109818).

## Supporting information
S1 Table

## Under- and over-expressed genes were obtained merging the overlapping genes coming from three approaches: 1) paired pair-wise comparisons using the Affymetrix GCOS comparison algorithm, 2) using dChip Compare Sample procedure, 3) paired t-test using Partek GS®.
FC, fold change. T test, paired t-test applied comparing LV-GsαR201C to mock treated hBMSCs.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Fig

## In silico analysis.
(A) Flow chart of the different steps applied for the functional and statistical analysis of array data. (B) Functional pathways were evaluated in the GsαR201C data set by Ingeuity Pathwaay Analysis (IPA). Significant pathways were defined by assessing the number of molecules mapping to the pathway and by Fisher’s exact test calculated p-value. Top ten scoring pathways are showed in the histogram.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Fig

## qPCR analysis.
(A) qPCR analysis on cDNA extracted from LV-GsαR201C and mock treated hBMSCs, for the different indicated genes. Data are obtained from tripilicate measurements of independent biological duplicates shown as the difference of LV-Gsα\R201C fold change respect to mock treated samples, each dot represent an individual sample. P values were calculated with Student’s t test (*p < .05, ** p < .01 ***p < .001).
(TIFF)
Click here for additional data file.

## Acknowledgments
We thank S. Piersanti for her technical contribution. This work is in the memory of P. Bianco.

## Data Availability
The data discussed in this manuscript have been deposited in NCBI's Gene Expression Omnibus and are accessible through GEO Series accession number GSE109818 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE109818). The following secure token has been created to allow review of record GSE109818 while it remains in private status: ctujawowrtehnqf.

## Funding Statement
This work has been supported by Grants EU FP7 Brainvectors (n. 286071), Telethon GEP15033, PRF 2016-67, Progetti di Ricerca, Sapienza University of Rome (RP1181642E87148C) to IS, FIRC (22392) and CIB to MLT and IS; Avvio alla Ricerca, Sapienza University of Rome (AR2181642B6F2E48, AR1181642EE61111) to RB, SDG and IS; Telethon GGP15198, University of Pennsylvania Orphan Disease Center in partnership with the Fibrous Dysplasia Foundation MDBR16-114-FD/MAS and MDBR17-114-FD/MAS to MR; Sapienza University (RP11715C7C4DC57A) to AC; the IRP, NIH, DHHS (ZIA DE000380) to PGR. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

## References
 

PLoS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0227279.r001Decision Letter 0
TintutYinAcademic Editor© 2020 Yin TintutThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
17 Oct 2019

PONE-D-19-26235
Changes in gene expression in human skeletal stem cells transduced with constitutively active Gsα correlates with hallmark histopathological changes seen in fibrous dysplastic bone
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Saggio,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
==============================
This study has potentially valuable information to the field of fibrous dysplasia.  However, it is critical to address the concerns raised by the reviewers with respect to the rigor of the study, i.e. R201C mutation in all 3 donors and the protein expression levels.  In addition, please provide the rationale of the cell cultures and the comparison/contrast with hyperparathyroidism.   
==============================
We would appreciate receiving your revised manuscript by Dec 01 2019 11:59PM. When you are ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter.
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). This letter should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. This file should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. This file should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Manuscript'.
Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Yin Tintut, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
1. When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
http://www.journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and http://www.journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2. Our internal editors have evaluated your manuscript and determined that it is within the scope of our Stem Cell Plasticity in Tissue Repair and Regeneration Call for Papers. This collection of papers is headed by a team of Guest Editors for PLOS ONE and will encompass a diverse range of research articles. Additional information can be found on our announcement page: (https://collections.plos.org/s/stem-cell). If you would like your manuscript to be considered for this collection, please let us know in your cover letter and we will ensure that your paper is treated as if you were responding to this call. If you would prefer to remove your manuscript from collection consideration, please specify this in the cover letter.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: This manuscript describes gene expression changes (assessed by microarrays) in human bone marrow stromal cells in response to introduction of the FD-associated Gs,alpha R201C mutation. This paper is well-written and contains a systematic and careful discussion about the complex nature of bone disease in FD. THis new dataset will be of some value to researchers studying FD and other cAMP-regulated bone conditions. Overall, these microarray data are clearly described and robust.
Minor comments:
1. In Figure 1A, the three samples transduced with the R201C mutant are all listed as D02R. Is this correct? Or should this instead state D01R, D02R, and D03R? Ideally the authors would perform this analysis using three separate BMSC donors.
2. It would be useful to show an immunoblot demonstrating expression levels of the R201C mutant compared to endogenous Gs,alpha protein levels.
3. The authors could compare/contrast the genes regulated by Gs,alpha R201C expression and genes whose expression is regulated by continuous hyperparathyroidism (PMID 17690103).
Reviewer #2: The manuscript by Raimondo et al., reports transcriptome analysis of human bone marrow stromal cells constitutively expressing a mutated dominant form of the GNAS gene coding for a G-protein coupled receptor. The mutation is a substitution of Arginine to Cysteine at position 201 of the alpha subunit and causes fibrous dysplasia of bone. The cells are transduced with a lentiviral vector carrying the GsαR201C mutation. Previous work by the group has documented that GsαR201C transduced cells manifest the diseased phenotype in vitro and after ectopic in vivo transplantation into mice. In this report the authors concentrate on the expression profile of transduced cells with the aim to find early perturbations in gene expression that may provide potential targets for development of therapeutic strategies. For this, 3 different human samples isolated from healthy individuals were transduced with the constitutive active GsαR201C or with control vectors and expression profile analysis was performed after 15 days. The bioinformatics analysis of the data was directed towards the identification of pathways that may relate to disease phenotype. Interestingly genes belonging to the Wnt pathway as well as genes related to osteoblastogenesis were dysregulated in GsαR201C transduced cells and provide a link to the bone malformation situation observed in fibrous dysplasia (FD) patients. Similarly, an altered adipogenic program is related the block of adipogenesis in FD patients. Interestingly, comparison of the expression profile in this manuscript to published data from FD patients revealed common sets of dysregulated genes. Despite that the expression of GsαR201C is regulated from an exogenous promoter and not from the endogenous locus, the transcriptomic data are informative and can contribute to a better understanding of the molecular pathways involved in FD disease.
Minor comments
1. Please describe better the culture requirements for hBMSCs in the “Material and Methods” part. A far as I know, dexamethasone and ascorbic acid are used for osteogenic differentiation and not for maintaining hBMSCs. Further, you should mention why you culture 293T cells (virus production?).
2. KLF2 is Krüppel-like Factor 2 and NOT Krüpple
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes: Konstantinos Anastassiadis
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files to be viewed.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
PLoS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0227279.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
3012020151e0227279e0227279Collection date 2020.

3 Dec 2019

November 26, 2019
PONE-D-19-26235 
Dear Editor,
We enclose the revised version of the manuscript “Changes in gene expression in human skeletal stem cells transduced with constitutively active Gsα correlates with hallmark histopathological changes seen in fibrous dysplastic bone” by Domenico Raimondo and coworkers.
We hope that you will find this revised version suited for publication in PLOS One.
Thank you for your consideration,
Isabella Saggio
isabella.saggio@uniroma1.it, 
 
\f
PONE-D-19-26235 - REBUTTAL LETTER
Reviewer #1:
This manuscript describes gene expression changes (assessed by microarrays) in human bone marrow stromal cells in response to introduction of the FD-associated Gs,alpha R201C mutation. This paper is well-written and contains a systematic and careful discussion about the complex nature of bone disease in FD. THis new dataset will be of some value to researchers studying FD and other cAMP-regulated bone conditions. Overall, these microarray data are clearly described and robust. 
We thank for the favourable comments.
Minor comments: 1. In Figure 1A, the three samples transduced with the R201C mutant are all listed as D02R. Is this correct? Or should this instead state D01R, D02R, and D03R? Ideally the authors would perform this analysis using three separate BMSC donors.
The analysis was indeed performed on three donors and the Figure was corrected.
 2. It would be useful to show an immunoblot demonstrating expression levels of the R201C mutant compared to endogenous Gs,alpha protein levels.
This experiment was performed and added as Figure 1A.
 3. The authors could compare/contrast the genes regulated by Gs,alpha R201C expression and genes whose expression is regulated by continuous hyperparathyroidism (PMID 17690103).
This comparison was performed and added as Figure 7C.
 
Reviewer #2: 
The manuscript by Raimondo et al., reports transcriptome analysis of human bone marrow stromal cells constitutively expressing a mutated dominant form of the GNAS gene coding for a G-protein coupled receptor. The mutation is a substitution of Arginine to Cysteine at position 201 of the alpha subunit and causes fibrous dysplasia of bone. The cells are transduced with a lentiviral vector carrying the GsαR201C mutation. Previous work by the group has documented that GsαR201C transduced cells manifest the diseased phenotype in vitro and after ectopic in vivo transplantation into mice. In this report the authors concentrate on the expression profile of transduced cells with the aim to find early perturbations in gene expression that may provide potential targets for development of therapeutic strategies. For this, 3 different human samples isolated from healthy individuals were transduced with the constitutive active GsαR201C or with control vectors and expression profile analysis was performed after 15 days. The bioinformatics analysis of the data was directed towards the identification of pathways that may relate to disease phenotype. Interestingly genes belonging to the Wnt pathway as well as genes related to osteoblastogenesis were dysregulated in GsαR201C transduced cells and provide a link to the bone malformation situation observed in fibrous dysplasia (FD) patients. Similarly, an altered adipogenic program is related the block of adipogenesis in FD patients. Interestingly, comparison of the expression profile in this manuscript to published data from FD patients revealed common sets of dysregulated genes. Despite that the expression of GsαR201C is regulated from an exogenous promoter and not from the endogenous locus, the transcriptomic data are informative and can contribute to a better understanding of the molecular pathways involved in FD disease.
 Minor comments 
1. Please describe better the culture requirements for hBMSCs in the “Material and Methods” part. A far as I know, dexamethasone and ascorbic acid are used for osteogenic differentiation and not for maintaining hBMSCs. Further, you should mention why you culture 293T cells (virus production?).
293T cells were used only for virus production and this was indicated in the Materials and Methods section. The protocol for hBMSCs was corrected, there was a mistake in the text and in reference positioning. 
2. KLF2 is Krüppel-like Factor 2 and NOT Krüpple
This was corrected in the text.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: cover rebuttal gnas array 261119.doc
Click here for additional data file.
PLoS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0227279.r003Decision Letter 1
TintutYinAcademic Editor© 2020 Yin TintutThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
17 Dec 2019

Changes in gene expression in human skeletal stem cells transduced with constitutively active Gsα correlates with hallmark histopathological changes seen in fibrous dysplastic bone
PONE-D-19-26235R1
Dear Dr. Saggio,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it complies with all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you will receive an e-mail containing information on the amendments required prior to publication. When all required modifications have been addressed, you will receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will proceed to our production department and be scheduled for publication.
Shortly after the formal acceptance letter is sent, an invoice for payment will follow. To ensure an efficient production and billing process, please log into Editorial Manager at https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the "Update My Information" link at the top of the page, and update your user information. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to enable them to help maximize its impact. If they will be preparing press materials for this manuscript, you must inform our press team as soon as possible and no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
With kind regards,
Yin Tintut, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: Marc Wein
Reviewer #2: No
PLoS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0227279.r004Acceptance letter
TintutYinAcademic Editor© 2020 Yin TintutThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
6 Jan 2020

PONE-D-19-26235R1 
Changes in gene expression in human skeletal stem cells transduced with constitutively active Gsα correlates with hallmark histopathological changes seen in fibrous dysplastic bone 
Dear Dr. Saggio:
I am pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper at this point, to enable them to help maximize its impact. If they will be preparing press materials for this manuscript, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
For any other questions or concerns, please email plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE.
With kind regards,
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Yin Tintut 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
S1 Table

## Under- and over-expressed genes were obtained merging the overlapping genes coming from three approaches: 1) paired pair-wise comparisons using the Affymetrix GCOS comparison algorithm, 2) using dChip Compare Sample procedure, 3) paired t-test using Partek GS®.
FC, fold change. T test, paired t-test applied comparing LV-GsαR201C to mock treated hBMSCs.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Fig

## In silico analysis.
(A) Flow chart of the different steps applied for the functional and statistical analysis of array data. (B) Functional pathways were evaluated in the GsαR201C data set by Ingeuity Pathwaay Analysis (IPA). Significant pathways were defined by assessing the number of molecules mapping to the pathway and by Fisher’s exact test calculated p-value. Top ten scoring pathways are showed in the histogram.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Fig

## qPCR analysis.
(A) qPCR analysis on cDNA extracted from LV-GsαR201C and mock treated hBMSCs, for the different indicated genes. Data are obtained from tripilicate measurements of independent biological duplicates shown as the difference of LV-Gsα\R201C fold change respect to mock treated samples, each dot represent an individual sample. P values were calculated with Student’s t test (*p < .05, ** p < .01 ***p < .001).
(TIFF)
Click here for additional data file.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: cover rebuttal gnas array 261119.doc
Click here for additional data file.

## Data Availability Statement
The data discussed in this manuscript have been deposited in NCBI's Gene Expression Omnibus and are accessible through GEO Series accession number GSE109818 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE109818). The following secure token has been created to allow review of record GSE109818 while it remains in private status: ctujawowrtehnqf.
The data discussed in this manuscript have been deposited in NCBI's Gene Expression Omnibus [ ] and are accessible through GEO Series accession number GSE109818 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE109818).