Acta Radiol OpenActa Radiol Open2704aro101651010ARRActa Radiologica Open2058-4601SAGE PublicationsPMC6743200PMC6743200.1674320067432003154891310.1177/205846011987501510.1177_20584601198750151ResearchGender, letters, relatives, and God: mediating actors in
mammographic screening among Pakistani women in Norway
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2770-584XBhargavaSameer MoenKåre 
1Cancer Registry of Norway, Oslo, Norway
2Institute of Health and Society, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
3Department of Life Sciences and Health, Faculty of
Health Sciences, Oslo Metropolitan University, Oslo, NorwaySameer Bhargava, The Cancer Registry
of Norway, P.O. Box 5313 Majorstuen, N-0304 Oslo, Norway. Email:
Sameer.Bhargava@kreftregisteret.no1192019920198934131220584601198750158120191982019110920192309201925092019© The Foundation Acta Radiologica
20192019The Foundation Acta
Radiologicahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/Creative Commons Non Commercial CC BY-NC: This article is
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/)
which permits non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution
of the work without further permission provided the original
work is attributed as specified on the SAGE and Open Access
pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).

## Background
Pakistani immigrant women in Norway have lower attendance rates in
the national breast cancer screening program (BreastScreen
Norway) compared to non-immigrants and immigrants from most
other countries.

## Purpose
To identify and explore human and non-human actors that play a role
for Pakistani immigrant women’s attendance in the program.

## Material and Methods
Qualitative interviews with 16 Norwegian-Pakistani women in 2017
and 2018. Inspired by Latour, we explored how human and
non-human actors act and interact when Pakistani immigrant women
consider attendance in BreastScreen Norway.

## Results
Among the actors found to play a significant role in the
relationship between Pakistani immigrant women and the screening
program were trust in the healthcare system and breast cancer
screening, the gender of the screening radiographer, the written
information received from the screening program, family life,
daughters, general practitioners, non-governmental
organizations, religious beliefs, private service providers,
monetary expenses, accessibility, worries, and digital
tools.

## Conclusion
Many human and non-human actors work to shape and influence
Pakistani immigrant women’s screening attendance, or lack
thereof, for instance by creating thoughts, promoting
opportunities, raising doubts and generating worries, thus
variously encouraging, enabling, facilitating, discouraging or
preventing attendance in organized breast cancer screening.

Breast canceremigrants and immigrantsminority healthmammographyscreeningEkstraStiftelsen Helse og
Rehabiliteringhttp://doi.org/10.13039/1000094712016/FO76429pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NCedited-statecorrected-proof

## Introduction
Based on qualitative interviews, this paper aims to identify and explore human
and non-human actors that play a role for attendance in the national breast
cancer screening program in Norway (BreastScreen Norway) among immigrant
women from Pakistan. Who and what are these actors, and how do they act when
women consider attending the program and when they go for their
examinations?
Women who do not attend have a higher risk of being diagnosed with advanced
stage disease than women who do, and improvements in breast cancer-specific
survival are probably due to a combination of mammographic screening and
improved treatment ( ). From a public health perspective, mammographic screening
attendance should be as high as possible to reduce disease-specific
mortality ( ).
Norwegian studies have shown that low screening attendance rates are associated
with certain sociodemographic factors, such as earning a low income,
residing in Oslo, and being an immigrant ( , ). Among immigrants with
particularly low attendance are those with a background from Pakistan. Only
59% of the 2978 Pakistani immigrant women who were invited to BreastScreen
Norway between 1996 and 2015 had ever attended, compared to 86% of
non-immigrants. When comparing mammographic screening attendance among
immigrants from 71 different countries, women from Pakistan ranked 51st in
terms of ever having attended ( ). Moreover, women receive 10
invitations over 20 years and only one-third (34%) of all invitations sent
to Pakistani women resulted in attendance. This proportion was more than
twice as high (78%) among non-immigrants; when comparing immigrant groups
with different country backgrounds, Pakistani women ranked third lowest
(69th out of 71).
A recent study has shown that South Asian immigrant women in Norway had lower
incidence rates of breast cancer than non-immigrants between 1990 and 2012
(6). This could indicate that they have a lower risk of breast cancer than
non-immigrants. The lower incidence could also potentially be influenced by
early stage tumors remaining undiagnosed due to lower mammographic screening
attendance. While Asian immigrants in Europe and North America have been
shown to have lower incidence rates of breast cancer than non-immigrants,
their descendants are found to have similar rates of breast cancer as other
non-immigrants, indicating risk-adaptation among descendants of immigrants
( , ). Studies have
also shown that South Asian immigrant women in Norway have had more advanced
breast cancer, had lower survival from the disease, and been younger at
diagnosis than non-immigrant women ( , ). From a public health
perspective, low screening rates are of concern among Pakistani immigrant
women despite lower incidence rates of breast cancer due to the risk of more
advanced disease and consequently lower survival.
As far as we know, no previous study has explored Pakistani immigrant women’s
attendance in BreastScreen Norway. In Denmark, a study that included
Pakistani immigrants revealed that major life stressors and competing
priorities often left little room for breast cancer screening, and this was
so even among women who had knowledge both about the disease and about the
screening program ( ). In Canada, a study among women from Pakistan and other
South Asian countries identified language difficulties, problems with
transportation to the screening facility, reluctance to being touched by
male health providers, and a lack of knowledge about breast cancer as
barriers to screening ( ).

## The Norwegian-Pakistani community
There is a large Pakistani diaspora in Norway; women born in Pakistan
make up the fifth largest immigrant group invited to organized breast
cancer screening in the country ( ). A majority of the
immigration from Pakistan occurred > 20 years ago ( , ) and
consisted mostly of labor migrants, whereas those who have arrived
after 1975 have primarily come through family immigration ( ).
Pakistani immigrants and their descendants (hereafter called the
Norwegian-Pakistani community) account for > 37,000 of the 5.3
million people living in Norway.
In some ways, the Norwegian-Pakistani community shows signs of being an
integrated part of the Norwegian society and includes members of
parliament, local politicians, cultural personalities, high-profiled
journalists, and well-known medical doctors. The Norwegian-Pakistani
community also differs from the overall population, for example in
terms of residence pattern (67% of Norwegian-Pakistanis reside in
Oslo, as compared to only 12% of the total population ( )) and
with respect to religion (three-quarters of the overall population are
members of the Church of Norway, whereas the vast majority of
Norwegian-Pakistanis are Muslims ( )). Moreover, while 69%
of all women aged 15–74 years had paid work in 2008, this was the case
for only 31% of Pakistani women who had come to Norway through family
immigration ( ). As factors possibly contributing to this,
Statistics Norway suggests traditional division of work in
Norwegian-Pakistani households and low educational status ( ). They
also point out that many Norwegian-Pakistani women have difficulties
with the Norwegian language.

## Accessing BreastScreen Norway
BreastScreen Norway invites all women in Norway aged 50–69 years to
biennial mammographic screening as a secondary preventive tool against
breast cancer ( ). Women due for screening receive a letter (in
Norwegian) offering mammography at a specific (but changeable) time
and date. The letter is accompanied by an information sheet (also in
Norwegian) about breast cancer and breast cancer screening. In total,
the information package consists of four pages of text (see reference
( )
for the invitation letter and information sheet). Two short paragraphs
about mammographic screening are available in Urdu after navigating
through subpages on the screening program’s website. In Oslo, where
the fieldwork for this study was carried out, there is a single
screening facility operated by BreastScreen Norway, located 6 km from
the city center and up to 1 h away from major residential areas by
public transport. The screening examination requires payment of a user
fee of 250 NOK (about €26).

## Material and Methods
This paper draws on qualitative research carried out in and around Oslo in 2017
and 2018. The study was part of a larger research project using several
different approaches to investigate breast cancer and breast cancer
screening attendance among immigrant women. So far, the project has
demonstrated that immigrant and minority women have lower attendance rates
than other women across the world ( ), that this is the case also
in Norway, both overall and for all levels of all sociodemographic factors
studied ( , ), and that
mammographic screening performance measures differ between immigrants and
non-immigrants in Norway ( ).

## Identifying and exploring “actors”
Several theoretical models have been used in attempts to understand
breast cancer screening attendance, and lack of such, among Asian
women. Some studies have approached these topics through the
identification of barriers preventing attendance and facilitators
promoting attendance ( , ). Another framework that
has been used is the health belief model, through which attempts are
made to predict health-related behavior on the basis of personal
beliefs ( ). Roughly put, the idea would be that women will attend
breast cancer screening if they believe breast cancer is a
sufficiently serious illness, to which they feel sufficiently
susceptible, and for which they perceive mammographic screening to be
a reasonably effective preventive measure. Yet other frameworks, such
as social cognitive theory ( ), focus on women’s
self-efficacy.
While these frameworks have provided useful perspectives on screening
attendance and non-attendance, they also seem to have their
limitations. Among them may be that they propose fairly linear
relations between cause and effect and, as a result, could come to
give rise to rather simplistic ideas about interventions to promote
screening attendance. If women merely had (or acquired) the right
beliefs, or if obstructive barriers were simply removed, screening
coverage would improve.
In this article, we draw inspiration from Latour’s theorizing of action
in an attempt to understand why women act as they do in relation to
organized mammographic screening in Norway. We take as our starting
point Latour’s ( ) view that action is normally multiple and dislocated
rather than single and situated. In other words, a whole range of
agents typically play a role in shaping people’s actions.
To come to grips with this insight, Latour suggests that we reconsider
the concept of “actors.” Rather than understanding an actor as a “pure
and unproblematic source of action” (p. 46), we should—quite to the
contrary—conceive of actors as entities that are made
to act (p. 46) and acknowledge that what makes us act are normally
many agents (as opposed to one). Let us offer a simple example to
illustrate these points. If someone wanted to understand how we, the
authors, came to write this paper, we imagine Latour would have
encouraged them to try and identify the range of entities that
contributed to make us act to have it written. Among candidate actors
would probably be a few teachers who have taught us different skills,
some family members who permitted us to work on the manuscript instead
of contributing to household chores, and the policy makers who decided
to make our academic careers dependent on active publication, along
with many others. For each identified agent, one could in turn explore
what made them act in the ways they did. A whole network of actors
contributing to make others act could be envisioned in this way.
In addition to human actors, Latour would also be likely to prompt us to
take into consideration the things that contributed to make the
authors prepare the article. While objects may not have the same type
of agency as humans, Latour argues that they can still meaningfully be
conceived of as entities that make other agents do things. As examples
of what things can do, he mentions to “authorize, allow, afford,
encourage, permit, suggest, influence, block, render possible, forbid,
and so on” (p. 72). As we are writing up this article, for example,
several tables, chairs, and computers are among the things that permit
us to work on the manuscript, while the electricity supply keep our
offices lit and our computers running and thus render our writing
possible.
In short, Latour defines an actor as anyone or anything that is made to
act by other agents so that they come to modify “a state of affairs by
making a difference” (p. 71). To identify an actor, the question he
wants us to ask is therefore: “Does it make a difference in the course
of some other agent’s action or not?” (p. 71). Inspired by this, the
first question we try to answer in this paper is: who are the agents,
broadly understood, that contribute to make Norwegian-Pakistani women
act in various ways in relation to organized mammographic screening?
Which human and non-human actors are involved? For each identified
actor we then go on to explore the ways in which they may make women
act. In other words: what do they do?

## Asking women for advice
In this paper, we also bring forward Norwegian-Pakistani women’s advice
on issues related to breast cancer screening and the different agents
that contribute to shape the women’s relations with it. There are
currently widespread calls for patient and public involvement in
research (e.g. Greenhalgh et al. ( )) as well as in care
(e.g. Greenhalgh ( )). Among other things, situated, lived experience is
thought to be crucial if one is to succeed in developing services that
cater meaningfully to patients’ perceived needs and circumstances. In
the context of a paper which deals with low participation in cancer
screening, it would seem to be particularly important to take into
consideration advice provided by the very people the screening program
is intended to benefit.

## Qualitative interviews
A convenience sample of 16 women with a Pakistani family background
participated in qualitative interviews. Despite being a convenience
sample, the study population included women with different backgrounds
with respect to age, education, work, time in Norway, and screening
participation ( ). Thirteen of the women, all born in Pakistan,
were in the target age group for BreastScreen Norway (age
range = 50–64 years; mean age = 56 years). The most recent immigrants
had arrived in Norway the last few years preceding the study, while
others had immigrated as early as in the 1970s. Because several key
informants and interviewees suggested that daughters could or should
play a role in getting more women to attend screening, we also sought
the perspectives of three younger women (mean age = 31 years) with a
Pakistani family background who had mothers in the target age range
for breast cancer screening. One of them was born in Pakistan, another
grew up in Pakistan, and the third was born and raised in Norway.
 Six of the 16 interviewees were not employed at the time of the
interview, whereas 10 had paid work. The latter group included both
unskilled laborers and women who had jobs that required higher
education. Two were medical doctors (they did not have work related to
breast cancer). Four women did not have any higher education; three of
them could not read or write.
Among the interviewees who were in the target age group for BreastScreen
Norway, 10 had attended screening at least once, two had not yet had
their first appointment, and one had never participated despite being
invited several times (she had, however, had an opportunistic
examination before she reached the age group targeted by the program).
The women who had attended had been screened either regularly (i.e.
they had always attended after receiving an invitation) or irregularly
(i.e. they had attended at least once, but not always).
The interviewees were recruited through people involved in the larger
research project, key informants, Norwegian classes for adult
immigrants in a suburb of Oslo, and a multicultural non-governmental
organization (NGO) promoting participation in Norwegian society among
immigrants in an area of Oslo with a high proportion of
immigrants.
Interviews were semi-structured. A topic guide was prepared before
fieldwork started in order to remind the interviewer about issues we
had conceived of as potentially relevant on the basis of literature
review and conversations with key informants. Importantly, however,
the topic guide was not intended to be a tool that should fully steer
the interviews, nor was the idea to ask questions in any particular
order or to exclude topics women felt were relevant. On the contrary,
a main strategy was to allow interviewees opportunities to bring up
issues they felt were important and to lead the conversations in
directions that made sense from their points of view. The topic guide
covered breast cancer and attendance in breast cancer screening, as
well as contextualizing topics related to sickness and health, breast
lumps and breast cancer treatment, and consisted of a list of themes
(rather than ready-formulated questions), as well as brief
descriptions of situations and statements the women were asked to
comment on, and a word map with key words allowing the interviewer to
have an overview of the guide on one page. All interviews were audio
recorded.
We aimed for repeat interviews when possible to allow opportunities for
greater in-depth exploration of salient topics. Most women agreed in
principle to take part in repeat interviews. However, only four women
agreed to participate when contacted for scheduling of follow-up
interviews.
Twenty interviews were conducted face-to-face (at times and places
proposed by the interviewees or at a venue close to the interviewees’
homes as proposed by the interviewer) or by telephone. Some women
strongly preferred telephone conversations and some only agreed to
take part in interviews conducted over the phone; thus, eight
interviews were conducted by telephone. The duration of conversations
was in the range of 30–75 min.
The interview guides were dynamic in the sense that they were updated
after each interview to reflect emerging insight and remind ourselves
of themes that we still needed to understand better. Initial interview
guides focused on broad topics, such as what women knew about breast
cancer and mammographic screening, what they wanted to know more
about, how they would go about gaining more information, and how they
felt about mammographic screening. The interview guides for follow-up
interviews were prepared based on the initial interviews and our
preliminary analyses of them. During early interviews, we identified
several actors, and among the aims of follow-up interviews was to
explore these actors further in order to understand their actions in
relation to breast cancer and breast cancer screening attendance.
Most interviews were conducted in Norwegian. However, seven women were
interviewed in Urdu, either because they preferred this, because they
did not speak Norwegian, because they had difficulties understanding
the first author’s Norwegian dialect, or because they only agreed to
participate in the study if they could speak Urdu. In interviews
conducted mainly in Norwegian, the women at times also expressed
themselves in Urdu, and in interviews conducted mainly in Urdu, women
now and again also used Norwegian words and expressions. Further, the
interviewees also used English words and phrases, as is quite common
among Urdu speakers.

## Key informant interviews
In preparation for the interviews proper, the first author consulted nine
key informants, i.e. persons with experience and/or positions of
relevance to the topic of the study. The key informants, all of whom
were women, had prior experience from immigrant health work and
included health professionals, researchers, and persons working for
NGOs. Six of them had been involved in projects aiming to increase
cancer screening attendance among immigrants. Four had a Pakistani
family background, while five did not. The key informants were asked
about experiences and opinions regarding breast cancer and breast
cancer screening among Pakistani women and for advice on how to get in
touch with potential study participants. Some of them were also asked
to comment on the findings in the ongoing data analysis, for instance
regarding the importance attached to the gender of radiographer.

## The first author’s position
The first author conducted the fieldwork and carried out all interviews.
He is a man in his 30s, which means he had a different gender and age
than most interviewees. His professional and academic backgrounds (a
medical doctor specializing in oncology and a cancer-screening
researcher), moreover, clearly rendered him an outsider with respect
to women’s perspectives on cancer screening.
With respect to the Norwegian-Pakistani cultural context, on the other
hand, the first author was arguably both an insider and an outsider.
Born in Norway to parents who emigrated from India to Norway about 40
years ago, he may be considered a desi (a loose term
used by people from the Indian subcontinent to refer to its people,
its diaspora, and the culture and languages they have in common). As a
desi, the first author was familiar with
aspects of the Norwegian-Pakistani community with which most
non-desis are unacquainted. However, as a
non-Pakistani, he continually ran the risk of overlooking aspects that
that may be more common among Pakistanis than among Indians, and
taking for granted that perspectives familiar to him because of his
Indian background were also relevant for Pakistanis.
The first author is fluent in Norwegian and English and speaks and
understands Hindi/Urdu (spoken Hindi and Urdu are interchangeably
understandable).
As always in research, the researchers’ preconceived assumptions and
knowledge undoubtedly played a role for their understanding of the
interviewees’ perspectives. The first author is a doctoral fellow at
BreastScreen Norway, supervised by the other authors. The second
author is an epidemiologist and the head of BreastScreen Norway,
whereas the last author is a medical doctor and social anthropologist
who has been involved in public health research, including studies
about cervical and breast cancer screening. The authors were therefore
well-informed by medical and public health perspectives, while they
lacked personal experience with the lived lives of Norwegian-Pakistani
women. Striving to transcend preconceptions, the first author strove
to allow time for the interviewees’ stories to unfold, and
continuously attempted to identify information that could challenge or
disconfirm what the authors took for granted. Assumptions and analyses
were moreover continuously challenged in the ongoing dialogue between
the authors and between the first author and key informants.

## Ethical considerations
The study was approved by the Norwegian Data Protection Authority (case
no. 2017/2727). All interviewees provided informed consent to
participate. Most consent was provided in writing, but oral consent
was obtained from women participating in telephone interviews and from
women who could not read or write. Transcripts did not include
directly person-identifying information and were stored on an
encrypted server at the Cancer Registry of Norway. The audio recorder
and consent forms were stored in a locked cabinet in the same
institution and recordings were deleted after transcription. We have
given study participants pseudonyms in this paper to protect their
identity.

## Data management and analysis
The analytical process was considered a continuous activity throughout
the study, from preparation of the study protocol, via the interviews
and thematic content analysis, to submission of the final manuscript.
All interviews were written out sentence by sentence. This was done by
the first author within a day of each interview. In the process, some
conversations had to be translated to Norwegian. The first author (the
only author who understood Urdu) did this by listening to the
conversations sentence by sentence, translating to Norwegian, and then
listening to the conversations again with the aim of identifying and
correcting errors. Where the first author felt that the meaning was
lost in translation, he wrote out the text at verbatim in Urdu (with
Latin letters).
Transcripts and field notes were read through several times to develop
overall familiarity with the material. As part of the thematic content
analysis, the first author thereafter went through the material
sentence by sentence, intensely examining the texts and generating
codes to categorize the content. Terms that had been used in vivo were
often used as code labels. Numerous themes were identified based on
these codes and analytic notes were written for these themes. In this
paper, inspired by Latour’s theorizing of actors, we focus on the
human and non-human actors that played a role in women’s actions
towards and interactions with the breast cancer screening program. We
attempted to find out how these actors acted, for instance how they
authorized, encouraged, or forbade screening attendance. While the
initial coding process was open and mostly inductive, we later took a
more deductive approach informed by theory and focused on core
categories given the actor perspective ( , ).

## Results

## Trust in healthcare and breast cancer screening
The interviewees clearly had a high degree of trust in Norwegian public
healthcare services. As an example of how strongly articulated their
trust could be, consider Shabana’s response when she was asked to
elaborate on why she thought women should attend breast cancer
screening. Without a flinch, she answered:
The government and the doctors think about what is
best for us. After all, it is our best they have in
mind. If there is a problem, it will be
investigated.

Other women used different terms, but the tone was rather
similar across the group of interviewees. They were all confident that
breast cancer screening was important and they enthusiastically
offered reasons for why one should attend.
Related to this, there was often a sense of urgency among the
interviewees to contribute to get others to participate in breast
cancer screening. One of them recommended that screening attendance
among immigrants be promoted through dedicated screening days at NGOs,
during which women would attend lectures about breast cancer before
being offered transport to a screening facility for the examination.
Another recommendation was to stimulate attendance by removing user
fees and possibly even by offering attending women a reward:
It should be free. No, not only free, but maybe
there should be some kind of voucher if you attend.
Maybe some kind of reward system. (Tahira)

Finally, a few interviewees argued that screening was so
important that women should even be forced to attend. It was as if
they wanted to remove screening from the list of things about which
women needed to make active decisions by rendering attendance
compulsory.

## Gender of the radiographer
The second actor we will consider is gender, more specifically the gender
of the radiographers working at one of the 26 stationary or four
mobile screening units operated by BreastScreen Norway. Women clearly
found that the gender of this category of healthcare personnel played
an important role in breast cancer screening.
While a few women were willing to attend screening even if the
radiographer was a man, not one of them was comfortable with this
scenario. Alone the possibility that one might encounter a male
radiographer gave rise to negative emotions.
In some cases, this was linked to previous, self-experienced, and
upsetting incidents with male examiners. Rashida, for example, had
experienced what she portrayed as highly inappropriate behavior by a
male radiographer when she had a mammogram before reaching the target
age range for the organized program and this had led her to not attend
breast cancer screening for > 10 years. In most cases, however, the
women had not had such experiences, but they were still uneasy with
the idea of male radiographers. It created emotional distress and
plans for or de facto non-attendance. Ifran may serve
as an example. She had not thought of the possibility that the
radiographer could be a man until she arrived at the screening center
for her appointment, but it struck her as soon as she sat down in the
waiting room. She decided that if it turned out that a man were to
examine her, she would excuse herself, pay the user fee, and leave.
For her, a male radiographer would have blocked her from getting the
screening examination.
In discussions about why male examiners were undesirable, several
interviewees explained how they were uncomfortable undressing in front
of, or being touched by, men at the screening center. Others
highlighted that some Norwegian-Pakistani women were not used to close
interaction with men from outside of their most immediate social
circles in the first place. Said Begum, one of the younger
interviewees, with reference to women older than herself:
It’s a bit like, women who never see men they
don’t already know. And then seeing a man,
especially of another race - that would be a crisis.
It’s just a no-go (…) They don’t have any male
friends, they are not used to interacting with other
men [other than family and friends of the family].
They are somewhat separated from they are children,
and a lot is left there.

It was also taken for granted among the interviewees that
some Pakistani husbands would block their wives from attending if they
were not confident that it was a woman who conducted the examination.
Ifran (whose husband had not interfered with her own screening
attendance) explained:
If the husband thinks that the examination is
conducted by a man, of course he will not allow it,
but if the husband is ensured that this examination
is conducted by a female, I don’t think he will do
any nonsense, because he will not be interested in
losing his wife.

Importantly, some interviewees said that their religious
beliefs explicitly forbade them being examined by a male. They
explained that in Islam, women are not allowed to be naked in front of
a man. As Tahira remarked:
It is our religion, we are Muslims. A man should
not look at a woman’s body.

Notwithstanding the importance placed on religion, women
were adamant that male examiners in breast cancer screening was not a
problematical issue only for Muslim women, but for many non-Muslims
and non-immigrants as well. The point they wanted to get across was
that having a Pakistani and/or Muslim background did not necessarily
render them an “other” ( ) with respect to this,
but rather united them with women with various other backgrounds. In
effect, they refused to be given the position of the problematic,
ethnically different other in this question.
When asked for recommendations, several of the interviewees argued that
more women would attend breast cancer screening if they knew they
could be secured a female radiographer.

## The written information received from BreastScreen Norway
The information material sent from the screening program to the women was
another important actor in the screening venture. Interestingly, none
of the interviewees said that the exclusive use of Norwegian in this
material had blocked their own screening attendance. In fact, several
women had attended despite not knowing Norwegian at all and, in some
instances, even if they did not know how to read. In these cases,
however, the letter from BreastScreen Norway had acted by putting
several people to work. Some of the necessary labor was carried out by
women themselves and typically consisted of contacting and interacting
with family members who were able to read Norwegian. Additional work
was carried out by these family members as they engaged with the task
of translating and explaining the information. Alina, who did not
speak Norwegian, outlined how this could occur:
If they get a letter, they get someone who knows
Norwegian to read it for them. My sister knows some
families where no one can read or write at all.
There they call her and tell her on the phone that
they have gotten a letter from the doctor or
somewhere else, take a photo of the letter, send it
to her, and she calls them back and
explains.

Some interviewees emphasized that women who did know
Norwegian would find the information from the screening program more
interesting and easier to engage with if it had been in Urdu. Begum
drew a parallel to her mother to make this point. While she was not
interested in health-related information in Norwegian, she went to
health-focused seminars in Urdu and often enthusiastically shared with
the rest of the family what she learnt.
Apart from language challenges, the interviewees drew attention to
another way in which the information material from the national breast
cancer screening program might work to hinder screening attendance.
Several explained how they had been discouraged from reading the whole
information package because they felt it was too complex and too
comprehensive. At one point, Tahira exclaimed:
You know, the content of the letter, it is not
right. It is not good! There is SO much information
in the letter, long and broad. Who has a head where
something that long and broad fits?

When asked for advice about the information material,
interviewees recommended that information about mammographic screening
be made available in Urdu. They argued that this would allow women
with limited or lacking Norwegian language skills to understand the
contents of the letter better and that this would encourage more women
to attend screening.
Women also argued that the information should be more persuading in tone
and content. Nasreen suggested the following:
That examination is good for your health and will
cost you less than if you get the disease and
receive treatment, something like that. A bit
powerful; it has to be short, but powerful (…)
Direct information in their own language.

Tahira suggested an even simpler message:
The information should be direct. (…) It should
only say what time you have an appointment, and
that’s it!

## Family life
A fourth actor of significance was women’s family lives. Interviewees
described how looking after their family and home was utterly
important for them, and in many cases could and should be prioritized
before looking after their own health. This meant that family
commitments at times interfered with the feasibility of attending
mammographic screening. For instance, significant events in children’s
lives (such as exams, births, and driving tests) typically led to busy
periods for mothers and could work to prevent screening participation.
Zaynab, for example, narrated:
When I got the first invitation, that period was
hectic. My husband was not that available, and some
of my children had exams. It was busy around then,
and I just did not have the time.

Some women felt that they would outrightly fail both
themselves and their family members if they prioritized their own
health before their responsibilities at home. Explained Azra:
The way we Pakistani women think is that we don’t
think so much about ourselves. We think more about
our family, what are the benefits for them; we don’t
put ourselves first.

It was argued that from when they are young, many
Pakistani women are not used to being prioritized and thus would not
rank their own cancer screening needs over their commitments towards
others. When asked what Pakistani women would choose before their own
health, Nasreen was in no doubt:
[They will prioritize] being at home, cooking and
cleaning!

Interviewees also pointed out that a subset of Pakistani
women did not attend breast cancer screening because they were
dependent on their husbands. When this was the case, women would not
be able to go for screening alone but might have to be accompanied by
their husband. In such cases they had to negotiate time for the
examination versus their husband’s schedule and responsibilities in
addition to their own. Alina elaborated:
They only leave their house with their husbands;
they don’t want to go alone. The husband might not
have time; he has to work and might not be finished
in time for the examination. They can’t go on their
own, women who are uneducated.

While family life could thus in various ways supplant
screening attendance for some women, the exact opposite was true for
others – interestingly with the precise same rationale: that family
life should come first. Some interviewees argued that their family
commitments not only allowed, but almost commanded that they get
screened for breast cancer, because if they were to get ill, they
would not be able to contribute at home. Umara, for example, asserted
that if you do not go for screening and get ill from breast cancer as
a result, your husband will leave you for a woman who is not ill.

## Daughters
While children are of course part of family life, women portrayed their
daughters as such important actors for screening participation that we
have chosen to discuss them separately.
Several interviewees advised that to channel information about breast
cancer screening through young women would help improve screening
attendance in their mothers’ generation. Children had a better grasp
of the Norwegian language and knew better how to navigate public
systems and could thus make information easier to understand and help
with the practicalities of attending screening. Fatima, for example,
recommended that children learn about breast cancer screening in
school, so that they could inform their mothers about the need to
attend.
Most interviewees did not problematize whether it was appropriate to
inform women through their children, but rather took for granted that
the daughters ought to play a role. As Azra pointed out:
Why else do we have children? We look after them,
so they also need to look after us when we get
older!

Daughters could aid by accompanying their mothers to the
screening center, which some of the younger interviewees had indeed
done. One of them, Hadia, explained how much Pakistani women wanted to
be accompanied by their daughters:
They think it is super social and nice, when I
follow my mother to the examinations where I drive,
bring her, we have a cup of coffee on the way back,
she thinks it’s great. She thinks ‘She [Hadia] takes
part in everything. I get to spend time with my
daughter’. What Pakistani woman would not want to be
social like that?

However, there were both younger and older women who were
opposed to relying on children to inform their mothers. Begum, for
example, one of the younger women, pointed out:
I have so many other responsibilities, and I have
already contributed lots and reminded [my mother]
about appointments, but I have my own life now and
don’t live with them. It is like a never-ending
upbringing, and I have already reminded her lots and
know that she’s been a few times, but I have no idea
how often one should go. It is unfair to expect that
I should be responsible for this.

Nasreen, one of the older interviewees, also rejected the
idea that daughters should inform women in order to increase
attendance. She argued that children were not supposed to teach their
parents what is (right and) wrong; it should be the other way
around.
Among those taking an intermediate position between these views was
Shabana, who was reluctant to rely on information through children,
but felt that if women did not understand health-related information,
it was appropriate to use their daughters to inform them.

## General practitioners (GPs)
A sixth actor was of significance mostly due to their marginalization in
the screening venture: the GP. Women expected their primary care
doctor to be involved in breast cancer screening and were surprised
that this was not the case. Their analysis was that the exclusion of
GPs from the breast cancer screening program acted to hinder screening
uptake, as they saw GPs as actors excellently positioned to provide
information about and promote the examination. As Tahira remarked:
The GP should have a connection to the mammography
people, so when you have an appointment for
mammography, the GP will know and can say ‘you have
got an appointment for this, and this is something
you must attend’.

Interviewees pointed out that GPs have a high status in
the Norwegian-Pakistani community and that they are thus particularly
well positioned to promote and encourage screening attendance. They
also noted that there are now many Urdu- and Hindi-speaking GPs, and
that this is an asset with regards to health promotion among Pakistani
women, including the provision of information about breast cancer
screening.

## Non-governmental organizations
A seventh actor of importance were the range of NGOs women knew of and
interacted with. Some interviewees specifically mentioned that they
had gained knowledge about breast cancer and mammographic screening
from such NGOs; many saw NGOs as potentially important promoters of
screening participation in the Norwegian-Pakistani community.
Among recommendations brought forward was that NGOs should be utilized to
teach about screening. Ifran, who had attended an NGO lecture about
breast cancer and breast cancer screening, explained:
What can be done is that one can cooperate with
NGOs and mosques, right, because that’s where people
are. And that you get in touch with them [Pakistani
women] in another way, right, so you have access
through NGOs and Norwegian classes, but you’ll
especially get in touch with many through
NGOs.

## Religious beliefs
Interviewees were adamant that their religion authorized and encouraged
mammographic screening, even though it was Allah who decided the final
outcome in cases of ill health. As long as the radiographer was a
woman, none of the interviewees expressed religious views that
prevented them from attending screening. Shabana, for example, argued
to the contrary that her God had given her the right to have good
health and the opportunity to go for screening examinations, and Ifran
explained how God and science could very well act together:
I believe in prayer, right, you answer your
calling, (…) but that is in addition to, not a
replacement. There are things you have to do in
parallel, but I’m a religious person, so I believe
prayers are answered. So, I think, science has a
great meaning in Islam too, and there is no conflict
between science and religion, so one has to avail
the offer [of breast cancer screening] and the
possibility that exists, and at the same time have
faith that your God will help you.

As mentioned above, some interviewees recommended that
the screening program cooperate with mosques in order to reach
Pakistani women. In 2009–2010, a collaborative project, which included
participation from the Oslo Breast Centre, the Norwegian Cancer
Society, and the Cancer Registry of Norway, ran campaigns aiming to
increase screening attendance among immigrants, especially women from
Pakistan ( ). These campaigns featured Urdu-speaking doctors as
“ambassadors” for screening, educational DVDs in Urdu, and one-off
teaching events in Urdu at mosques in Oslo. While women praised such
events as highly useful, they emphasized that they ought to be offered
regularly. As Tahira explained:
There should be courses or seminars about breast
cancer screening, and the mosque is a good place
[for that]. There are different courses in the
mosques… and tell about reasons and that it is
important… as soon as you attend mammography you
don’t need to worry about whether you have a mass or
not. And they [courses] have to be yearly or every
six months.

There was some disagreement among study participants as
to whether courses like these would lead to screening attendance.
Among those who were in doubt was Hadia, who argued that women are not
all that interested in non-religious topics when going to the mosque.
Nasreen, to the contrary, believed that women were very interested
indeed in hearing about such topics in mosques.

## Private service providers of mammography
An actor that was both appreciated and caused some confusion in the
context of the organized screening program operated by BreastScreen
Norway was private mammography providers.
Several women were not aware that there existed different providers of
mammography (public and private). For instance, during a presentation
at a class for immigrants learning Norwegian, when told that the user
fee is about 250 NOK (about €26), a woman from Pakistan explained that
she had paid 10 times as much. She had not reached the target age for
BreastScreen Norway and had attended a private service provider.

## Monetary expenses
Monetary expenses had not blocked attendance for any of the interviewees,
but several were concerned that other Pakistani women might not have
sufficient financial resources for the user fee. Ifran, who had
experience from NGO work, explained that many Pakistani women live in
households where only the husband has paid work. In such households,
the need to prioritize food, rent, and medical appointments could
limit the possibility to attend mammographic screening.
When asked about recommendations, women argued that the examination
should be free in order to enable all women to attend. Tahira explained:
These things that will save lives should be free.
I mean, if someone can pay for it, that’s fine, but
what should someone who does not have much income
do?

## Accessibility
Several of the interviewees explained how matters related to
transportation could contribute to make attendance difficult. Women
with a car could drive to the facility, but this involved driving to
an unfamiliar destination and paying for toll and parking. For women
who were working or who were dependent on their husbands to accompany
them to the screening facility, the opening hours could also act to
restrict their possibility to attend.
Among recommendations brought forward were to have more screening units
in Oslo to bring screening closer to where women live and to improve
accessibility by keeping screening centers open on some weekends.

## Worries
Various concerns and apprehensions could also influence screening
attendance. Some interviewees were worried about pain and discomfort
during the examination; for some, the expectation of pain brought
forward thoughts about non-attendance. Noor was worried that
radiographers paid too little consideration to how uncomfortable the
examination was:
My own experience is that the people who take
these X-rays, they do it at least 15–20 times every
day, it becomes a routine for them, so they have
become a bit too rough. They mean well, but it feels
very uncomfortable. (…) It is very painful, very
uncomfortable, and it’s not a nice
examination.

Rashida was worried about side-effects of radiation and
about her registered data being accessed by other actors than
BreastScreen Norway.

## Digital tools
Google, YouTube, and mass media were actors providing women with
information about breast cancer and mammographic screening. Umara, for
example, had searched on YouTube to find out more about cancer, and
Rashida’s worries about radiation, mentioned just above, were
influenced by a TV program about the risk from radiation from too many
examinations.
BreastScreen Norway’s website had not engaged with the interviewees.
During the fieldwork, the first author made a video showing how to
access information in Urdu on the screening program’s website, but
when showing it to study participants, they usually stopped following
the video early on and explained that the information appeared too
complicated to access.
Many interviewees were active users of social media platforms and
recommended that such platforms be used both to reach out with
information and to invite individual women for screening appointments.
Some recommended the use of voice messages, for instance via WhatsApp,
not least because voice messaging could also reach women who could not
read. Several thought that webpages and group discussions and
advertisements on Facebook could be used to inform women about
mammographic screening.
A few of the study participants were not at all very computer literate;
for some, even the menu-sign many websites currently use was
confusing. Amina, one of the younger women, explained her experiences
when helping women with other websites with the same menu sign:
The generation that was here before Internet, they
would have trouble knowing that they should press
there (the menu sign) and you have to tell them
every time that that is a sign you have to press to
get an overview.

## Discussion
Through qualitative interviews with 16 Norwegian-Pakistani women, we identified
and explored actors that variously enabled, encouraged, delayed, hindered,
or blocked Pakistani immigrant women’s breast cancer screening attendance.
The actors we identified were trust in healthcare and breast cancer
screening, the gender of the radiographer, the written information received
from BreastScreen Norway, family life, daughters, GPs, NGOs, religious
beliefs, private service providers of mammography, monetary expenses,
accessibility, worries, and digital tools.
This is the first qualitative study exploring breast cancer screening
attendance among Pakistani immigrant women in Norway. In a study with a
partly overlapping study population (Somali and Pakistani immigrant women in
the Oslo region aged 25–70 years), Gele et al. identified barriers and
facilitators to cervical cancer screening ( ). Some of their findings
resonate well with the experiences of the women in this study, such as women
being hesitant to male healthcare workers and having difficulties with the
Norwegian language.
There were also differences, however. While the women in this study had a high
degree of trust in the Norwegian healthcare system, the women in the study
by Gele et al. were understood to express distrust towards the healthcare
system. However, as in our study, women in a Danish study of immigrant
women’s mammographic screening attendance, that also included Pakistani
immigrants, were found to show a high degree of trust in the national
healthcare system ( ). Grimen likens a trusting person to someone who is willing
to leave something of value in another person’s custody ( ). He or she
feels ensured that the entrusted person will not in any way harm his or her
interests, but rather be protective of them. Understood in this way, trust
would be a basic, but often immensely important, actor in terms of
willingness to succumb to medical care. The considerable confidence women in
this study had in their healthcare providers thus clearly seemed to work to
promote participation in BreastScreen Norway.
The women in this study were utterly dedicated to their families and
family-related responsibilities; commitments at home at times blocked breast
cancer screening attendance despite knowledge of the screening program and a
strong belief in the importance of the examination. Shakari has documented
the importance of family life in the Norwegian-Pakistani community ( ). The
well-developed care ethics ( ) among the women we
interviewed, along with the concern and compassion they articulated for the
people with whom they were closely connected, worked to limit their
possibility to attend breast cancer screening, at least in periods. In
addition, the Danish study mentioned above found that major life stressors
and home commitments often dominated immigrant women’s daily lives and left
little room for prioritizing breast cancer screening despite knowledge of
breast cancer and the screening program ( ). The flipside of the coin in
the present study was that the importance attached to women’s family roles
also acted as a reason to take part in screening.
Postponing preventive health measures due to other commitments is not an issue
limited to immigrants from far away. In a study of rationales for postponing
cervical cancer screening among Norwegian and Danish immigrant women in
Sweden, women described that competing needs related to immigration were
overwhelming in the first years after immigration ( ). This included the invitation
for cervical cancer screening being just one of many offers to deal with,
navigating a new healthcare system and considerable changes in life
situation and routines.
As everyone else, care seekers must divide their energy and resources between
the demands of care and everyday life. When the aim is to improve
participation in preventive care, it is important to acknowledge the work
people do when engaging with and utilizing health services. It would seem
important that healthcare providers seek to reduce the work load they put on
people they are entrusted to provide with services. Health personnel may
indirectly see the result of the work people do, i.e. reading information
from healthcare providers, getting it translated if needed, transportation
to the screening facility, etc., but rarely the work itself ( ). Some of the
women in our study could not read Norwegian (or read at all) and relied on
family members translating the invitation letter. This might be a common
experience in many immigrant communities (for instance, a German study with
Turkish women found that due to difficulties with the German language, the
invitation letter was often read by family members ( )).
Interviewees who could read Norwegian often argued that the information
material from the screening providers was too long and complicated. One
reason why the text is as long as it is would seem to be that the
information is intended to serve as a basis for invitees to make an informed
decision about screening participation. In the words of BreastScreen Norway
( ), the
four-page information package is supposed to provide women with “balanced,
high quality information about mammographic screening to enable them to make
an informed choice about whether to participate” and to “ensure that women
have the practical information they need to make use of their screening
invitation” (p. S10). The interviewees hardly perceived it to work this way
and rather thought of it as an unnecessarily convoluted and dense text that
discouraged attendance and needed to be shortened and made more to the
point. A study about the information material from BreastScreen Norway has
found that also non-immigrant women thought of the information as too
comprehensive and detailed ( ).
Further, the women pointed out what they perceived to be a confusing
contradiction in the information they received. The screening program
invited them to an examination that aimed to prevent them from dying from
cancer, while at the same time seemingly downplaying the importance of that
examination. This was perceived to be so because the information package
emphasized that it was up to women themselves whether they wanted to avail
themselves of the screening opportunity or not. Interviewees reasoned that
it was illogical that the screening provider would leave women to draw their
own conclusions in a question on which the provider was clearly the expert
and where women´s survival was in the balance. They argued that the program
should send a clear message that breast cancer screening is an important
preventative health measure which every woman of a certain age should avail
themselves of.
BreastScreen Norway is a vertical program with centralized management and
objectives ( ).
The program offers screening, operates its own screening centers, and
informs attendees about screening results. When examinations turn out
positive, women are referred for assessment at breast diagnostic centers in
regional public hospitals. If diagnosed with cancer, they are thereafter
referred for surgery. It may be first when a woman is discharged from
hospital after surgery for breast cancer that her GP receives any
information about the diagnosis. That GPs are thus in effect excluded from
breast cancer screening in Norway was hard to understand among the women we
interviewed. The GP was exactly the actor women would expect to take
centerstage in a program of this kind. They argued that their permanent
doctors were excellently positioned to provide information about screening,
encourage screening participation, and communicate and follow up screening
results. This may be read as a pointed critique of the vertical organization
of BreastScreen Norway. Women were satisfied with their GPs and reasoned
that GPs could and should be entrusted to bring screening services closer to
their daily lives and ordinary interactions with the health sector.
Strategies to increase attendance among immigrant women usually focus on
improving delivery and uptake of information, for instance by educating
women or translating the information to foreign languages ( ). In Norway,
time-limited information campaigns with written and oral information in Urdu
have targeted the Norwegian-Pakistani community in attempts to increase
attendance ( ).
Pakistani immigrant women had low mammographic screening attendance rates
both before and after these campaigns ( ). A systematic review of cancer
screening interventions among Asian women argued that mailed translated
education materials alone were not effective in increasing screening uptake
among Asian minority women and that combining multiple strategies is more
likely to increase attendance than single interventions ( ). This study
suggests that the low breast cancer screening rates among Pakistani
immigrant women in Norway are not simply or overwhelmingly due to a lack of
knowledge and information. Importantly, the women in this study had several
recommendations about how the screening venture could fit better into
Pakistani women’s lives. These suggestions included cooperating with NGOs to
facilitate screening, increasing accessibility by offering screening in
weekends, and involving women’s family members and GPs to encourage
attendance. In addition, lectures at NGOs and mosques could allow for
interactive learning situations where women could listen, ask questions and
discuss emerging topics with each other and presenters, and also provided
learning opportunities for women who could not read or write well.
In the following, we will discuss the study in terms of trustworthiness, which
can be interpreted in terms of dependability, credibility, transferability,
and confirmability ( ).
To be dependable, researchers should ensure that the research process is
traceable and clearly documented ( ). We have striven to achieve
this by securely storing all documentation produced throughout the study
period, including various drafts of the study protocol and interview guides,
and all transcripts, field notes, analytical notes, article drafts, and
feedback received from key informants and reviewers. A factor limiting the
dependability of the study is the different languages that were used (Urdu,
Norwegian, and English). Few people understand all three languages and will
thus not understand all written material produced in the research process.
However, information in Urdu was translated to Norwegian, which all three
authors understand. Further, some women only agreed to take part in
interviews if they could speak Urdu; we would not have reached these women
if we insisted that the interviews must be in English or Norwegian.
The credibility of a qualitative study can be understood as the degree to which
the findings it presents are recognizable in the groups about which it aims
to provide knowledge ( ). Since this study draws on interviews with a limited
number of women, and although they came from a variety of backgrounds and
had variety of experiences, we could clearly have come to overlook actors
and perspectives that are of relevance for Norwegian-Pakistani women’s
relationship with breast cancer screening. We would particularly have wanted
to have included more perspectives from women who have never attended breast
cancer screening. On the other hand, we are rather confident that the
findings and actors we do present are recognizable and perceived as relevant
among Pakistani women and professionals with experience relating to
healthcare for immigrants. This impression is strengthened by the feedback
received through discussions with study participants (especially with those
who took part in repeat interviews), other community members, and a number
of healthcare providers with relevant experience. Further, while additional
interviewees and repeat interviews could potentially have brought new
perspectives, we did not recruit more attenders to our study as few new
actors or contradictory perspectives regarding identified actors emerged in
the latter interviews. Towards the end of the analytical process, some
interviewees and some women with a Pakistani family background not included
in the study were offered and accepted to read the manuscript. Among other
things that may contribute to strengthen the credibility of the study are
also that we to a large degree let interviewees steer conversations, letting
their stories unfold without interruption, that we did not set a time-limit
for interviews, that women were allowed to speak their preferred language,
and that we have used abundant quotations throughout the paper.
The interviews conducted by phone could potentially have limited our ability to
explore and understand, among other reasons because we were not able to
observe non-verbal cues and because it can be more difficult to establish
trust over phone than face-to-face. The reason why we nonetheless carried
out some telephone interviews was that this was a preference among some
interviewees (and also among some of the persons who functioned as
recruiters for this study, among whom there were some who believed that
Norwegian-Pakistani women would be reluctant to meet a male interviewer and
only agreed to recruit women for phone interviews). If we had not allowed
for phone interviews, the voice of some of these women would have been
silenced. Let us add that although we had preferred to meet all interviewees
in person, the telephone interviews turned out to become engaged
conversations that were rich in information and perspectives.
The transferability of a study refers to its potential ability to play a role
in other contexts than the one in which it was carried out. It would seem
likely that several of the perspectives and actors described would be
recognizable and relevant for Norwegian-Pakistani immigrant women also
outside of Oslo, where the study was conducted. Many of them have
backgrounds similar to the women who were part of this study and they relate
to the same, nationwide breast cancer screening program. We may not be in a
position to judge to what extent the concrete actors identified and explored
in this paper are relevant in other groups of immigrants, among women in
general, and in other countries. However, if nothing else, it will be of
value for screening programs to have the possibility for similarities on
their radar. At that, we do hope that the actor perspective we have taken
may raise this approach as a possibility for others.
In conclusion, many human and non-human actors acted on Pakistani women and
influenced their mammographic screening attendance, for instance by raising
doubt, giving worries, stirring confusion, promoting opportunities,
encouraging actions and putting others to work, thus variously enabling,
facilitating, discouraging, and blocking screening attendance. Among actors
that were involved in the relationship between Pakistani immigrant women and
the nationwide breast cancer screening program in Norway were women’s trust
in healthcare, the gender of radiographers, the written material sent to
women before screening, several aspects of Norwegian-Pakistani family life,
GPs, NGOs, religious beliefs, and private service providers. If one were to
listen to the women who took part in this study, a key to improved breast
cancer screening attendance among Norwegian-Pakistani women would be to
strike stronger partnerships with actors they identified as important,
including NGOs, mosques and GPs. It is our hope that our findings might
prove useful for politicians, legislators, the public health sector,
BreastScreen Norway, and – not least – for Norwegian-Pakistani women
themselves.

## Acknowledgements
The authors thank Samera Azeem Qureshi for her work in the study, especially
for the recruitment of study participants. This project was supported by a
grant from the Norwegian Breast Cancer Society, funded by the Norwegian
ExtraFoundation for Health and Rehabilitation (2016/FO76429) (https://www.extrastiftelsen.no/logo/ English description
towards the end). We would like to thank both organizations for their
support. The funding source had no involvement in the conduction of the
study, interpretation of the results or preparation of the manuscript.

## Declaration of conflicting interests
The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

## Funding
The authors received the following financial support for the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article: This project was supported
by a grant from the Norwegian Breast Cancer Society, funded by the Norwegian
ExtraFoundation for Health and Rehabilitation (2016/FO76429) (https://www.extrastiftelsen.no/logo/ English description
towards the end). The funding source had no involvement in the conduction of
the study, interpretation of the results, or preparation of the
manuscript.