pmcCochrane Database Syst RevCochrane Database Syst Rev3102cochrev10090974714651858The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews1469-493X1361-6137John Wiley and Sons, Inc. and the Cochrane LibraryPMC6984618PMC6984618.1698461869846183197825910.1002/14651858.CD011895.pub2CD011895.pub2CD0118951Implementation strategiesChild healthEffective practice & health systemsInfectious diseaseLungs & airwaysImproving vaccination uptake among adolescents
AbdullahiLeila Hleylaz@live.co.za ) to 11 months ( )
b (randomised trial); (cluster‐randomised trial); (cluster‐randomised trial). 
c Well conducted randomised trials with consistent findings (I2 = 0%).
d The findings from the one non‐randomised trial that assessed this comparison were similar to the findings of the randomised trials.
eOne study reported that health education did not have any adverse events in relation to usual practice ( ).
 

## Background

## Description of the condition
The World Health Organization (WHO) defines adolescents as people aged between 10 and 19 years ( ). Targeting adolescents with relevant vaccines offers three benefits: catch‐up on missed vaccinations, boosting of waning immunity, and primary immunisation with new vaccines ( ; ). Vaccines given during adolescence include, but are not limited to, those against human papillomavirus (HPV), diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, measles, mumps, rubella, varicella, hepatitis B, poliomyelitis, and meningococcal disease ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ). Future vaccines against HIV and Mycobacterium tuberculosis are likely to target adolescents as the primary population ( ; ).
In many settings, adolescents usually turn to physicians only when they are ill and so there are limited opportunities to inform them that vaccines are important and should be administered ( ; ). In such instances, adolescents may be more interested in their current health condition than possible benefits of preventing future vaccine‐preventable diseases (VPDs) ( ). Schools have been used extensively as a delivery platform for vaccinating large numbers of school‐aged children ( ; ; ; ; ). However, school‐based vaccination programmes may not be entirely successful in countries with suboptimal school attendance rates ( ; ). For instance, school attendance rates in many low‐ and middle‐income countries (LMICs) are variable due to factors such as geographical location, socioeconomic status, and gender ( ; ; ). Strategies such as mass immunisation campaigns can be used to complement school‐based vaccination programmes in settings with poor school attendance rates ( ; ).
Data on vaccination coverage among adolescents are limited, but coverage is generally low in this group ( ; ; ). For example, it is estimated that only 6.1% of adolescent girls worldwide completed the full series of HPV vaccination in 2014; with wide variation between LMICs and high‐income countries ( ). HPV vaccination coverage was only 1.1% in Asia and 1.2% in Africa, compared to 35.6% in North America and 35.9% in Oceania. Overall, HPV vaccination coverage in 2014 was 33.6% in high‐income countries, compared with only 2.7% in LMICs ( ). The most commonly reported barriers to adolescent vaccination include lack of knowledge about vaccines and VPDs; negative attitudes towards vaccination from adolescents, parents, teachers, and healthcare providers; poor vaccine infrastructure; and financial constraints ( ; ; ; ).

## Description of the intervention
Interventions to enhance the uptake of vaccines by adolescents may have multiple components, targeting adolescents and their communities, healthcare providers, the health system, or a combination of these ( ).

## Recipient‐oriented interventions
Interventions targeting adolescents and their communities (including their parents and teachers) may include education, reminders, incentives, and mandatory vaccination.
Educational interventions enable adolescents and their communities to understand the meaning and relevance of vaccination to their health ( ; ). Such interventions may be delivered face‐to‐face or via written mail, telephone conversation, audiovisual presentation or drama, printed materials, websites, multi‐media campaigns, or community events ( ; ). These types of interventions may be directed at individuals or groups, and may include information about VPDs; the risks and benefits of vaccines; where, how, and when to access vaccine services; who should be vaccinated; or a combination of these ( ; ; ; ). Adolescents and communities may receive education about vaccines through prominently displayed posters in waiting rooms, brochures, e‐mails, and website resources ( ).
Client reminder interventions involve reminding members of a target population that vaccinations are due or have been missed. Reminders are delivered using various methods, such as telephone calls, letters, or postcards ( ). The contents of the reminders may include personalised information related to a specific upcoming or missed appointment ( ; ; ).
Adolescent or community incentives involve providing financial or other incentives to motivate people to accept vaccinations ( ; ; ). Incentives can be rewards or gifts ( ).
Mandatory vaccination refers to a law or policy that requires students to show proof of immunisation records prior to school admission with failure to do this resulting in school admission being denied ( ; ; ).

## Provider‐oriented interventions
Provider‐oriented interventions may include reminders, audit and feedback, and education.
Provider reminder interventions inform vaccinators that individual clients are due for vaccinations. Reminders may be delivered through client charts, computer, e‐mail, or postal mail, among many others ( ; ; ).
Audit and feedback for vaccinators involves retrospectively evaluating the performance of the vaccinators in administering vaccines and providing feedback to them ( ; ; ). This information is given to providers to motivate them to improve immunisation services.
Provider education involves giving information regarding vaccinations to providers to increase their knowledge and to encourage them to adopt positive attitudes towards vaccination. Techniques by which information is delivered can include written materials, videos, lectures, continuing medical education programmes, and computerised software ( ; ; ).

## Health system interventions
Outreach programmes include school‐based immunisation and mass campaigns. School‐based immunisation outreach is intended to improve delivery of vaccinations to school‐going children ( ). School‐based interventions usually include vaccination‐related education of students about either provision of vaccinations or referral for vaccinations ( ; ; ). Mass campaign programmes target adolescents both in school and out of school ( ).
Expanding access in healthcare settings is used to increase the availability of vaccines in the medical or public health settings in which vaccinations are offered. This can be achieved using several methods such as: increasing or changing the hours during which vaccination services are provided; delivering vaccinations in clinical settings in which they were previously not provided (e.g. emergency departments, inpatient units, or subspeciality clinics); or reducing administrative barriers to obtaining vaccination services within clinics (e.g. developing a 'drop‐in' clinic or an 'express lane' vaccination service) ( ; ; ).
Reducing out‐of‐pocket costs can be implemented by subsiding the costs of vaccines, paying for vaccinations, providing insurance coverage, or reducing copayments for vaccinations at the point of service ( ; ; ).

## Multi‐component interventions
Multi‐component interventions are approaches that include more than one tactic, with the aim of addressing a variety of barriers to adolescent vaccine uptake. Such interventions could enable communities to be aware of the immunisation services available to them, demonstrate the utility and relevance of these services, provide community members with the knowledge and information base to effectively take advantage of the services, or incorporate a variety of associated provider or health system strategies to improve immunisation uptake ( ; ; ).

## How the intervention might work
We have proposed a logic model which suggests how the strategies described in the section may, alone or in combination, influence adolescent vaccination uptake and other outcomes ( ).
 Parents, including legal guardians or other people assuming the parental role, are routinely involved in the decision‐making process about vaccine administration to their children ( ). Teachers can also play a crucial role in adolescent vaccination uptake, especially where school‐based vaccination programmes are a popular platform for vaccination of adolescents ( ; ). In some situations, the final decision on whether an adolescent will be vaccinated or not may be entirely dependent on the parents, as adolescents may not have an independent final decision on whether to get vaccinated ( ; ). Hence, adequate knowledge and positive attitudes towards vaccination among parents, teachers, and adolescents may improve the uptake of vaccines among adolescents ( ; ; ). It is likely that more vaccine‐informed adolescents may be more able to positively guide and influence their parents and peers on vaccinations compared to peers who are less well informed. In addition, adolescents are future parents and investing resources in educating adolescents about vaccination may lead to improved uptake of vaccines by their children ( ). Therefore, educating adolescents about vaccination may have long‐term positive benefits on vaccine uptake in general ( ).
Healthcare providers give advice to parents and adolescents on vaccination. The ability of healthcare providers to keep up‐to‐date with knowledge on vaccines is essential, particularly when new vaccines are recommended ( ; ). Careful and factual advice on vaccination to adolescents and their parents by healthcare providers can result in more willingness to get vaccinated by adolescents. Health system interventions ensure that vaccines are available when adolescent girls and boys, and their communities, demand them ( ).

## Why it is important to do this review
Adolescents represent 25% of the global population, but vaccination coverage among them is very low ( ; ; ; ). There is a knowledge gap around interventions to improve vaccine uptake among adolescents, especially in LMICs. Our review evaluated the evidence on strategies that can be adopted to improve vaccine uptake among adolescents. Such strategies will improve the uptake of current vaccines among adolescents, and may also increase the uptake of future vaccines. In addition, this review could be used to advocate for strengthening existing adolescent vaccination policies and to formulate new policies on the vaccination of adolescents where none currently exist. We are not aware of any previous systematic review that has assessed interventions to improve adolescent immunisation coverage across all country income categories. However, a number of reviews have assessed various strategies to improve immunisation coverage in children or the whole population ( ; ; ; ; ). These reviews considered general barriers to immunisation and assessed the effects of a variety of interventions. In our review, we used a similar approach among the adolescent population.

## Objectives
To evaluate the effects of interventions to improve vaccine uptake among adolescents.

## Methods

## Criteria for considering studies for this review

## Types of studies
We included randomised trials, non‐randomised trials, interrupted time series studies, and controlled before‐after studies that met the quality criteria used by Cochrane Effective Practice and Organisation of Care (EPOC) ( ). We included both individually randomised and cluster‐randomised trials. For cluster‐randomised trials, we only included those with at least two intervention and two control clusters. Following the EPOC criteria, we included interrupted time series studies only if outcomes were measured during at least three points before and three points after the intervention. For a controlled before‐after study to be included in the review, it must have included at least two intervention groups and at least two comparable control groups, with simultaneous data collection.
We excluded simple pre–post designs; cluster‐randomised and non‐randomised trials with only one intervention or control site; and controlled before‐after studies without concurrent data collection in intervention and comparison groups in accordance with the EPOC criteria for inclusion of studies in systematic reviews of effects ( ).

## Types of participants
Girls or boys (or both) aged 10 to 19 years eligible for WHO‐recommended vaccines and their parents or healthcare providers. In the case of studies with interventions directed at mixed populations of children and adolescents or adolescents and adults, we excluded a study if specific data for adolescents were not reported.

## Types of interventions

## Intervention
Recipient‐oriented interventions (i.e. interventions targeting adolescents or their communities, or both), for example:
interventions to communicate with adolescents or their parents (or both) about adolescent immunisation;
financial and non‐financial incentives for adolescents or their parents (or both); and
mandatory vaccination: vaccination requirement for high school and university attendance.
Provider‐oriented interventions, for example:
any intervention to reduce missed opportunities for vaccination (e.g. audit and feedback); and
health education, training, and supportive supervision.
Health system interventions, for example:
interventions to improve the quality of services, such as provision of reliable cold chain systems, provision of transport for vaccination, vaccine stock management;
outreach programmes, for example, school‐based immunisation and mass vaccination campaign for out‐of‐school adolescents;
expanded services, for example, extended hours for immunisation services;
increased immunisation budget; and
integration of immunisation services with other services.
Multi‐component interventions.

## Exclusions
We excluded interventions to remind recipients or providers of immunisation services, as there is already a Cochrane Review on this topic ( ).

## Comparisons
Standard immunisation practices in the study setting.
Alternative interventions.
Similar interventions implemented with different degrees of intensity.

## Types of outcome measures

## Primary outcomes
Adolescent vaccination coverage, that is, the proportion of adolescents who have received the recommended dose(s) of the vaccine(s) studied.

## Secondary outcomes
Proportion of adolescents completing the schedule.
Equitable uptake of immunisation (as defined by the study authors).
Knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs.
Adverse effects of the intervention.
Cost of the intervention.
Incidence of VPDs.

## Search methods for identification of studies
With the assistance of the Cochrane EPOC Information Specialist, we developed search strategies, with no restrictions on language or publication date. The search strategies for the electronic databases incorporated the Cochrane EPOC search strategy for randomised trials, non‐randomised trials, interrupted time series studies, and controlled before‐after studies ( ), and combined selected MeSH and free‐text terms relating to adolescent vaccination uptake literature globally.

## Electronic searches
We searched the following databases for primary studies:
Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) 2017, Issue 1; part of the Cochrane Library (www.cochranelibrary.com; searched 31 October 2018);
MEDLINE Epub Ahead of Print, In‐Process & Other Non‐Indexed Citations, MEDLINE Daily, and MEDLINE (1946 to 31 October 2018);
Embase Ovid (1974 to 31 October 2018);
CINAHL EBSCOhost (1981 to 31 October 2018);
Africa‐Wide Information EBSCOhost (19th century to 31 October 2018);
Global Health Ovid (1973 to 31 October 2018);
Scopus, Elsevier (searched 31 October 2018); and
Science Citation Index Expanded; Social Sciences Citation Index (1987 to October 2018), and Emerging Sources Citation Index (2015 to October 2018), Web of Science Core Collection, Thompson Reuters (searched 24 April 2017) (for papers citing any of the included studies in the review 31 April 2019).

We searched the following databases for related reviews:
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (CDSR), 2017, Issue 3, part of the Cochrane Library (www.cochranelibrary.com; searched 31 October 2018);
Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects (DARE), 2015, Issue 2, part of the Cochrane Library (www.cochranelibrary.com; searched 31 October 2018);
Health Technology Assessment Database (HTA), 2016, Issue 4 (searched 31 October 2018);
PDQ‐Evidence (searched 31 October 2018).

In addition, in May 2019, we did a citation search using: Science Citation Index Expanded; Social Sciences Citation Index (from 1987), and Emerging Sources Citation Index (from 2015), Web of Science Core Collection, and Clarivate Analytics.
See for search strategies used.

## Searching other resources

## Grey literature
We searched the following grey literature (31 October 2018):
WHO (www.who.int/);
Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance (www.gavi.org);
United Nations Children's Funds (UNICEF; www.unicef.org/);
PATH Vaccine Resources Library (www.path.org/);
US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC; www.cdc.gov/);
The Communication Initiative Network (www.comminit.com/);
Grey Literature Report (www.greylit.org);
OpenGrey (www.opengrey.eu/);
Eldis (www.eldis.org/);
Immunization Basics (www.immunizationbasics.jsi.com).

## Trial registries
We searched the following trial registries (31 October 2018):
WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (ICTRP; www.who.int/ictrp/en/);
ClinicalTrials.gov, US National Institutes of Health (NIH; clinicaltrials.gov/).

## Reference lists
We searched the reference lists of potentially eligible studies and relevant previous reviews.

## Data collection and analysis

## Selection of studies
Two review authors (LA and BK) screened titles and abstracts to select potentially eligible studies. One review author (LA) then obtained the full text of potentially eligible studies and two review authors (LA and VN) independently conducted the final study selection for inclusion in the review. We resolved any disagreements regarding the inclusion of studies by discussion or by consulting a third review author (BK and CW). We used a PRISMA flow chart ( ) to summarise the search and selection of studies for the review ( ).
 

## Data extraction and management
Two review authors (LA and VN) independently extracted data from selected studies using an adapted version of the Cochrane data extraction form. Disagreements on study selection and data extraction were resolved by consensus between the two review authors, failing which a third review author (BK) arbitrated. Prior to use, we piloted the data extraction form on four studies identified randomly from the list of included studies.
The data extraction form included the following items.
Setting of the study (city and country).
Type of study: randomised trials, non‐randomised trials, interrupted time series studies, and controlled before‐after studies.
Type of participants: adolescents, parents, healthcare providers.
Type of interventions: name of intervention, frequency, timing, delivery method, venue of delivery.
Type of outcomes measured: vaccine coverage, knowledge, attitudes and beliefs, cost of intervention, adverse effects of the intervention, equity.

When dichotomous outcome data were presented as percentages, we multiplied the percentages by the number of participants in the study arm to obtain the approximate number of events.

## Assessment of risk of bias in included studies
We applied the Cochrane EPOC 'Risk of bias' criteria for randomised trials, non‐randomised trials, interrupted time series studies, and controlled before‐after studies, as appropriate ( ). For each included study, we reported our assessment of risk of bias (low, high, or unclear risk) for each domain, together with a descriptive summary of the information that influenced our judgement. Any study that was assigned a high risk of bias for allocation concealment, blinding of outcome assessment, completeness of outcome data, or a combination of these was considered to have a high risk of bias. Studies with low risk of bias for all three domains were considered to have a low risk of bias, and all other studies were considered to have an unclear risk of bias. Two review authors (LA and VN) applied the criteria independently and a third review author (CW) arbitrated any disagreements.

## Measures of treatment effect
We used raw dichotomous data reported in each study to express the study's result as a risk ratio (RR) with its corresponding 95% confidence interval (CI). However, one study reported adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and we calculated the natural logarithm of the OR and its standard error for each outcome in this study. We then expressed the intervention effect for each outcome in this study as an OR with its 95% CI using inverse variance. We grouped studies with broadly similar types of participants, interventions, study designs, and outcomes to get feasible results for an overall estimate of effect. See for measures of effect specified in the protocol ( ), but not used in the review.

## Unit of analysis issues
We did not encounter unit‐of‐analysis issues in this review. Two included studies were cluster‐randomised trials based on matched pairs of clusters ( ; ). We did not reanalyse these data as matching cannot be taken into account in reanalyses in such studies unless the raw data are available. However, the studies conducted appropriate analyses of the data, and we provided the results as reported in the studies. See for methods specified in the protocol ( ), but not used in the review.

## Dealing with missing data
For the current version of the review, we did not experience any missing data thus we did not contact the primary study authors for missing data. In , we indicated methods specified in the protocol ( ), but not used in the review.

## Assessment of heterogeneity
We reviewed heterogeneity in the type of intervention, type of setting, study design, and risk of bias of included studies in order to make an assessment of the extent to which the included studies were similar to each other. We examined the levels of heterogeneity between study results using the Chi² test of homogeneity (with significance defined at the alpha level of 10%). We quantified any statistical heterogeneity between study results using the I² statistic. We regarded heterogeneity as substantial if the I² was greater than 50% ( ).

## Assessment of reporting biases
Test for asymmetry with a funnel plot was not feasible because the number of included studies for each meta‐analysis was less that the recommended 10 studies. We have archived methods for assessing reporting biases in , for use in updates of this review.

## Data synthesis
We pooled data from studies of similar study designs, similar interventions, similar participants, and similar outcomes in a meta‐analysis using the random‐effects model if there was no significant statistical heterogeneity, methodological difference, or high risk of bias. For outcomes with substantial variation between studies in the reported interventions, participants, study designs, and outcome measures, we did not pool the results but summarised the findings in a narrative format. Overall, we interpreted the study findings by taking into account the methodological quality of the studies and the strength of the evidence. For each observed effect, we explicitly stated the strength of evidence and drew conclusions. See for data synthesis methods specified in the protocol ( ), but not used in the review.

## 'Summary of findings' tables
We created 'Summary of findings' tables for the main intervention comparisons and included the primary outcome: vaccination coverage. We used the GRADE approach to assess the certainty of evidence at outcome level ( ). Two review authors (LA and CW) independently assessed the certainty of the evidence (high, moderate, low, and very low) using the five GRADE considerations (risk of bias, consistency of effect, imprecision, indirectness, and publication bias). We used methods and recommendations described in Section 8.5 and Chapter 12 of the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions ( ), and the EPOC worksheets ( ), and used GRADEpro software. We resolved disagreements on certainty ratings by discussion and provided justification for decisions to downgrade the ratings using footnotes in the table and made comments to aid readers' understanding of the review where necessary. We used plain language statements to report these findings in the review ( ; ).

## Subgroup analysis and investigation of heterogeneity
We did not have sufficient data to conduct planned subgroup analyses ( ). However, we conducted a posthoc subgroup analysis exploring the effect of variations in the intervention ( ; ; ; ) or comparison ( ) groups on vaccination coverage. We used the Chi² test for subgroup differences to test for subgroup interactions.

## Sensitivity analysis
We planned to perform sensitivity analyses based on unit of analysis errors, risk of bias, and missing data ( ). However, available data were insufficient to perform these analyses.

## Results

## Description of studies

## Results of the search
We identified 29,103 records from the electronic databases and other sources. After excluding 3476 duplicates, we screened 25,627 records, and found that 25,560 records were not relevant to our review question. We reviewed the remaining 67 potentially eligible full‐text articles for inclusion and excluded 48 of them for the reasons given in the table.
Sixteen studies met the inclusion criteria and were included in the review ( ). Two studies are awaiting classification ( ; ; table), and one study is ongoing ( ; table). The search process and selection of studies is presented in .
 

## Included studies

## Study design and setting
Sixteen studies met the inclusion criteria. Eight studies were randomised trials with individuals as the unit of randomisation ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ); four studies were cluster‐randomised trials that used health facilities or schools as the unit of randomisation ( ; ; ; ); three studies were non‐randomised trials with at least two intervention and two control arms ( ; ; ); and one study was a controlled before‐after study with two intervention and two control arms ( ).
Twelve studies were conducted in the USA ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ); one study was conducted in Australia ( ); one study was conducted in Sweden ( ); one study was conducted in the UK ( ); and one study was conducted in Tanzania ( ).

## Participants
Two studies enrolled girls only ( ; ), five studies enrolled boys and girls ( ; ; ; ; ), three studies enrolled parents ( ; ; ), and two studies enrolled healthcare providers ( ; ).
Four studies enrolled mixed participants, comprising of adolescents and parents ( ), adolescents and healthcare providers ( ), and parents and healthcare providers ( ; ). The healthcare providers included physicians, nurses, and physician assistants.

## Interventions and comparisons
We present a summary of the interventions and comparisons used in the included studies in and a detailed description in the table.

## Recipient‐oriented interventions
The recipient‐oriented intervention studies compared the following to usual care: health education ( ; ; ; ; ; ), financial incentives ( ), health education and financial incentives ( ), and a school entry law mandating vaccination ( ). The seventh health education study compared a multi‐component intervention to simplified information leaflets ( ).
In six health education studies, participants in the intervention arm received structured 30 to 40 minute ( ; ; ; ), one hour ( ), or two to three day ( ) interactive education on the target disease, vaccine recommendations, vaccine schedule, vaccine efficacy, and vaccine safety. Participants in the comparison 'usual care' arm received group general health education or education on the prevention of a specific non‐vaccine‐related condition. In the seventh study, participants in the education arm received a complex multi‐component intervention that included a resource fact sheet and assessment; an information video and questions designed to engage the adolescent audience; small group discussions; and an activity to locate resource information on the Internet. However, both the intervention and comparison arms received information brochures consisting of one‐page folded coloured leaflets, outlining in simple terms the risks of the target disease and the benefits and adverse effects of vaccination ( ).

## Provider‐oriented interventions
The provider‐oriented intervention studies assessed provider prompts ( ), provider education with performance feedback ( ), and a multi‐faceted intervention ( ), compared to usual care.

## Health system intervention
One study compared a class‐based vaccination strategy to an age‐based strategy ( ).

## Multi‐component interventions
Two studies assessed multi‐faceted interventions aimed at both recipients and providers of vaccination services compared to usual care ( ; ).

## Outcomes
Fifteen studies reported data on our primary outcome, vaccination coverage. Eleven studies evaluated completion of the HPV vaccination schedule ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). Three studies assessed uptake of vaccines against hepatitis B virus ( ; ; ). One study examined uptake of tetanus–diphtheria (Td) and measles–mumps–rubella (MMR) vaccines ( ). Finally, two studies reported data on uptake of tetanus–diphtheria–acellular–pertussis (Tdap), meningococcal conjugate, HPV, and influenza vaccines ( ; ).
Other predefined outcome measures reported by the included studies were:
knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs ( ; ; ; );
cost of the intervention ( ; ); and
adverse effects of the intervention ( ).

Predefined outcomes not reported by the included studies were:
incidence of VPDs; and
equitable uptake of immunisation.

The following predefined outcome was considered in a posthoc assessment as not relevant to the review: adverse events following immunisation (AEFI). An AEFI is any undesirable medical incident which follows administration of a vaccine, but is not necessarily caused by the vaccination ( ). It is thus not a relevant outcome in this review, given that we are assessing interventions to improve vaccination uptake rather than the effects of the vaccine itself.
The studies did not report the lag‐time between delivery of interventions and assessment of outcomes.

## Excluded studies
We excluded 48 studies for reasons given in the table. The most common reasons for exclusion were ineligible study designs and ineligible interventions.

## Risk of bias in included studies

## Allocation
The risk of selection bias (random sequence generation) was low for nine studies ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ), unclear for three studies ( ; ; ), and high for four studies ( ; ; ; ).
The risk of selection bias (allocation concealment) was low for seven studies ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ), unclear for six studies ( ; ; ; ; ; ), and high for three studies ( ; ; ).

## Blinding
For the types of intervention assessed in this review, blinding of participants and personnel was not possible. However, since vaccination coverage is an objective measure, we considered all studies to be at low risk of performance and detection biases.

## Incomplete outcome data
The risk of attrition bias (incomplete outcome data) was low for 12 studies ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ), unclear for one study ( ), and high for two studies ( ; ).

## Selective reporting
Selective reporting was categorised as low risk in 12 studies ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ), and unclear in four studies ( ; ; ; ).

## Other potential sources of bias
None of the studies had evidence of other biases.

## Summary of risk of bias assessments
We have summarised the risk of bias assessment in each of the included studies in and . Overall, three studies had low risk of bias ( ; ; ), nine studies had unclear risk of bias ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ), and four studies had high of bias ( ; ; ; ).
 

## Effects of interventions
See: ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; 
We present a summary of the effects of the interventions in . In this table we report the direction of the results and the certainty of the evidence for both primary and secondary outcomes.
 

## Recipient‐oriented interventions

## Comparison 1: health education compared to usual practice

## 1.1. Vaccination coverage
Three randomised trials ( ; ; ) and one non‐randomised trial ( ) reported vaccination coverage. A meta‐analysis of the randomised trials showed that health education improves HPV vaccination uptake compared to usual practice (RR 1.43, 95% CI 1.16 to 1.76; I² = 0%; high‐certainty evidence; 1054 participants). The non‐randomised study had similar findings, suggesting that health education may improve HPV vaccination uptake compared to usual practice (RR 1.84, 95% CI 1.34 to 2.54; low‐certainty evidence; 2822 participants)( ; ).

## 1.2. Secondary outcomes

## Knowledge, attitude, and beliefs
One randomised trial suggested that health education may improve knowledge of vaccines (HPV, meningococcal conjugate, Tdap, and Influenza) and corresponding VPDs compared to usual practice ( ). We downgraded the certainty of the evidence to low because of serious study limitations (high risk of bias) and serious indirectness (given that this finding is based on one study from one setting).

## Adverse effects of the intervention
One study reported that health education did not have any adverse events in relation to usual practice ( ). The remaining studies did not provide any information on adverse effects.

## Comparison 2: complex health education programme compared to simplified health education

## 2.1. Vaccination coverage
One large randomised trial ( ) suggested that a multi‐component health education intervention probably results in little or no difference in the uptake of three doses of the hepatitis B vaccine compared to simplified information leaflets (RR 0.98, 95% CI 0.96 to 0.99; 17,411 participants; ). We judged the certainty of the evidence as moderate because of serious study limitations, as the included study had an unclear risk of bias ( ).

## 2.2. Secondary outcomes

## Knowledge, attitude, and beliefs
The randomised trial showed that multi‐component health education may improve knowledge of the targeted vaccine and disease compared to simplified information leaflets ( ). We downgraded the certainty of evidence to moderate because of serious study limitations (unclear risk of bias) and serious indirectness (given that this finding is based on one study from one setting).

## Comparison 3: financial incentives compared to usual practice

## 3.1. Vaccination coverage
One randomised trial ( ) found that financial incentives may improve uptake of the first dose of the HPV vaccine compared to usual practice (RR 1.45, 95% CI 1.05 to 1.99; 500 participants; ). We judged the certainty of the evidence as low, because of concerns regarding study limitations (unclear risk of bias) and imprecision of the effect ( ).

## 3.2. Secondary outcomes
None of the included studies reported relevant secondary outcomes for this comparison.

## Comparison 4: health education plus financial incentives compared to usual practice

## 4.1. Vaccination coverage
From the findings of one small randomised trial ( ), we are uncertain about the effects of combining health education and financial incentives on the completion of three doses of the hepatitis B vaccine, compared to usual practice (RR 1.38, 95% CI 0.96 to 2.00; 104 participants; ). We judged the certainty of the evidence as very low because of concerns regarding risk of bias in the included study, very serious imprecision of the findings, and very serious indirectness (given that this finding is based on one small study from one setting) ( ).

## 4.2. Secondary outcomes

## Knowledge, attitude, and beliefs
One study ( ) assessed this outcome. We are uncertain about the effects of health education plus financial incentives on vaccine knowledge compared to usual practice because the certainty of the evidence was very low. We judged the certainty of the evidence as very low because of serious study limitations and very serious indirectness.

## Comparison 5: mandatory vaccination compared to usual practice

## 5.1. Vaccination coverage
 assessed the effects of mandating hepatitis B vaccination by law for elementary school entry in the state of Missouri in the USA. This non‐randomised trial compared students in the ninth grade (affected by the hepatitis B law) and 12th grade (not affected by the law) in the state and showed that making vaccinations mandatory probably leads to substantial improvements in vaccination uptake (RR 2.94, 95% CI 2.66 to 3.25; 2642 participants; ).
In addition, the study compared the ninth grade in Missouri (affected by the mandatory hepatitis B vaccination law) to the ninth grade in the state of Kansas (not affected by the law) and confirmed that mandating vaccination probably leads to a large increase in the uptake of hepatitis B vaccine (RR 3.92, 95% CI 3.65 to 4.20; 6462 participants; ). This was a well conducted non‐randomised study and, for both outcome assessments, we upgraded the certainty of the evidence to moderate because of very large intervention effects ( ).

## 5.2. Secondary outcomes
The study reported no relevant secondary outcomes.

## Provider‐oriented interventions

## Comparison 6: provider prompts compared to usual practice

## 6.1. Vaccination coverage
 assessed the impact of provider prompts compared to usual practice on the uptake of various recommended adolescent vaccines through two parallel randomised trials: one in a national network of paediatric clinics, covering 36 states in the USA, and one in a local network of primary care practices, based in one county in New York state in the USA.
In the national network of paediatric clinics, provider prompts probably made little or no difference to the uptake of three doses of HPV (adjusted OR 1.13 95% CI 0.68 to 1.88; 437 participants), Tdap (adjusted OR 1.16, 95% CI 0.68 to 1.99; 1746 participants), meningococcal conjugate (adjusted OR 1.08, 95% CI 0.82 to 1.41; 1752 participants), and seasonal influenza (adjusted OR 0.89, 95% CI 0.69 to 1.16; 878 participants) vaccines. These adjusted odds ratios were based on a multilevel mixed‐effect logistic regression model with covariates for pair assignment, study time period, group assignment, and an interaction between time and group assignment.
In the local network of primary care practices, provider prompts probably made little or no difference to the uptake of three doses of HPV (adjusted OR 0.93, 95% CI 0.64 to 1.34; 422 participants), Tdap (adjusted OR 1.44, 95% CI 0.82 to 2.56; 1550 participants), meningococcal conjugate (adjusted OR 1.15, 95% CI 0.64 to 2.05; 1467 participants), and seasonal influenza (adjusted OR 0.93, 95% CI 0.69 to 1.25; 561 participants) vaccines. The odds ratios were adjusted as for the national network results above.
Pooling the data from the two networks, this randomised trial shows that provider prompts probably make little or no difference to the uptake of three doses of HPV (OR 0.99, 95% CI 0.55 to 1.81; 859 participants; ), Tdap (OR 1.28, 95% CI 0.59 to 2.80; 3296 participants; ), meningococcal conjugate (OR 1.09, 95% CI 0.67 to 1.79; 3219 participants; ), and seasonal influenza (OR 0.91, 95% CI 0.61 to 1.34; 1439 participants; ) vaccines.
We judged the certainty of the evidence as moderate because of concerns regarding imprecision of findings ( ).

## 6.2. Secondary outcomes
The study reported no relevant secondary outcomes.

## Comparison 7: provider education with performance feedback compared to usual practice

## 7.1. Vaccination coverage
One controlled before‐after study looked at the effects of education and performance feedback on the uptake of HPV vaccination ( ). Provider education with performance feedback may increase the proportion of adolescents who are offered and accept HPV vaccination by clinicians, compared to usual practice. Compared to adolescents visiting non‐participating clinicians (in the usual practice group), the adolescents visiting clinicians in the intervention group were more likely to receive the first dose of HPV during preventive visits (5.7 percentage points increase) and during acute visits (0.7 percentage points for the first and 5.6 percentage points for the second doses of HPV)(227 clinicians and more than 200,000 children). We judged the certainty of the evidence as low because this is a non‐randomised study ( ).

## 7.2. Secondary outcomes

## Cost
 evaluated the costs required to implement the education and performance feedback programme. The authors calculated the total cost of each of the following components: creation of the performance feedback reports; time spent on creating and delivering the educational content; and time spent by participating providers on group calls, reviewing data, and planning/implementing practice change. The estimated total cost of the intervention was USD 17,887 (USD 662 per participant), of which USD 17,064 was for participant time spent on the programmes ( ).

## Health system interventions

## Comparison 8: class‐based compared to age‐based HPV vaccination in schools

## 8.1. Vaccination coverage
 assessed the effect of two HPV vaccine delivery strategies in a cluster randomised trial and showed that a class‐based delivery tactic probably leads to slightly higher HPV vaccine uptake than an age‐based delivery strategy (RR 1.09, 95% CI 1.06 to 1.13; 1 study, 5537 participants; ). We judged the certainty of the evidence as moderate because of serious indirectness, given that this finding is based on one study from one setting ( ).

## 8.2. Secondary outcomes

## Cost
 collected data on the costs of class‐based versus age‐based delivery of the HPV vaccine in Tanzania and found the class‐based vaccination strategy to be less expensive. In urban schools, the cost was USD 52 per girl vaccinated in a class‐based strategy compared to USD 87 for the age‐based delivery system. In rural schools, the cost was USD 67 per girl vaccinated in a class‐based strategy compared to USD 98 for the age‐based delivery system.

## Multi‐component interventions

## Comparison 9: multi‐component provider intervention compared to usual practice

## 9.1. Vaccination coverage
 (cluster randomised trial) assessed the effects of a four‐component provider intervention package (education session, repeated contacts, individualised feedback, and incentives) and found that the intervention probably improves HPV vaccination coverage compared to usual practice. Girls in the intervention group are probably more likely to receive their next HPV vaccine dose than those in the control group (odds ratio 1.6, 95% CI 1.1 to 2.2; 5786 participants). The effects are probably larger for boys (odds ratio 25.00, 95% CI 15.00 to 40.00; 7332 participants), and this may be because publicly funded HPV vaccination for boys became available during the study. We judged the certainty of the evidence as moderate because of serious indirectness, given that this finding is based on one study from one setting ( ).

## 9.2. Secondary outcomes
The study reported no relevant secondary outcomes.

## Comparison 10: multi‐component provider and parent intervention compared to usual practice

## 10.1. Vaccination coverage
One non‐randomised trial showed that a social marketing intervention directed to parents and providers may improve HPV vaccination uptake compared to usual practice (RR 1.41, 95% CI 1.25 to 1.59; 25,869 participants; ). The intervention included: distribution of HPV vaccination pamphlets to healthcare providers; radio messages directed at adolescents and their parents to raise awareness about HPV vaccination; an online continuing medical education training on HPV vaccination for health providers; simplified information sheet for adolescents and parents; and a website with links to credible information sources for parents and providers.
A very small randomised trial ( ) also suggested that a multi‐component educational intervention directed to both providers and parents may improve HPV vaccination uptake (RR 2.34, 95% CI 0.75 to 7.32; 337 participants). Healthcare providers received a one‐hour presentation and handouts on HPV vaccination, and parents were mailed simplified educational material on HPV vaccination followed by a phone call to emphasise the importance of HPV vaccination.
Overall, the two studies show that using a multi‐faceted provider and parent intervention may improve HPV vaccination uptake compared to usual practice ( ). We judged the certainty of the evidence as low because of concerns regarding serious imprecision and serious study limitations (unclear risk of selection bias in the included study) ( ).

## 10.2. Secondary outcomes

## Knowledge, attitude, and beliefs
 reported that a multi‐component educational intervention directed to both providers and parents may increase knowledge about HPV infection and HPV vaccine among providers and parents compared to usual practice. The average number of correct answers about HPV infection and HPV vaccination (out of 10) post‐intervention among parents in the intervention group was 9.4 (standard deviation 1.0), compared to 7.3 (standard deviation 1.9) among parents in the comparison group (P = 0.001). We judged the certainty of the evidence as low because of serious indirectness (given that this finding is based on one study from one setting) and serious study limitations.

## Discussion

## Summary of main results
We found that educating adolescents and their parents about the importance of vaccinations; passing laws stating that adolescents must be vaccinated to go to school; using a multi‐faceted package of interventions for providers of vaccination services, including education, repeated contacts, individualised feedback, and incentives; or using class‐based rather than age‐based approaches for delivering vaccines probably improve adolescent vaccination coverage. Adolescent vaccination coverage may also be improved through targeting parents and healthcare providers with a combination of vaccination education, telephone calls, and radio messages. In addition, providing adolescents and their parents with financial incentives may improve adolescent vaccination coverage. However, reminding healthcare providers to vaccinate adolescents when they open their electronic medical charts, probably makes little or no difference to adolescent vaccination coverage. From the data provided in the studies included in this review, we were uncertain about the costs of the interventions tested and their effects on knowledge and attitudes regarding adolescent vaccination. shows a summary of the effects of the interventions, indicating the certainty of the evidence and gaps in the evidence base.

## Overall completeness and applicability of evidence
Our systematic review was comprehensive as we included all known types of interventions for improving vaccination coverage (except recipient‐oriented reminders ( )), all vaccines recommended by WHO for boys and girls aged 10 to 19 years ( ), and all country settings. However, we identified only 16 eligible studies, mostly conducted in high‐income countries.
There may be multiple barriers and facilitators of vaccine uptake among adolescents, from the logistics of ensuring access and the affordability of vaccination services, to the psychosocial factors that influence vaccination‐seeking behaviours and individual acceptance of vaccination. Therefore, multiple interventions may be required to achieve optimal vaccination coverage among adolescents. This review showed promising findings for a range of interventions including recipient‐oriented education, vaccine mandates, and financial incentives; provider education and a combination of interventions targeting providers alone or together with parents; and tailored school outreach programmes.
The most promising intervention was mandatory vaccination, which increased hepatitis B vaccination coverage more than four‐fold ( ). This study was conducted in the US states of Missouri (which had a law mandating hepatitis B vaccination for school entry) and Kansas (which did not have mandatory hepatitis B vaccination at the time of the study). The study authors noted that the vaccination coverage achieved in this study (i.e. 72.8%) did not reach the high coverage levels obtained following a similar vaccination mandate in California. This was probably because, unlike in Missouri, mandatory vaccination in California was stringently enforced through measures such as expulsion of unvaccinated students and inspections to verify that vaccination coverage levels reported by schools were correct. Various countries have mandates for several vaccines ( ). However, there is considerable variation between and within countries in the implementation of mandatory vaccination; including (but not limited to) variation in what is required of people, the penalties imposed if requirements are not met, and the age groups and populations covered by vaccine mandates; ( ; ). Therefore, countries considering mandatory vaccination, as part of a multi‐intervention approach to reach optimal immunisation coverage among adolescents, may want to ensure that the process is consultative, involving relevant national stakeholders in its planning, implementation, and monitoring. National immunisation decision makers should bear in mind that mandatory vaccination is unlikely to be effective in settings where healthcare facility obstacles and other access issues are major drivers of sub‐optimal vaccination coverage ( ; ). In addition, the study was conducted more than 15 years ago, and it is possible that changes in health systems arrangements and other contextual changes since the time of the study may impact on the applicability of this evidence.
We also found health education to be very effective, leading to a relative increase of 43% in the completion of a three‐dose schedule of HPV vaccination ( ; ; ; ). In addition, we found little or no difference in effects between a complex multi‐component health education intervention and simplified information leaflets; suggesting that interventions need to be tailored to local vaccination barriers.
This review has several limitations in relation to the applicability of this evidence. First, 15/16 included studies were conducted in high‐income countries, mainly the USA, in which vaccination services are readily available to adolescent girls and boys. The findings from these studies need to be interpreted with caution when applied to settings with different health system arrangements and access to vaccination services. Second, there was limited information from the studies on the cost‐effectiveness of the interventions tested. Only two studies reported the costs of interventions, including provider education with performance feedback ( ) and a health system intervention ( ). Therefore, when applying the findings of this review to any setting, local costing should be undertaken, particularly in settings differing from those of the original investigations. Third, the studies included in this review did not report information on equity. It is possible that the implementation of interventions may increase inequity if they are not adapted to populations in remote and under‐served areas in countries or if there is substantial variability in socioeconomic characteristics among populations receiving the interventions. Given these contextual issues, any adolescent vaccination programmes implemented based on our review findings should include a monitoring component to assess the performance of the intervention within the given context.
One study in our review was conducted in a country defined by the World Bank as low‐income or middle‐income ( ). The study compared class‐based and age‐based strategies for delivering HPV vaccines among 5532 girls in 134 primary schools in northwest Tanzania (a low‐income country). There was a 9% relative increase in vaccination coverage among eligible girls in schools assigned to a class‐based approach compared to girls in schools using an age‐based strategy. This finding may be relevant to (low‐ or middle‐income) countries that do not have established healthcare programmes for adolescent boys and girls, but have introduced or are contemplating to introduce HPV ( ) and other vaccines for adolescents. School health programmes can have an advantage of integrating various existing health services at the same or a minimal increase in cost ( ). In line with our findings, one previous review of school‐based programmes in 17 countries found that such programmes led to substantial increases in HPV vaccination coverage rates ( ).
Although the effect sizes reported in this review were small to moderate, even relatively small effects for interventions aimed at increasing uptake of adolescent vaccines may be important from a health service perspective, when applied across large populations. Therefore, we believe that this review is an important resource for countries and international organisations in the context of the "Immunization Agenda 2030", a global strategy which envisions a "world where everyone, everywhere, at every age, fully benefits from vaccines for good health and well‐being" ( ).
Three quarters of the studies in this review assessed the effects of various interventions on HPV vaccination coverage. Despite a global expansion of HPV vaccination programmes in recent years, HPV vaccination coverage remains sub‐optimal worldwide ( ; ; ; ). The current review will be supplemented by a Cochrane qualitative evidence synthesis which will explore the factors that influence acceptance of adolescent HPV vaccination ( ). The findings may help to explain why some interventions in the current review were more effective than others, and may contribute to the development of more effective and contextualised interventions for improving HPV vaccination uptake among adolescents.

## Certainty of the evidence
The certainty of the evidence on the effects of included interventions on our primary outcome (adolescent vaccination coverage) varied widely, from high to very low. Among the interventions targeting adolescents and their communities, we judged the certainty of the evidence as high for education ( ), moderate for multi‐component health education ( ) and legislation mandating vaccination ( ), low for financial incentives ( ), and very low for a combination of health education and financial incentives ( ). Regarding provider‐oriented interventions, we assessed the certainty as moderate for provider prompts ( ) and multi‐component performance improvement continuing medical education intervention ( ) and low for provider education with performance feedback ( ). For the combination of recipient and provider interventions, we assessed the certainty of evidence as moderate ( ). On health system interventions, we judged the certainty of the evidence as moderate for class‐based compared to age‐based delivery of vaccines to adolescents ( ). Our main concerns with the evidence related to study limitations (risk of bias; ; ), indirectness (for findings based on single studies from one setting), and imprecision.

## Potential biases in the review process
We minimised potential biases in the review process by adhering to Cochrane guidelines ( ). We conducted comprehensive searches without limiting the searches to a specific language. Two review authors independently assessed study eligibility, extracted data, and assessed the risk of bias in each included study. The eligible cluster‐randomised trials reported that they adjusted for cluster effects. However, there was some level of subjectivity in the determination of concerns that were serious enough to require rating down the evidence; and it is possible that other authors would have arrived at slightly different levels of certainty of evidence.
The searches for the main databases were done in October 2018. It is possible that some relevant studies published after the last search date have not been included in the review and the review authors acknowledge this limitation, However, we do not think that this limitation has an impact on the reliability of the main findings and conclusions of the review.

## Agreements and disagreements with other studies or reviews
Few recent systematic reviews have assessed the effectiveness of interventions for improving adolescent immunisation coverage ( ; ; ). Das and colleagues searched three databases for studies published up to December 2014 and included 23 studies on the effectiveness of interventions to improve vaccination coverage among adolescents. The authors reported that evidence of moderate certainty from 13 studies suggested that mandatory vaccination in schools, reminders, and national permissive recommendation increased vaccination coverage in adolescents ( ). Smulian and colleagues searched five databases and included 34 intervention studies published from June 2006 to May 2015. The authors reported that many types of intervention strategies (targeting recipients, providers, and the health system) led to increases in HPV vaccination coverage in different settings ( ). The and reviews had some overlap with our review in terms of included studies, but many studies included in the two reviews do not meet the EPOC criteria for inclusion of studies in systematic reviews of effects ( ).
Jacobson Vann and colleagues searched four databases to January 2017 for trials, controlled before‐after studies, and interrupted time series evaluating vaccination‐focused recipient reminders in children, adolescents, and adults in any setting. Based on 10 studies, the authors reported high‐certainty evidence that reminders improved adolescent vaccination coverage ( ). There was no overlap between our review and the review since we excluded reminders of this kind.
Overall, our systematic review complements earlier relevant reviews, and is the most comprehensive systematic review to date on the effects of interventions for improving uptake of vaccines among adolescent boys and girls.

## Authors' conclusions

## Implications for practice
We found that educating adolescents and their parents about the importance of vaccinations; passing laws requiring adolescents to be vaccinated as a condition for school enrolment; using a multi‐faceted package of interventions for providers of vaccination services, including education, repeated contacts, individualised feedback, and incentives; or using a class‐based approach for delivering vaccines probably increase the uptake of vaccines among adolescent girls and boys. The certainty of the evidence for these interventions was moderate, implying that monitoring and evaluation of the impact is likely to be needed.
In addition, we found low‐certainty evidence that adolescent vaccination coverage may be improved through providing adolescents and their parents with financial incentives; and giving education and feedback to providers of vaccination services. The low certainty of the evidence for these interventions implies that an impact evaluation is warranted if any of these interventions is implemented to improve adolescent vaccination coverage.
However, these are complex interventions which may be implemented in many different ways. For example, mandatory vaccination is context‐specific and can be operationalised through (but not limited to) schools, childcare, social welfare, and criminal justice ( ; ). The study that assessed mandatory vaccination in this review reported two key implementation challenges ( ). Firstly, it was complicated to track the three dose series of hepatitis B vaccinations throughout the year; especially when students moved from one school to another. Secondly, school funding was tied to school attendance, a situation which may have deterred school personnel from enforcing mandatory vaccination through exclusion of unvaccinated students.
It is critical to understand the factors that influence hesitancy, acceptance, and demand for adolescent vaccination in different settings. An ongoing Cochrane qualitative evidence synthesis of factors that influence acceptance of adolescent HPV vaccination ( ) may help to explain why and how some of the interventions in the current review were more effective than others in improving uptake of HPV vaccines.

## Implications for research
Most of the currently available evidence on interventions for improving adolescent vaccination coverage are from high‐income countries. In order to understand the effects of these interventions across a range of settings, there is a need for rigorous evaluations of adolescent vaccination interventions in low‐ and middle‐income countries. Given that there is little or no evidence from existing studies on cost and (gender, socioeconomic, and geographical) equity ( ), the challenge for the future is to design rigorous evaluations and report results in ways that can assess costs and equity impacts clearly, in addition to vaccination knowledge, intentions, and coverage.
In addition, there is a need for appropriately designed, implemented, and reported evaluations of interventions for which this review found low‐certainty evidence of benefits (e.g. recipient incentives, provider education and performance feedback, optimal combination of effective interventions, etc.), moderate‐certainty evidence of little or no benefits (provider prompts), and interventions for which we found no eligible studies (e.g. expansion of access to adolescent vaccination services, integration of adolescent vaccination with other services).

## Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the Cochrane EPOC editorial base for assistance in the preparation of this review. We thank Marit Johansen who advised on the search strategy and helped with computerised searches, as well as the following editors and peer referees, who provided comments to improve the review: Simon Lewin, Kent Ranson, Chris Rose, Ntombenhle Ngcobo, Sabrina Bakeera‐Kitaka, Xavier Bosch‐Capblanch, Newton Opiyo, Claire Glenton, and Heather Ames.
The South African Medical Research Council and the National Research Foundation of South Africa supported Leila H Abdullahi and Charles S Wiysonge (grant numbers: 106035 and 119467).
The Norwegian Satellite of the EPOC Group receives funding from the Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation (Norad), via the Norwegian Institute of Public Health, to support review authors in the production of their reviews.
This Cochrane Review is associated with the Research, Evidence and Development Initiative (READ‐It) project. READ‐It (project number 300342‐104) is funded by UK aid from the UK government; however, the views expressed do not necessarily reflect the UK government’s official policies.

## Appendices

## Appendix 1. Search strategies
PDQ Evidence
Title/Abstract: ("vaccination uptake" OR "vaccination up take" OR "vaccination coverage" OR "vaccine uptake" OR "vaccine up take" OR "vaccine coverage")
CDSR, the Cochrane Library
 
CENTRAL, DARE and HTA, Cochrane Library
 
MEDLINE, Ovid
 
Embase, Ovid
 
CINAHL, EBSCOhost
 
Global Health, Ovid
 
Africa‐Wide Information, EBSCOhost
 
Scopus, Elsevier
( TITLE‐ABS‐KEY ( ( vaccination W/3 adolescent* ) OR ( vaccination W/3 youth* ) OR ( vaccination W/3 {young adult} ) OR ( vaccination W/3 {young adults} ) OR ( vaccination W/3 teenager* ) OR ( immunization W/3 adolescent* ) OR ( immunization W/3 youth* ) OR ( immunization W/3 {young adult} ) OR ( immunization W/3 {young adults} ) OR ( immunization W/3 teenager* ) OR ( immunisation W/3 adolescent* ) OR ( immunisation W/3 youth* ) OR ( immunisation W/3 {young adult} ) OR ( immunisation W/3 {young adults} ) OR ( immunisation W/3 teenager* ) ) ) AND ( ( TITLE‐ABS‐KEY ( randomis* OR randomiz* OR randomly OR intervention* OR control* OR evaluat* OR {before and after} OR ( ( {pre test} OR {pretest} ) AND ( {post test} OR posttest ) ) OR quasiexperiment* OR ( quasi W/0 experiment* ) OR {time series} OR ( time W/0 point* ) OR ( repeated W/0 measur* ) ) ) OR ( TITLE ( trial OR effect* OR impact* ) ) )
Grey literature
(Interventions) AND (adolescent) AND (immunisation)
Trial registries:
(With all the words (( interventions AND adolescent AND immunisation)))

## Appendix 2. Table of unused methods
 

## Data and analyses
 

## Characteristics of studies

## Characteristics of included studies [ordered by study ID]
 

## Characteristics of excluded studies [ordered by study ID]
 

## Characteristics of studies awaiting assessment [ordered by study ID]
 

## Characteristics of ongoing studies [ordered by study ID]
 

## Differences between protocol and review
New author added during the review process (i.e. Valantine N Ndze).
In the review, we did not conduct subgroup and sensitivity analyses, as specified in the protocol, due to lack of data. See Table 1 for methods specified in the protocol ( ), but not used in the review.
We removed adverse events following immunisation as an outcome as we realised posthoc that it was not a relevant outcome for this review.

## Contributions of authors
LA, BK, GH, and CW conceived the review, participated in the development of the protocol ( ), and approved the final version for publication.
LA, BK, VN, GH, and CW participated in the review and approved the final version for publication.

## Sources of support

## Internal sources
Vaccines for Africa Initiative, University of Cape Town, South Africa.

## External sources
Department for International Development, UK.
Project number 300342‐104

## Declarations of interest
LA: none.
BK: I am employed by the University to conduct research and aid in supervision of postgraduate students. I am a co‐supervisor of Leila Abdullahi, the first author of the review. I do not have any conflicts of interest for the review.
VN: none.
GH: none.
CW: none.