3398dghealthDigital healthDigit HealthSAGE PublicationsPMC6001201600120160012012994257910.1177/2055207616688841The ‘who’ and ‘what’ of #diabetes on Twitter
Beguerisse-DíazMariano McLennanAmy K Garduño-HernándezGuillermo BarahonaMauricio UlijaszekStanley J 1Department of Mathematics, Imperial
College London, UK2Mathematical Institute, University of
Oxford, UK3School of Anthropology and Museum
Ethnography, University of Oxford, UK4Sinnia, Mexico City, Mexico✉Mariano Beguerisse-Díaz, Mathematical
Institute, University of Oxford, Andrew Wiles Building, Radcliffe Observatory
Quarter, Woodstock Road, Oxford OX2 6GG, UK. Email:
beguerisse@maths.ox.ac.uk; Twitter: @marianobegue
1120173205520761668884120552076166888412562018© The Author(s) 2017This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 3.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/) which
permits non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work as
published without adaptation or alteration, without further permission
provided the original work is attributed as specified on the SAGE and Open
Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).

## Abstract
Social media are being increasingly used for health promotion, yet the landscape
of users, messages and interactions in such fora is poorly understood. Studies
of social media and diabetes have focused mostly on patients, or public agencies
addressing it, but have not looked broadly at all of the participants or the
diversity of content they contribute. We study Twitter conversations about
diabetes through the systematic analysis of 2.5 million tweets collected over 8
months and the interactions between their authors. We address three questions.
(1) What themes arise in these tweets? (2) Who are the most influential users?
(3) Which type of users contribute to which themes? We answer these questions
using a mixed-methods approach, integrating techniques from anthropology,
network science and information retrieval such as thematic coding, temporal
network analysis and community and topic detection. Diabetes-related tweets fall
within broad thematic groups: health information, news, social interaction and
commercial. At the same time, humorous messages and references to popular
culture appear consistently, more than any other type of tweet. We classify
authors according to their temporal ‘hub’ and ‘authority’ scores. Whereas the
hub landscape is diffuse and fluid over time, top authorities are highly
persistent across time and comprise bloggers, advocacy groups and NGOs related
to diabetes, as well as for-profit entities without specific diabetes expertise.
Top authorities fall into seven interest communities as derived from their
Twitter follower network. Our findings have implications for public health
professionals and policy makers who seek to use social media as an engagement
tool and to inform policy design.
Keywords: Twitter, social networks, diabetes, public health, humour, temporal networks, topic detection

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2015 Oct 24; Accepted 2016 Dec 16; Collection date 2017 Jan-Dec.

## Introduction
Of an estimated 3 billion internet users around the world (over 40% of the global
population), approximately 310 million actively use the social networking site
Twitter (according to Twitter's own figures from July 2016). Since Twitter's launch
in 2006, the platform and its users have been the protagonists of several major
events (e.g. the Arab Spring, protest movements in Iran, Spain and
elsewhere – ), and it has become a prominent
venue for companies, personalities and ordinary people to broadcast news and events,
send public messages, express opinions and socialise. , 
There is growing interest in the potential uses for Twitter, and other social media,
in public and population health. Research has been carried out on the use of Twitter
for epidemiological applications and public health surveillance. For instance,
influenza spread, , contagious disease outbreaks and tobacco use have been mapped using public data from Twitter. Geographic or spatial risk
factors have also been elucidated using Twitter. , This medium is being
increasingly used for health information sharing, primary care, delivery of health support, primary prevention and public
health education. – 
Health promotion has typically drawn on unidirectional, top-down social marketing and
advertising strategies to disseminate health-related messages to a wide audience. The recent use of Twitter in health promotion coincides with the influx of
commercial agencies into social media to sell commodities, trends and ideas. The confluence of health promotion and commercial agents on Twitter has led
to a cacophony of short health-related messages directed at users and passed through
social networks. Some users who create and disseminate content have the exclusive
aim of promoting health, while others may have additional or alternative aims (e.g.
commercial interest, self-promotion). Yet this complex environment is rarely
acknowledged in public health promotion research, reviews and planning. Instead,
public health marketing strategies and evaluations focus on the quantity of messages
disseminated by health authorities over time, the number of followers an account has
attracted and the design of new slogans. , There is little critical
analysis of the wider landscape of, and relationships underpinning, health-related
content on Twitter, or of the impact that messages have in the broad user base.
In this paper, we investigate messages on Twitter (‘what’ is discussed and by ‘whom’)
relating to a single clinical and public health concern: diabetes. Diabetes is a
clinical condition associated with blood sugar regulation by the hormone insulin and
other endocrine factors. Complications associated with unmanaged or poorly managed
diabetes can typically affect the heart, blood vessels, eyes, kidneys and nerves.
There are two types of diabetes: type 1 (often abbreviated as T1 or T1D on Twitter)
occurs when the pancreas does not produce sufficient insulin; type 2 (T2 or T2D)
develops when the body does not effectively respond to insulin. In 2012, the global
prevalence of diabetes of both types was estimated to be nine percent among adults
aged 18 years and over. However, this is likely to be an underestimate; in the United States alone,
27.8% of all diabetes cases are thought to be undiagnosed. Globally, around 10% of all people with diabetes have T1, which typically
requires the daily administration of insulin. The remaining 90% have diagnoses of
T2, which is commonly associated with obesity, poor nutrition and physical
inactivity. Both types have genetic components, although no known genes directly
cause diabetes. T2 is managed predominantly through health education, diet and activity
change, and weight loss; treatments also may include medication and, in more
advanced cases, regular insulin administration. People who have diabetes are encouraged to self-surveil their blood sugar
levels and self-manage their lifestyles and insulin levels (through diet, physical
activity and medications, where prescribed) in order to control their blood sugar
levels and minimise related health complications such as those described above.
Previous research on diabetes and social media has focused on the possibilities that
the internet and social media open up for both self-management , and clinical
management – for people
living with the disease. Others have focused on the dissemination of information
relating to diabetes-specific outreach events or from specific platforms. Our approach is different; instead of assuming that patients, clinicians and
health promotion organisations are the main protagonists in the Twitter conversation
about diabetes, we place all stakeholders on an initial equal footing with respect
to Twitter exchanges around the broad category ‘diabetes’.
We compiled over 2.5 million English-language tweets containing the
term ‘diabetes’, which were generated by more than one million users over a period
of 8 months (March 2013 to January 2014). These are the type of messages that users
encounter when they search for the term ‘diabetes’ on Twitter, or click on the
hashtag #diabetes. We analysed these tweets (public messages
comprising of text strings with a maximum length of 140 characters), using a
mixed-methods approach that combines mathematical and computational techniques with
anthropological analysis. We used tools from data and network science to detect
patterns in social interactions , , and to extract topics from the
messages. , We then interrogated these patterns using discourse analysis
approaches from anthropology, – which permit the elaboration
of themes, personalities, and contexts. As a result, we extract and classify the
topics that appear in the messages, and identify the important participants in the
conversations (which include patients, practitioners, public health authorities,
commercial entities and others).
Researchers have called for improving our understanding of social media to inform its
use in public health policy making and practice. Our work contributes to this understanding by addressing three questions.
First, what are the main themes of messages posted on Twitter that contain
the term ‘diabetes’? To answer this question, we extract the topics
that appear in the tweets by processing word co-occurrence networks, and analyse
their content, participants, and evolution over time. Second, who talks
about diabetes on Twitter and in what capacity? To answer this
question, we investigate the Twitter users who drive conversations by analysing
networks of interactions (posting, sharing/retweeting, following) among the users.
And third, which users contribute content to which topics and
themes? We answer this question by examining the type of accounts that
post in the different themes. We discuss the relevance of this interdisciplinary
research for public health professionals and policy. The methods employed in this
project are general and may be applied in other studies where similar data become
available.

## Methods

## Data from Twitter
We collected every tweet containing the term ‘diabetes’ (2,698,114 tweets in
total), posted between 26 March 2013 and 19 January 2014 by 1,202,143 different
users ( ). We
also collected information about ‘retweets’: a retweet event is when a user
re-broadcasts a message (or ‘status’) originally posted by another user and
which is disseminated to his or her followers. Each retweet is a time-annotated
interaction between two users: the target (the author of the original tweet, or
the target of the attention) and the source (the user who retweeted the message,
or the source of the attention). We recorded 1,219,282 retweets from June 2013
up until when the data collection ended. We also recorded 41,582 friend–follower
relationships among a select subset of the users along with their
Twitter biographies, messages of at most 140 character in
which users can describe themselves. All data were collected by Sinnia using
Twitter Gnip PowerTrack API (https://gnip.com/realtime/powertrack/). We have made available a
list containing tweet IDs used in this study (see the Data Statement at the end
of the article). 
 There is an ongoing debate about the ethical implications of using Twitter data
for research. Some authors maintain that the lack of complicated privacy
settings on Twitter means that messages placed in the public domain are intended
to be there; alternatively, other authors consider that posting tweets should
not be interpreted as permission to use tweets for research. We believe that the topic, analysis and results presented here serve the
public interest and pose no risk to users. None of the tweets we analyse and
reproduce here contain notable amounts of sensitive or private material. Indeed,
the most prominent users in our data set also maintain other online profiles and
produce tweets for public consumption.

## Construction of the different networks
The number of ‘diabetes’ tweets follows weekly cycles of activity ( ). Consequently,
we group the data into weekly bins. Given that the date of the original message
and the date of its retweet are not always the same, retweets are labelled by
the date of the original posting.

## Retweet network
For each week w, we construct a directed, weighted
retweet network with
N(w) nodes, corresponding to all of
the users who participated in a retweet event either actively (by
retweeting) or passively (by having their statuses retweeted by someone
else). A directed connection (edge or arc) exists between two nodes if the
source node has retweeted the status of the target node, and the weight of
the edge corresponds to the number of retweets (see ), i.e. we define the
N(w) × N(w)
adjacency matrix of the retweet network as
A(w), where the element Aij(w) records the number of retweets from
i to j over week w.
For a given node, the in-degree corresponds to the number of users who have
retweeted statuses of that node, and the out-degree corresponds to the
number of users whose status that node has retweeted. In the example network
from ,
node 1 has retweeted statuses of nodes 3, 4 and 7, and has had nodes 2, 6
and 8 retweet some of her own (i.e. the in- and out-degree of node 1 are
both three). A weakly connected component is a group of nodes that are all
mutually reachable if we ignore the direction of the edges. For example, the
initial network in consists of only one weakly connected component, but its
co-citation and bibliographic projections (defined below) have six and five
components, respectively. 

 In a retweet network, the direction of the edge signifies an explicit
declaration of interest (i.e. source nodes find certain messages worth
passing along to their followers) and information flows in the opposite
direction (i.e. from the target nodes), as shown in . Such retweet networks have
a distinct structure, with many weakly connected components and an abundance
of ‘star’ motifs, in which a highly retweeted node (with high in-degree) is
surrounded by many nodes that point almost exclusively to the star node.
 
shows a typical network for one week in our data with 44,000 nodes and about
4000 weakly connected components. Over 50% of the nodes belong to a giant
connected component (nodes in purple) whereas each of the smaller components
contain less that 1% of the nodes.
A fundamental feature of retweet networks is the fact that they are directed
(they may contain extreme asymmetry of interest, ‘leaders’ and ‘followers’
and other roles). Directionality entails additional computational
challenges, which is why it is often neglected. However, ignoring
directionality in such settings destroys valuable information and can
severely affect the results and their interpretation. Our analysis below takes the directed and temporal nature of the
network into full account.

## Co-citation and bibliographic projections of the retweet network
To understand not only who drives conversations and produces influential
content, but also which users are instrumental in the dissemination of
content, we study two useful networks derived from the original retweet
network: the co-citation and bibliographic projections. These projections reflect the asymmetry of the original adjacency
retweet matrix A(w), and provide (a)
information about the shared interests of users who have retweeted tweets by
the same authors (bibliographic) and (b) information about whose tweets
generate responses from the same users (co-citation).
The co-citation network projection of
A(w) is an undirected, weighted network
defined on the same set of N(w) nodes as
the original retweet network with adjacency matrix
C(w): 
(1)C(w)=A(w)TA(w) An edge of the co-citation network
Ci,j(w)
exists when at least one user has retweeted messages from both users
i and j during week
w. Hence, this network links authors of tweets that elicit
interest in users, even though they themselves may belong to different
spheres of interest and activity ( ). The number of disconnected
nodes in the co-citation network is typically large ( ). For example, all nodes
whose in-neighbours have a maximum out-degree equal to 1 in the retweet
network will be isolated in the co-citation projection ( ). 
 The bibliographic network projection is the converse of the
the co-citation network. It is also built from the original retweet network
A(w) and has adjacency matrix

(2)B(w)=A(w)A(w)T This projection links pairs of users who have retweeted
messages posted by at least one author in common; in other words, the
bibliographic projection connects users who share interests. In a retweet
networks context the size of the largest component in the bibliographic
projection is typically larger than in the co-citation projection ( and ); this is due to the
fact that, on average, Twitter users retweet more than they are
retweeted.
Note that all nodes in the original retweet network exist in both
projections. However, depending on their connectivity (induced by the
interest elicited or the interest bestowed) they may appear isolated in one
or both of the projections. shows an illustration of the construction of the
co-citation and bibliographic projections in a simple example, as well as
the retweet, co-citation and bibliographic networks compiled from a typical
week in the data.

## Follower network
In addition to the retweet network, we also constructed a follower
network for a small subset of users of interest (see Section
‘The ‘who' of diabetes on Twitter’). In this network a directed connection
between two nodes exists when the source node follows the
target node on Twitter (i.e. is subscribed to the target's content). The
interpretation of the follower network is similar to the retweet network
( ) in
the sense that a directed connection is a declaration of interest, with
content flowing in the opposite direction. One key difference between retweet and follower networks is that
connections in the retweet network can be understood as localised
expressions of interest associated to a specific tweet, whereas in follower
networks a connection may be understood as a more general (and stable)
expression of interest.

## Computation of the hub and authority scores over time
Hub and authority scores provide a useful tool to analyse directed networks. Intuitively, a hub is a node whose outgoing connections
point to important nodes in the retweet network (authorities); conversely, an
authority is a node with many incoming connections from
hubs. The entries of the lead eigenvectors of the adjacency matrices of the
co-citation and bibliographic projections C(w) and
B(w) correspond to the authority and
hub centrality scores of the nodes during week w.
A node may rank highly as hub, authority, both or none, as we will show
below.
Henceforth, for notational simplicity, we drop the w from the
matrices A(w), C(w)
and B(w), but the dependence on w
remains implicit.
An alternative way to understand hub and authority scores is through the singular
value decomposition (SVD) of A:
A = UΣVT, where U and
VT are unitary matrices containing the left and
right singular vectors, respectively, and Σ = diag(σi) is the diagonal matrix of the N singular values. The
entries of the leading left and right singular vectors of A
correspond to the hub and authority scores, respectively. 
As explained above, the bibliographic and co-citation networks contain several
disconnected components ( and ). The largest connected component in a typical co-citation network
in our dataset contains about 10–15% of the nodes, yet it is responsible for
producing about 50% of messages that have at least one retweet. This observation
is consistent with Wu et al. who report that about 50% of URLs on Twitter are posted by a small
minority of ‘elite users’. On the other hand, since the number of users who
retweet is much larger than those whose messages are retweeted, the
bibliographic projection has a much larger giant connected component, with about
75% of the nodes.
Given the fragmented nature of the projection networks, we compute hub/authority
scores weight-averaged over all components as follows. Let the co-citation
network for a given week C have K weakly connected
components (excluding components of size 1), which we label with the index
k in order of decreasing size (i.e. k = 1
corresponds to the largest and k = K to the
smallest component). Therefore, , where Ck is the Nk × Nk adjacency matrix of the kth component. For each
component k, we compute the authority score, vk: 
Ckvk=λkmaxvk where is the largest eigenvalue and vk is normalised such that all its entries add up to 1 (i.e. ‖vk‖1 = 1). The authority score of the ith user
in component k is vk(i). We then aggregate the authority scores of all
components into the weight-averaged vector . The score for each node is weighed according to the size of
the component in which it is found, thus ensuring that the scores are comparable
and that we do not discard information from the smaller components.
To extract the hub scores in each week we follow the same procedure on matrix
B.

## Topic extraction
Topic extraction from the data proceeds in several steps. First, the tweets in
the dataset are grouped in weekly bins (as for the networks constructed above).
For each week, the raw text is pre-processed and a word co-occurrence network is
created. The probability that the tweets in each bin belong to different topics
is computed using techniques from textual analysis and community detection for
graphs. Note that topics are extracted using only the original tweets: retweets
are excluded because they do not add any new topical information. The details of
each of the steps for topic extraction are as given as follows.

## Text pre-processing
Prior to topic extraction, the text of each tweet is processed in the
following way. 
Convert words to lowercase, e.g. the terms ‘diabetes’, ‘Diabetes’
and ‘DIABETES’ are all processed as the same word.
Remove all punctuation signs and non-alphanumeric characters,
i.e. we compare tweets based only on the words they contain.
Replace collocations for specific terms (e.g. ‘Type 2’ or ‘T2D’
are replaced by ‘type2’) in order to homogenise terms that are
known to refer to the same concept.
Remove stop-words and special words (articles, conjunctions, etc.), numbers and vestigial URLs, which bear no topical
information.
Stem the text. This step strips suffixes so that related words are
mapped to the same stem, e.g. ‘house’, ‘houses’, ‘housing’ are
replaced by ‘hous’.
The result of this pre-processing step is illustrated in , which
contains examples of ‘raw tweets’ and their processed version. 
 

## Topic extraction from word co-occurrence graphs
After text pre-processing, we extract the topics from the tweets in each
weekly bin in the following steps. 
Following Lancichinetti et al., we create a word adjacency graph for each weekly bin. The
nodes in the graph are words, and edges indicate two words that
co-appear in tweets with higher probability than one would
expect at random (i.e. when the probability of such an edge in a
random network with the same degree sequence is less than
0.05).
We analyse the word co-occurrence graph using Markov
Stability , (in contrast with the use of Infomap in
Lancichinetti et al. ) to extract relevant communities (or groups) of words
that co-appear in tweets more consistently than with words
outside of their own group, and to consider groupings of
different granularity. , 
The communities of words are used as the input for the
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) topic
extraction method. Hence, the communities obtained with Markov stability
provide an initial guess for the topics to
which a tweet is likely to belong. Specifically, we assume that
each document (tweet) di belongs to a topic (community) tk with a prior probability
P0(di|tk) that is proportional to the number of words that
document di has in topic tk. LDA then proceeds iteratively to produce the posterior
probability that document di belongs to each topic tk: P(tk|di). LDA also produces P(hj|tk), the probability of finding word hj in a document given topic tk.
We make the assumption that, given their brevity, each tweet can
only belong to at most one topic. This entails
collecting only the assignments of topics to documents with
abnormally large values (i.e. the outliers) of
P(tk|di), and discarding all other values. A tweet is assigned to
a topic if P(tk|di) > pc(99) + IPR, where pc(99) is the 99th percentile
of the distribution and IPR is the inter-percentile
range: IPR = pc(99) − pc(1). shows an
example of this criterion where a tweet about the FDA's approval
of a diabetes drug is assigned to a topic that contains almost
2000 tweets about this event.
 This method for topic extraction is applied separately to each of the 43
weeks in our dataset. shows the number of topics in each week. The average
number of topics per week is 75.

## Themes from topics
In order to identify the dominant themes in the dataset, we applied open
thematic coding to the topics obtained in the previous section, for a random selection of
weeks. In total, we analysed in-depth 290 topics (from weeks 34, 39, 44 and 50
of 2013, and week 2 of 2014) containing 63,000 processed tweets with identified
topic.
The analysis consisted of reading all of the tweets in each topic, and assigning
a label to the topic according to the dominant theme present. In general, one or
two themes clearly dominated each topic. In some cases, tweets in one topic were
too mixed to identify one single theme; in this case, we did not assign a theme
label but we read the tweets to ensure that no new themes emerged within the
topic. As per standard practice, we continued this process until saturation;
that is, until no new themes emerged from the evaluation of topics, and the
repetition of existing theme labels was constant. This process was repeated twice by the same researcher to ensure
consistency. For ease of representation, we then grouped the themes identified
through open thematic coding into thematic groups, as seen in . 
 In summary, our analysis of content progressed as follows: first, we
automatically extracted weekly topics from the tweets; second,
we manually applied open thematic coding until saturation to obtain a list of
coded themes; and third, we manually placed these themes into
thematic groups.
In order to learn which themes dominated in tweets by the most influential
accounts, we also analysed the tweets by the top authority nodes. Here, tweets
belonging to each user were coded according to themes identified in the thematic
analysis.

## Interest communities in the follower network of authorities
To complement the textual analysis above, we also analysed the community
structure of the follower network of the 1000 accounts with the
highest cumulative authority score over the observation period. The giant
connected component of this network comprises 880 nodes, with the rest being
either isolated or suspended. To extract the communities in the networks, we
used the Markov stability community detection framework as described by
Beguerisse-Díaz et al. and Amor et al. ; we found a robust partition of the network into seven communities of
different size. We labelled the communities according to the type of accounts
that each contains (e.g. health agencies, diabetes advocacy, research scientists
and so on).

## Results

## The ‘what’ of diabetes on Twitter
As described above, the tweets in our dataset were first automatically grouped
into topics, and their content was then manually assigned themes using open
thematic coding. These themes fall into one of four broad thematic groups:
health information, news, social interaction and commercial. For tweets in these
groups, although the content and messages changed from week to week, the themes
remained constant. In addition to these four thematic groups, we identified a
fifth group of tweets with consistent and recurrent content. In this distinct
group, the specific content was repeated consistently across the data sample
(i.e. the tweets did not change from week to week). In , we present the thematic groups
and the themes within each group. contains a visual summary of the
thematic groups as ‘word-clouds’ with the 200 top words in each thematic group
(i.e. the words most likely to appear in the topics), and ‘word-clouds’ with the
usernames (scaled to size of number of tweets) of the 200 most active users
(available also as a supplementary spreadsheet, see the Data statement). Note
that the term diabetes has been removed from the analysis
because it appears in all of the tweets. It is important to remark that the most
active users (e.g. those who tweet the most) are not necessarily the most
important, or ‘central’ in the different networks, from the point of view of
information generation. 
 We now discuss in more detail the themes, topics and users found in each of the
five thematic groups.

## Health information tweets
One of the largest thematic groups consists of health information, research
findings, recommendations, advice and warnings, which are all abundantly
tweeted and retweeted. contains a word-cloud with the 200 most probable
words in the topics of this group (the total number of distinct terms is
29,647 in 90 topics from open thematic coding). The top 10 words in this
thematic group are: risk, type2, disea (disease, diseased), heart,
research, month, obe (obese, obesity), fruit, news, awar (aware,
awareness). Such terms are typical of tweets that fall within
this broad thematic group, as seen in and the supplementary
spreadsheet, as well as in at the end of the article
containing specific examples of tweets. The tweets in this group include
information about diabetes (its causes, treatments and cures); technologies
and pharmaceutical products that can be used for managing it; as well as
risks associated with the disease. Other health-related messages include
publicity about outreach and awareness events, activities and information.
These individual messages are typically not long-lived, and are only visible
at the top of a user's timeline for short periods of time. In general, there is a high turnover in the content that each user is
exposed to, even though many messages (e.g. those from newspapers and online
media) are posted multiple times. One of the themes that is less variable in
this regard concerns the dangers of sugar, sugar replacements and/or sodas.
Its frequency is unsurprising given the nature of diabetes as a problem of
blood sugar regulation. It is worth mentioning that the largest spike of
activity in our data (in November 2013, see ) is in part due to a surge
in tweets about World Diabetes Day on 14 November 2013. 
The health information in the collected sample does not appear to be directly
or specifically associated with health promotion groups. Instead, such
tweets are posted by users with different claims to expertise: individuals
who have experienced diabetes; personal trainers marketing their services;
companies selling lifestyle products or services; and other users with an
apparent interest in diabetes, cookery and healthy eating. These tweets
include advice about diabetes management and diagnosis, cookery and diet
tips, life stories and experiences, and links to articles about new
treatments or promising cures. Some tweets make claims about ‘curing’
diabetes, or offer natural or ‘miracle’ treatments. Advice of this nature
appears to be authoritative in tone and language, making it difficult to
distinguish it from advice disseminated by official health authorities.
Links contained in such tweets point to different types of authoritative
sources of content: from people who have first-hand experience of diabetes,
to marketing agencies trying to sell a particular food, supplement or
device, to hospitals attempting to communicate a specific health message.
Home remedies and ‘miracle’ cures appear alongside health tips and
recommendations. Digests and newsletters specifically containing
diabetes-related news (where the authors gather information from multiple
sources around the internet and supply it to their followers) appear at
different moments in time and mix all such messages together.

## News tweets
News-related tweets in the collected dataset typically list a headline of a
news article; they sometimes give the first line of the story and often also
provide a weblink to the complete story. These tweets rarely relate to
health promotion or education messages. contains the 200 most
probable words theme (out of 10,416 in 29 topics). The top 10 words are:
type2, risk, fruit, type1, eat, peopl (people, peoples),
blueberri (blueberry, blueberries), cut, research, juic (juice, juicer,
juicing, juicy). Some news-related tweets communicate research
breakthrough studies or technologies, which may be reported with messages of
hope for those who have diabetes, in particular T2. Just as common in this
thematic group are tweets with celebrity news (especially about celebrities
diagnosed with diabetes) and diverse news about people or pets with
diabetes. Another prominent theme in this group consists of tweets
disseminating news headlines about the pharmaceutical industry and stock
market. Diabetes treatment is a lucrative industry because diabetes is a
chronic condition that requires regular and ongoing treatment (rather than
cure), and so the demand for pharmaceutical products and lifestyle aids is inelastic. Furthermore, the number of people with T2 is projected to increase
dramatically in the future as a result of population ageing and obesity, which will further expand the market. contains examples of tweets
in this category. 

## Social interaction and humorous tweets
Twitter is not simply an information-sharing technology, but also a space
that permits (virtual) social interaction. , Social interaction
tweets use language differently to the thematic groups above: they are
typically informal in tone, their attention to spelling and grammar is
limited, and they often use exclamation marks and punctuation to express
fun, laughter, exasperation, sarcasm, irony, and abuse. The top 10 words
(out of 31,061 in 97 topics) in this group are: give, health, food,
die, think, fat, year, diet, diseas (disease, diseased), cau (cause,
causes, causing). See for the theme's
word-cloud. Users frequently joke about how what they have eaten is likely
to give them diabetes, with a wide variety of sugary foods and drinks, junk
foods and other ‘unhealthy’ options being cited. Such tweets indicate a
level of awareness of dietary guidelines and diabetes aetiology. Users have
conversations and interact about a diversity of topics in chatter that is
not necessarily directly related to diabetes but may include references to
it. People who have diabetes, particularly T1, also talk about their daily
experiences of their bodies, sugar management, and social acceptance or
stigma; such tweets may elicit retweets or messages of support from others.
Some users also talk in terms of “us” (with T1) and “them” (without). For
example, one user talks about T1 as being a ‘perk’ or feature he/she looks
for in a romantic partner:
I haven't stopped thinking about this girl for seriously like…a
month. AND she has diabetes! #diabetesperks
Such chatter often elicits retweets and replies, including
messages of support, or appreciation of a joke.
On the other hand, stigmatising comments, especially tweets which blame
diabetic people for bringing the disease on themselves through, for example,
poor diet or lack of physical activity, are abundant in the dataset. and the
supplementary spreadsheet contain numerous examples of profanity and
pejoratives. Faced with such messages, users with T1 diabetes frequently
point out that it is important to differentiate between T1 and T2,
insinuating that while T1 diabetes is not a person's ‘fault’, T2 may well
be. Other tweets include calling other people ‘diabetic’ as an insult and
wishing diabetes upon a person a user does not like. contains examples of social
interaction, humorous and stigmatising tweets. 
A distinct theme in this category consists of tweets with sexual innuendo. At
their mildest, such tweets refer to boy-band members or other (often
celebrity) ‘crushes’ that are so sweet they are diabetes-inducing. At their
most extreme, tweets joke that others' bodily fluids and genitals are so
sweet they are diabetes-inducing. These tweets contain weblinks to
pornography websites or other explicit material. Like the jokes discussed
earlier, these tweets reflect a baseline awareness of the links between
sugar and diabetes.

## Commercial tweets
As mentioned previously, diabetes is an industry with an attractive (and
expanding) market: it is a chronic condition which is currently incurable,
and it requires constant and regular testing, surveillance and treatment.
The top 10 words (out of 5841 words in 20 topics) in this group are:
type2, drug, job, manag (manage, manager), care, health,
marijuana, sale, test, forsal (for sale). See for the
theme's word-cloud and the most active users within this topic. People with
diabetes depend on different technologies, consumables, health services and
pharmaceutical products. This commercial dimension of diabetes is reflected
in many Twitter messages. Tweets concerned with stockmarket listing
announcements, FDA approval (e.g. ), court cases and
business recruitment (for example, a company hiring a new CEO or advertising
for new staff) are common. contains typical examples
of these types of message. 

## Recurrent content
While the specific content of tweets in different themes varies over time,
there are some tweets whose content appears consistently across time over
our dataset. The top 10 words (out of 8731 words in 19 topics) in this theme
are: sugar, eat, blood, sweet, risk, type2, drink, high, reduc
(reduce, reducing, reduction), health. contains this theme's
word-cloud. There is a large number of tweets repeating lyrics from two
specific rap songs, both of which contain the term ‘diabetes’ (see ). Of
these, ‘All the Time’ by Jeremih was released in 2013, so it is possible that the appearance of one
line from the song in many tweets in our sample may be linked to marketing
and initial responses to the song. The lyric repeated from the song relates
to the sexual innuendo discussed previously, so its continued presence may
result from it being used to express a joke rather than as a direct and
deliberate citation (indeed, the song name or artist are rarely mentioned).
The second song ‘I'm Still Happy’ by Lil Boosie (now Boosie Badazz) was released on a 2010 digital mixtape, suggesting that the lyric has
been consistently attractive to users over time. This lyric is about
determination in the face of challenges; the artist himself has T1 and has
talked with his fans about the challenge of managing his diabetes. 
In addition, several specific viral ‘facts’ and jokes are posted frequently
and repeatedly (for example, that tasting urine for sweetness was a method
to detect diabetes in the past, or that consuming alcohol moderately has been reported to reduce diabetes ). These few specific facts appear to intend to entertain or amuse.
They retain almost identical phrasing over time, with sustained popularity.
In fact, such facts are repeated more consistently over time than other
headlines, health messages and reports.
One of the most prominent instances of recurrent content in our data
corresponds to various versions of a mathematics-themed joke. A typical
instance of this joke is
Math Problems: If Jim has 50 chocolate bars, and eats 45, what does
he have? Diabetes. Jim has diabetes…
See for more versions of the same joke. This joke appears
consistently in our dataset (44,130 times including retweets, ). As with
other jokes about certain foods that are linked to diabetes, for this joke
to be amusing or entertaining (which its sheer volume suggests it is to
many) it requires that readers and retweeters have a minimum awareness that
certain foods might contribute to diabetes. To highlight the consistency
with which the mathematics joke appears in our data, we compare it in with the
number of tweets mentioning Tom Hanks. In October 2013, TomHanks announced
he had type 2 diabetes, which was discussed and shared widely on Twitter
(13,454 tweets in our dataset). In contrast to the mathematics joke, the
number of tweets about Tom Hanks displays an abrupt ‘exogenous peak’
(evidence of external events affecting the behaviour of a system ) followed by a steady relaxation to a baseline level.

## The ‘who’ of diabetes on Twitter
We now turn our focus to the analysis of the users in the retweet networks
extracted from our dataset. provides a visual illustration of the users that posted
more tweets in the topics contained within each of the thematic groups. Although
helpful, this figure does not provide information about how important these
users are perceived to be in the community, or the impact they have in the
conversation about diabetes. Therefore, in order to understand who are the key
users that influence diabetes-related content on Twitter over time, we examine
the hub and authority scores of all nodes for each of the weekly retweet
networks from June 2013 to January 2014 (see Section 2.3 for a description of
the methodology). We then examine the content generated by the most important
users (according to their hub and authority scores), and we finally analyse
their follower network (i.e. who follows whom within this group
of important users).

## Authorities and hubs in the weekly retweet networks

Authority nodes.
 shows the
score over time for the top 10 authorities ranked by their aggregate weekly
score. Of these authorities, nine are institutional accounts and one belongs
to an individual blogger, Kelly Kunik (@diabetesalish). This blogger is a
diabetes advocate who has had T1 for over 30 years and is involved with a
number of diabetes advocacy organisations. She also administrates the
Diabetesaliciousness blog (http://diabetesaliciousness.blogspot.co.uk/), which ‘spreads
diabetes validation through humour, ownership and advocacy’. Kunik's tweets
and blog posts are humorous, casual and interpersonal in style. 
 Three of the nine institutional accounts belong to stockmarket-listed
commercial ventures (i.e. established with the purpose of generating profits
for shareholders). Of these, two (@diabetesfacts and @EverydayHealth) belong
to Everyday Health Media. This company, which does not claim to have any
specific diabetes expertise, owns and operates a range of brands. It was
founded in 2002 by Ben Wolin (an entrepreneur who has previously worked for
Beliefnet, acquired by News Corp., PBS, Warner Brothers and Tribune
Interactive) and Mike Keriakos (a media sales expert who began his career at
Procter and Gamble and who built partnerships between Everyday Health and
AOL, Google, YouTube and the ABC). The other listed company account,
@Diabetes_Sanofi, belongs to the global pharmaceutical firm Sanofi, which
produces diabetes treatments.
Another three of the top 10 authorities correspond to national and
international diabetes associations: @AmDiabetesAssn (the American Diabetes
Association) @DiabetesAssoc (the Canadian diabetes association) and @WDD
(which belongs to the International Diabetes Federation). The latter account
is established especially to promote World Diabetes Day (14 November),
although it disseminates diabetes information and messages all year round.
These associations were originally founded by physicians and they focus on
advocacy and research.
The remaining three authorities in the top ten belong to not-for-profit
organisations founded by people who have experienced T1. These organisations
target T1 specifically: one is a funding body (@JDRF, an organisation
previously known as Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation), and the other
two are blog platforms that host discussions and disseminate information
(@diabetesblogs and @DiabetesSocMed).
 shows the
complement of the cumulative distribution function (CDF) (i.e. 1 − CDF) of
the aggregate authority scores (blue triangles). The distribution of
authorities shows that over 95% of users involved in a retweet event do
not feature as an authority at all (in our weekly
binning). Users who do attain a non-zero authority score fall into two
categories. 
Users with a sporadic or marginal appearance (i.e. they appear in
only a handful of weeks and/or not in the giant components of
the weekly co-citation networks). These users are concentrated
in the long plateau in .
Users who appear more regularly usually as part of the weekly
giant connected components. These users constitute the top 2% in
the heavy tail of high scores in .
 In the supplementary spreadsheet, we provide the top 1000 accounts by
aggregate authority score as a further resource for research. As with the
top 10 users discussed above, this longer list contains accounts of known
commercial, public and advocacy organisations, as well as medical schools,
hospitals, individual activists and bloggers. In addition, we note the
appearance of academic publishers (@bmj_latest, ranked 55; @NEJM, ranked
67); comedians (@ChelcieRice, ranked 28; @SherriEShepherd, ranked 85); news
and media outlets (@medical_xpress, ranked 40; @foxnewshealth, ranked 82);
entertainment (@FoodPorn, ranked 197); and large health-oriented
organisations (@WHO, ranked 88; @NIH, ranked 111), all of which have a focus
much broader than diabetes.
These accounts disseminate content and information about diabetes on Twitter
efficiently, with messages that elicit a wide, measurable response through
re-tweets and replies from the general population. The sustained presence of
the top authorities (i.e. the sustained strictly positive authority score in
 ) is an
indication that these users consistently produce content that resonates with
the general Twitter-using population.
Hub nodes. The top 10 accounts by aggregate hub score have a
markedly different character to the authorities, both in behaviour and types
of users. In the context of a retweet network, hubs are connectors; they
forward information generated by authorities across Twitter. The top
accounts by aggregate hub score over time (see and the supplementary
spreadsheet) contain: content aggregators (i.e. accounts that gather
internet content for re-use such as @1MEDICAL2NEWS or @Diabetes_Month);
accounts designed to promote products such as @reTouchMD; automated accounts
(e.g. so-called ‘robots’); and some individual accounts. Some of these
accounts have been suspended (@shaschneider1); have become inactive
(@1MEDICAL2NEWS); or have seemingly changed hands (@abdSauce) since the data
was originally collected. 
 These hub nodes have a highly variable number of followers. For instance, in
August 2016 @Diabetes_Month had over 20,000 followers, whereas @abdSauce had
about 50. What all hubs have in common is a high rate of retweeting and a
feeble, unsustained presence throughout the observation period. shows the
scores over time for the top 10 hubs based on aggregate score, along with
the number of weeks in which they have a non-zero score. The data shows
that, in most cases, the high aggregate hub score is the result of a
‘one-off’ surge. We thus term these ‘intermittent
hubs’.
The biographical information provided by these users about who they are and
what they do is sparse, often vague and difficult to corroborate. For
example, the account @1MEDICAL2NEWS claims to be a Dr Richard Billard from
Los Angeles, but while the account had a high level of activity on Twitter
in our data (and until August 2014) there is no other evidence online that
this doctor exists. Given the extremely active Twitter account, it is
unusual that this doctor has absolutely no other online presence. The rate
at which this particular user retweeted (on average, 65 times per day),
together with the lack of any original tweets (or non-retweets), further
suggests that it could have been an automated account assigned an
authoritative-sounding alias.
 shows the
complementary CDF of aggregate hub scores for all users (red squares). In
contrast with the authority scores, most users (∼90%) have a non-zero
aggregate hub score), and the split between low scoring and high scoring
hubs is more even, with around 50% of the ∼1.2 million users contained in
the heavy-tailed part of the distribution. There is a distinct bend at the
right end of the heavy tailed regime of the distribution that contains the
top 20 users by aggregate hub score, half of which have been discussed
above.
To obtain a clearer picture of ‘persistent hubs’, we created
an additional activity ranking of hubs by number of weeks in which the users
have a non-zero hub score ( ). The top hub according to this persistence score is
still @1MEDICAL2NEWS, which is a hub in each of the 31 weeks for which we
computed the hub scores. Another noteworthy appearance is @diabetesalish,
who is also a top 10 authority, and who was active as a hub in each week as
well. The top 1000 (intermittent and persistent) hub accounts are included
in the supplementary spreadsheet as a resource for further research.
Authorities versus hubs. Our results in – show that the behaviour of the top
authorities and hubs in our data is fundamentally different: top authorities
tend to have a more sustained presence throughout the observation period
than top hubs. We therefore investigate the combined characterisation of
users in terms of joint aggregate hub and authority scores. shows the
accounts with high hub and authority scores (i.e. in the global top 2% in
both rankings). It is relevant to study users that have a prominent role as
both hub and authority. These include not only the
blogger @diabetesalish and the advocacy group @DiabetesSocMed, but also the
following users (highlighted in black in ). 
@JDRFAdvocacy: a US Government-funded organisation which focuses
on building support for T1D research; the advocacy account of
@JDRF; (authority rank, hub rank) = (38, 234).
@askmanny: Manny Hernandez, a prominent Venezuelan–American
diabetes advocate who has had diabetes since 2002, and whose
professional expertise is in social media, technology and health
(authority rank, hub rank) = (12, 208).
@amidiabetic: Diabetes advocate and writer Stuart Wimbles, who
runs a diabetes information website and reportedly has T1D,
although there is little additional information about him
online; (authority rank, hub rank) = (20, 366).
@DiabetesMine: A website/blog/newsletter run by Healthline, a
consumer health information website. The company has a large
team of staff and a panel of three medical advisors (a Professor
of Emergency Medicine, a drug information specialist, and a
pharmacist) who provide insights into user needs; (authority
rank, hub rank) = (13, 208),
@KayleighAdams3: Account currently suspended; (authority rank,
hub rank) = (300, 64).
@theNGdoc: Nigeria Diabetes Online Community, a non-government
organisation launched in 2013 to provide empowerment, education
and support for diabetics in Nigeria. An original idea by
Cherise Showkley (@DiabetesSocMed), the site is officially
recognised by the International Diabetes Federation, and two of
its Directors are medical doctors; (authority rank, hub rank) =
(127, 200).
@BattleDiabetes: Account of informationaboutdiabetes.com, a website with no
details about who it belongs to, but which traces to Jill Knapp,
a T2 diabetic who is an advocate for the American Diabetes
Association; (authority rank, hub rank) = (49, 442).
@KellyRawlings: Diabetes advocate, T1 diabetic, journalist, and
editor of Diabetes Forecast, a publication of the American
Diabetes Association; (authority rank, hub rank) = (107,
387).
@diaTribeNews: Account of the diaTribe Foundation, a non-profit
organisation founded by T1 diabetic Kelly Close to help people
with diabetes to live better lives. Close was previously a
financial sector analyst and also runs Close Concerns, a
healthcare information firm focusing on diabetes and obesity;
the Foundation Board contains one medical doctor; (authority
rank, hub rank) = (171, 273).
@MyGlu: T1D Exchange, a non-profit organisation providing
connectivity for people whose lives are affected by diabetes.
The site's leadership team contains a physician and pediatric
endocrinologist, but it also makes a clear disclaimer that
discussions on the site should not be a substitute for medical
advice; (authority rank, hub rank) = (122, 326).
@abdSauce: Top hub account, has been taken down or switched hands
since data were collected; a Pinterest account with the same
handle belongs to Rasheed Adewole, who works with the Nigeria
Diabetes Online Community (@theNGdoc); (authority rank, hub
rank) = (676, 6),
@dr_bolajidauda: Top hub account, no longer active at the time of
analysis; (authority rank, hub rank) = (637, 7).
In addition to posting messages that evoke a broad response (as
authorities), these users also engage by retweeting and replying to messages
posted by other users (as hubs). The empty upper-right corner in indicates
that there are no accounts at the very top as both hubs and
authorities. 
 

## Extended analysis of authorities: content and relationships
The analysis so far has established the persistence and relevance of a
relatively small number of authorities in the collected retweet networks. To
further our understanding of the group of authorities, we perform two
further analyses. First, we analyse in detail the thematic content produced
by the top 10 authorities. Second, we extract the network of followers
within the top 1000 authorities and characterise the interest communities
within the network of authorities. , 
Topical analysis of authorities. We analyse into which of the
topics and themes obtained through our earlier analysis of the whole
dataset, the tweets from the top 10 authorities are classified. All of the
top 10 authorities post messages frequently and consistently in all the
themes listed under the thematic group ‘Health information’ in . Some
‘News’ related tweets are also featured, although these are less common.
Two accounts, @Diabetes_Sanofi and @diabetesblogs, do not appear to be
dominated by any one of the themes listed, but contain a mixture of all the
‘Health Information’ themes. Two other accounts, @WDD and @AmDiabetesAssn
participate in themes that are related to outreach and advocacy activities,
events and news. The not-for-profit organisation and research funding body
@JDRF produces tweets that contain life stories and experiences of diabetes
sufferers more than any other top 10 authority.
Two accounts, @diabetesfacts and @EverydayHealth (owned by the same company)
focus predominantly on lifestyle and diet-related tips, hints and advice.
Unlike the other authorities, these do not produce outreach or advocacy
messages at all. Typical messages posted by these accounts include:
@diabetesfacts: Tips on adjusting your insulin pump during exercise
from diabetes educator Gary Scheiner @Integ_Diabetes – http://t.co/28Hx8c7PES
 @EverydayHealth: Medical costs for people with #diabetes are more
than 2x those of people without it. Are you budgeting for diabetes?
http://t.co/2ohMOVJvwp
 @EverydayHealth: The best beverages to quench your thirst with
#diabetes http://t.co/HbR4poFfF5
The vast majority of the tweets from these two accounts provide
a link back to the company's website, which offers articles containing
health and lifestyle advice.
The messages posted by the accounts @diabetesalish and @DiabetesSocMed are
dominated by a mix of social interactions, banter and advocacy. They
participate in news topics, but to a lesser degree than the other top 10
authorities. Their tone is different to the others: it is informal and
conversational rather than authoritative or informational. For example:
@DianetesSocMed: Happy Mother's (aunts, fur baby moms, god moms,
etc.) to all the women in the diabetes community! Have a great
day!
and
@diabetesalish: #dblog:Dear240 #bgnow: You R but fleeting &
temporary, I am permanently fabulous. #Iwin #diabetes #doc #dsma
http://t.co/w9iZw83f97
which links to a blog posting about the user's experience with
diabetes. Two other users, @diabetesblogs and @DiabetesAssoc, also tweet
some social and interpersonal messages.
Two accounts, @diabetesblogs and @diabetesalish, occasionally feature
marketing or product promotion messages. Such instances of marketing are to
be expected, as some bloggers generate income by advertising goods and
services, and sponsoring blog advertising in this way is not regulated by
governments. In this case and others, while marketing might not be made
explicit to other users, it is still possible that ostensibly non-commercial
accounts are also practising marketing, especially accounts owned by
stockmarket-listed firms.
The topics where the highest number of top 10 authorities converge are
related to advocacy and awareness. For example, a topic about Diabetes Blog
Week in May 2013 gathered 6 of the top 10 authorities: @diabetesalish,
@diabetesblogs, @DiabetesSocMed, @Diabetes_Sanofi, @diabetesfacts and
@EverydayHealth. In other weeks, the top 10 authorities appear together in
topics related to promotion of blogs by diabetics (using the hashtag
#dblogs, which appears in 15,901 tweets in the data set), and diabetes
social media awareness (using the hashtag #dsma, which is promoted by
@DiabetesSocMed and appears in 10,945 tweets).
Analysis of the authority follower network. In order to
understand how the users with high authority scores interact with each
other, we have mined Twitter further to extract and analyse the
follower network of the top 1000 authorities by
aggregate score (see the supplementary spreadsheet). In this network, each
of the top 1000 authorities is a node and a directed connection between two
nodes indicates that the source node ‘follows’ the target node on
Twitter.
This directed network has a large weakly connected component of 880 nodes
(see ):
the rest of the nodes are either isolated (a handful are connected to only
one node) or have since been deleted or blocked. We work below with this
network of 880 Twitter users and their follower relationships. 
 It is important to note that, unlike the retweet networks studied up to this
point, the follower network is not ‘conversation-centric’. In a retweet
network, the existence of a connection is the result of one user retweeting
a message containing the term ‘diabetes’ at least once. In contrast, in the
follower network a directed edge indicates an interest by the ‘follower’ to
receive information from the ‘followed’ on a more permanent basis. This
declaration of interest may reflect more general information beyond the
specific retweets about diabetes.
As discussed above, the top 1000 authorities form a heterogeneous group of
users, including, among others: public health institutions and foundations;
diabetes advocates, researchers, activists and patients; hospitals and
medical schools; academic and mainstream publishers, media and
personalities; companies. The most central nodes in this follower network
according to pagerank , (a proxy for
importance) are users with a broad reach and not diabetes-specific: 
Centers for Disease Control & Prevention (CDC), @CDCgov
(ranked 65 as an authority in the previous section);
National Institutes of Health, @NIH (authority rank 111);
New York Times-Health, @NYTHealth (authority
rank 150);
World Health Organization, @WHO (authority rank 88);
CDC flu updates, @CDCFlu (authority rank 87);
recall information from the US Food and Drug Administration
(FDA), @FDArecalls (authority rank 651);
news about medical research and health advice from the
New York Times, @nytimeswell (authority
rank 412);
National Public Radio-Health, @NPRHealth (authority rank
336);
US Office on Women's Health, @womenshealth (authority rank
93);
New England Journal of Medicine, @NEJM (authority rank 67).
The high centrality of accounts relating to health research and
information (@NIH, @NEJM, @CDCgov, @WHO, @CDCFlu, @womenshealth),
health-specific news media (@NYTHealth, @nytimeswell, @NPRHealth), health
advocacy (@WHO) and commercial activities relating to foods and medicines
(@FDArecalls) indicates that health in general is a key concern to users in
this network. Diabetes is one health concern, but it is not isolated from
others.
Beyond a ranking of centrality, it is important to extract information about
relevant communities in this follower network, so as to reveal information
about who the authorities are and about their interests. A community in a
network is usually defined as a highly cohesive group of nodes, with
above-expected connections within the group. In directed networks such as the follower network, we define
communities in terms of flows of information, i.e. as groups of nodes in
which interest or information is retained and circulated. To extract such
interest communities, we use the Markov stability framework, , a
dynamical framework especially well-suited to extract directed
communities. , In this follower network, we found a robust
partition into seven main interest communities ( ) and six additional
communities with three nodes or fewer. Each of the seven larger communities
contains a distinct group of users characterised by domain of activity,
background, interests or employer (see supplementary spreadsheet for the
full list). 
C0 Health and medicine generalist accounts. This
community, the largest in the network (30% of the nodes, light
blue in ), contains many accounts with high pagerank
(including all the top 10 by pagerank listed above). Most
members are related in general to health and medicine. For
example, public health bodies, hospitals, medical schools,
academic publishers, the health divisions of mainstream media
and commercial entities.
C1 Diabetes-related users. This community (28% of
nodes, in green) contains the overwhelming majority of the
diabetes-centred accounts discussed earlier, including
associations, funders, advocates and patients and companies. All
of the top 10 authority accounts in belong to this
community.
C2 Lifestyle and well-being users. This community
contains accounts related to lifestyle and wellbeing advice,
publications, natural and alternative remedies, detox, health
and organic foods and products (17% of the nodes, in red).
C3 Science writers and media. This community
contains science writers (e.g. @bengoldacre) and popular
scientific publications, British media, and biotech-industry
related accounts (11% of the nodes, in orange).
C4 Celebrity and wider public. This community
contains celebrities, men's publications, and celebrity doctor
@DrOz (5% of nodes, in dark blue).
C5 Tesco-related. In this community, most accounts
are either owned by the UK retailer Tesco or by its employees
(3% of the nodes, in yellow).
C6 Humour. This community contains comedians,
parody, novelty accounts and others (2% of the nodes, in
purple).
Through this succinct analysis of the follower network of authorities we
obtain a clearer global picture of: the general participants in the
diabetes-specific discussions analysed earlier; the groups of interests that
are present; the audiences involved in the debate; and how they relate to
each other. For instance, as shows, the largest
community (C0), which contains generalist health and medicine agencies, is
clearly seen as a reference by all other communities, and especially by the
three other large communities: C1 (Diabetes), C2 (Lifestyle) and C3 (Science
writers and media). There are other clear asymmetries in the
follower-followed relationships: C2 accounts strongly follow C1 accounts
(but this following is not reciprocated to the same extent), whereas C2
users do not strongly follow C3 accounts (which largely ignore C2). The
connection between C1 and C3 is not strong in either direction. The presence
of the UK retailer Tesco as a distinct community (C5) in this network is
also noteworthy; Tesco is a high-profile supporter of the charity Diabetes
UK (@DiabetesUK, in C1; https://www.diabetes.org.uk/tesco/ accessed on 8 October
2015). As we have noted previously, humour is a prominent feature in our
datasets, and it makes another significant appearance here. Community C6
accounts, which contain many comedy and parody accounts, have also been
observed in other follower networks obtained from different topical issues. To provide a visual interpretation of the communities found, also
contains word-clouds constructed from the Twitter biographies of the members
in each community. The word-clouds are aligned with our descriptions of the
interest communities. In particular, the members of communities C0, C1, C2,
C3 and C5 use consistently-themed language to describe themselves. In
contrast, the members of the celebrity and humour communities (C4 and C6)
are heterogeneous in their self-descriptions, yet clearly identifiable
through examination of their usernames. As noted by Beguerisse-Díaz et al., the word-clouds obtained from the biographies can be thought of as an
independent annotation or ‘self-description’ of the communities. It is
important to remark that the biographies were not used in the analysis of
the network.

## Discussion
Twitter is a source of information and interaction for a growing section of the
world's population. Hence, understanding online conversations around health issues on Twitter
(and social media platforms more broadly) is important, especially since such
platforms are frequently considered as possible tools in public health outreach and
health promotion initiatives. , , – Such initiatives are designed
based on extended assumptions about the Twitter health landscape, the messages which
dominate it and the interactions of users within it. However, detailed data-driven
research can help ascertain the validity of such assumptions and enrich our
understanding of the online landscape and its implications for population
health.
In our study, references to diabetes on Twitter fall into four broad thematic groups:
health information, news, social exchanges and commercial messages ( ). While these
groups define a body of consistent themes, specific messages are largely irregular
and variable over time, both in their language and content.
In contrast, there exists an additional group of highly consistent messages that are
propagated through popular culture and humour, including jokes, song lyrics or viral
‘facts’. Such messages are consistent in content and style over time as they
continue to be posted and shared. Humorous tweets, banter, jokes and social
engagement (both supportive and stigmatising) are common in our data. Tweets with
such content have a different tone and vocabulary than tweets containing
authoritative posts, formal health messages or news headlines. This observation is
in line with previous reports, which have found that the most retweeted tweets are
emotionally evocative (either humorous or evoking anger). , , Moreover, we also find that
these tweets appear on Twitter more persistently over time than other tweets in the
sample ( ). From a
health promotion perspective, this highlights a need to consider not only the
consistency of slogans or lines in the messages, but also their style and sentiment.
The importance of sentiment in promoting dietary choices has also been discussed in
the literature. – 
The abundance of jokes and sexual innuendo about foods and substances that contribute
to diabetes indicates at least a basic understanding of diabetes, some of its causes
and its connection to blood sugar. The embedding of such fundamental understandings
about diabetes in online social media may be the result of health efforts in
nutrition over the past decades. This observation is at odds with assumptions that
more health education is required to help people to understand the sorts of foods
which might contribute to the development of diabetes. Furthermore, such use of
humour may imply a sense of powerlessness to make ‘healthy’ choices as users
seemingly mock health advice when faced with realities of the food and drink
products they encounter on a daily basis. 
When it comes to the ‘who’ of diabetes on Twitter, our analysis shows a clear
separation between the relatively few accounts that produce the most engaging
content (authorities), and the broader audiences that disseminate and respond to it
(hubs), as seen in . Only about 10% of the accounts in our dataset (approximately 120,000)
produce tweets that evoke some (heterogeneous) response ( ). Among the top authority accounts,
we find a mix of stockmarket-listed firms; public, civil and grassroots
organisations; and individuals who have experience as diabetes patients and
care-givers. The engagement levels of all authorities are sustained throughout the
observation period, and it is difficult to clearly discern between these different
groups based on the content, style or theme of their tweets alone. These
observations reflect the fact that the health landscape today no longer consists of
government and citizens alone. Other entities (such as commercial agents, individual bloggers and automated
accounts) also exist and exert influence on the health promotion landscape, and on
the conversations taking place around such themes. Their motives are sometimes
challenging to discern, and sponsorship arrangements can be difficult to identify or
regulate. Similar findings have been noted with respect to Facebook, another social
media platform used for health care and communication. Such entities, which are assumed by health authorities to be extrinsic to the
healthcare arena, need to be acknowledged and considered in successful strategies
for health promotion.
Our results show that the role of hubs in disseminating information is less
persistent over time than the role played by authorities in generating information.
Hubs are generally far less transparent about their identity. Some accounts, for
example, claim to have medical expertise, but these claims cannot always be
verified. As a result, it is difficult for Twitter users to be ‘informed citizens’
and discern legitimate from misleading or discredited information, or a bona-fide
health expert from a social-media expert, or a marketer with business motivations
from a marketer with public health ones. Establishing the credibility of an account
by the number of messages, followers or even through the published user profile, for
example, can therefore be misleading. This poses challenges to the use of Twitter as
a health promotion platform, and requires the use of sophisticated techniques (e.g.
collaboration of health professionals with practitioners of network and data
science). Further research and engagement with ‘real’ people, and not simply their
virtual online personae which represent them, is necessary to elucidate the
expertise and intentions of users generating some of the key diabetes-related
content on Twitter.
This research has implications for health policy makers and health promotion
practitioners. We show that key authorities in relation to diabetes on Twitter are
not simply those with accredited and formally recognised health expertise, but also
bloggers (men and women), patients, celebrities, advocacy organisations,
stockmarket-listed firms, news media and automated accounts. There are diverse
stakeholders that use Twitter; even when limited to the English language, these
accounts originate from a range of countries (notably, several Nigerian accounts
have prominent roles as both hubs and authorities). It may be that establishing
long-term collaborations with the most influential users, as well as enhancing the
connections between different communities of users, may be more effective health
promotion strategies than running short-term government-led campaigns and slogans
aimed at informing people who have (or who are at risk of developing) diabetes. In
addition, it is important that policy makers understand what social media users
already know about health before new initiatives are introduced: simply telling
users what they already appear to know, for example, about which foods contribute to
diabetes, may hinder health agencies' impact and credibility.
Our findings also have implications for programme evaluation, where ‘number of
tweets/followers’ is commonly assumed to equate to ‘impact’. Other metrics that
leverage the structure of the network of interactions to consider relative impact,
or a sustained high-centrality presence over time (e.g. via centrality metrics such
as hub-authority scores) may more closely reflect the reality of Twitter use for
health purposes.
The health information landscape on Twitter is complex, and it cannot be assumed that
people can easily discern ‘good’ and ‘bad’ information. Our observations echo
previous reports that there is more information available to consumers than they
have the capacity to process and understand. , In this context, public health
approaches and messages that simply aim to ‘inform’ the public might be insufficient
in themselves, or even be counterproductive as they make a complicated cacophony of
messages even busier. This is particularly relevant for health policy makers. For
instance, information that is disseminated by bloggers, stockmarket-listed firms or
automated accounts may be in line with broad health recommendations (and indeed may
provide a valuable service to users), but without clear distinction from
‘legitimate’ health advice, such information might equally push particular aspects
of a commercial agenda that could lead to harm or greater health costs in future. In
this case, public health agencies may have to develop novel approaches to ensure
that the electronic health information landscape is one that promotes healthy
citizens and not only sweet profits.

## Data statement
The Supplementary Spreadsheet that accompanies this article, with the lists of the
top users and topic keywords is available from the publisher's website. The IDs of
the tweets used in this research and the supplementary spreadsheet can be downloaded
from the ReShare UK Data Service repository.70

## Supplementary Material

## Supplementary material

## Acknowledgements
We thank E. Garduño for useful advice and discussions on how best to gather and
process the data. We thank H. Harrington and S. Yaliraki for fruitful discussions
and comments on the manuscript.

## Appendix

 
 
 
 
 

## Contributorship
MBD and AM researched literature and conceived the study, carried out quantitative
(MBD) and qualitative (AM) data analysis, and prepared the first draft of the
manuscript. GGH and MBD collected the data. MBD, AM, MB and SU wrote the paper. All
authors reviewed and edited the manuscript and approved the final version of the
manuscript.

## Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

## Ethical approval
Not applicable.

## Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article: MBD acknowledges support from the
James S. McDonnell Foundation Postdoctoral Program in Complexity Science/Complex
Systems Fellowship Award (#220020349-CS/PD Fellow). MB acknowledges funding from the
EPSRC (grant numbers EP/I017267/1 and EP/N014529/1).

## Guarantor
MBD/AM.

## Peer review
This manuscript was reviewed by Tim Robbins, University of Warwick and Dhiraj Murthy,
Goldsmiths, University of London.

## Supplemental material
The online supplementary materials are available at http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/suppl/10.1177/2055207616688841.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Supplementary material