Eur Stroke JEur Stroke J3645eso101688446ESOEuropean Stroke Journal2396-98732396-9881Oxford University PressPMC6571507PMC6571507.1657150765715073123648010.1177/239698731880871910.1177_23969873188087191GuidelineAction Plan for Stroke in Europe 2018–2030
NorrvingBo DavalosAntoni DichgansMartin CordonnierCharlotte GuekhtAlla KutlukKursad MikulikRobert WardlawJoanna RichardEdo NabaviDarius MolinaCarlos BathPhilip M Stibrant SunnerhagenKatharina RuddAnthony DrummondAvril PlanasAnna CasoValeria on behalf of the Action Plan for Stroke in Europe Working
Group 
1Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Neurology, Skåne
University Hospital, Lund University, Lund, Sweden
2Stroke Alliance for Europe, London, UK
3Department of Neurosciences, Hospital Universitari Germans Trias
i Pujol, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
4Institute for Stroke and Dementia Research, University Hospital,
Ludwig-Maximilians University, Munich, and Munich Cluster of Systems Neurology
(SyNergy), Munich, Germany
5Department of Neurology, CHU Lille, Lille, France
6Clinical Center for Neuropsychiatry, Russian National Research
Medical University, Moscow, Russia
7Department of Neurology, Stroke Unit, University of Dokuz Eylul,
Izmir, Turkey
8International Clinical Research Center and Neurology Department,
St Anne's University Hospital Brno and Masaryk University Brno, Czech
Republic
9Centre for Clinical Neurosciences, Edinburgh Imaging and UK
Dementia Research Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
10Department of Neurology, Radboud University Medical Centre,
Nijmegen, and Department of Neurology, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands
11Department of Neurology with Stroke Unit, Vivantes Hospital
Neukölln, Berlin, Germany
12Stroke Unit, Department of Neurology, Hospital Vall d´Hebron
Barcelona, Spain
13Stroke Trials Unit, Division of Clinical Neuroscience,
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
14Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, Sahlgrenska
University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden
15Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, Stroke NHS England
and Royal College of Physicians, London, UK
16School of Health Sciences, University of Nottingham,
Nottingham, UK
17Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques de Barcelona (IIBB),
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona,
Spain
18Stroke Unit, Department of Medicine and Cardiovascular
Medicine, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy*See Appendix 1 for the full list of the working group members.
Bo Norrving, Department of Clinical
Sciences, Neurology, Department of Neurology, Skåne University Hospital, S-221
86 Lund, Sweden. Email: bo.norrving@med.lu.se291020181220183433646530933626820181102018291020182406201925062025© European Stroke Organisation 20182018European Stroke
Organisationhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which
permits non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work
without further permission provided the original work is attributed as
specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).

## Abstract
Two previous pan-European consensus meetings, the 1995 and 2006 Helsingborg
meetings, were convened to review the scientific evidence and the state of
current services to identify priorities for research and development and to set
targets for the development of stroke care for the decade to follow. Adhering to
the same format, the European Stroke Organisation (ESO) prepared a European
Stroke Action Plan (ESAP) for the years 2018 to 2030, in cooperation with the
Stroke Alliance for Europe (SAFE). The ESAP included seven domains: primary
prevention, organisation of stroke services, management of acute stroke,
secondary prevention, rehabilitation, evaluation of stroke outcome and quality
assessment and life after stroke. Research priorities for translational stroke
research were also identified. Documents were prepared by a working group and
were open to public comments. The final document was prepared after a workshop
in Munich on 21–23 March 2018. Four overarching targets for 2030 were
identified: (1) to reduce the absolute number of strokes in Europe by 10%, (2)
to treat 90% or more of all patients with stroke in Europe in a dedicated stroke
unit as the first level of care, (3) to have national plans for stroke
encompassing the entire chain of care, (4) to fully implement national
strategies for multisector public health interventions. Overall, 30 targets and
72 research priorities were identified for the seven domains. The ESAP provides
a basic road map and sets targets for the implementation of evidence-based
preventive actions and stroke services to 2030.

Strokeepidemiologypreventiontreatmentstroke servicesstrategic planningtreatiesquality assuranceEuropeEuropean Stroke Organisationpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC

## Introduction
Stroke remains one of the leading causes of death and disability in Europe, and
projections show that with a ‘business as usual’ approach, the burden of stroke will
not decrease in the next decade or beyond. An important contributing factor to this
is that the number of older persons in Europe is rising, with a projected increase
of 35% between 2017 and 2050. Fortunately, there is compelling evidence that stroke is highly preventable,
treatable and manageable, and the potential exists to drastically reduce the burden
of stroke and its long-term consequences. However, this requires the joint actions
of ministries of health, other governmental bodies, scientific and stroke support
organisations, healthcare professionals, clinical and preclinical researchers and
the pharmaceutical and device industries.
To this end, two previous pan-European consensus meetings, the 1995 and 2006
Helsingborg meetings, , 
were convened to review the scientific evidence and the state of current services
and to set targets for the development of stroke care for the decade to follow. The
European Stroke Organisation (ESO) has prepared a European Stroke Action Plan (ESAP)
for the years 2018 to 2030, in cooperation with the Stroke Alliance for Europe
(SAFE). The ESAP adheres to the format of the Helsingborg Declarations, presenting a
review of the ‘state of the art’, the state of current services, research and
development priorities and targets for a series of domains in stroke care
(organisation of stroke services, management of acute stroke, prevention,
rehabilitation, evaluation of stroke outcome and quality assessment). The ESAP
includes two additional domains, on primary prevention and life after stroke, along
with research and development priorities for translational stroke research. ESAP
2018‒2030 complements the WHO Global Action Plan on non-communicable diseases (NCDs)
2013–2020, the WHO-Europe NCD Action Plan and the UN Sustainable Development Goals
for 2015 to 2030.

## Overarching targets for 2030
For each domain of the 2018 to 2030 ESAP, specific targets are being set, as detailed
in the following sections. Beyond these targets, four overarching targets for 2030
have been identified: to reduce the absolute number of strokes in Europe by 10%
to treat 90% or more of all patients with stroke in Europe in a dedicated
stroke unit as the first level of care
to have national plans for stroke encompassing the entire chain of care
from primary prevention to life after stroke.
to fully implement national strategies for multisector public health
interventions to promote and facilitate a healthy lifestyle, and reduce
environmental (including air pollution), socioeconomic and educational
factors that increase the risk of stroke.

## Methods
The work was led by a steering committee. The documents were prepared by working
groups for each of the seven domains, with patient organisation representatives in
each domain. Research priorities were identified by two persons for each domain. One
working group prepared research priorities for translational stroke research. The
draft documents were open to public comments during a one-month period. The final
document was prepared after a workshop in Munich on 21–23 March 2018 that was
streamed live.

## Primary prevention

## State of the art
Primary prevention of stroke is part of both primary healthcare and public
health. Stroke prevention, which involves both pharmacological and
non-pharmacological interventions, targets many of the same risk factors as
those involved in other cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) and other NCDs. Thus,
primary prevention of stroke has two integral components, which can be
implemented at different levels. First, measures to promote a healthy lifestyle,
such as smoking cessation and reducing alcohol intake, can be implemented at the
individual patient level. Second, reductions in air pollution and improvements
in socioeconomic and educational status require action at governmental and
societal level.

## Risk factor modification
Ten modifiable risk factors may account for the vast majority of the
population attributable risk of stroke, across age groups, genders and
ethnicity. These risk factors are: hypertension, smoking, dyslipidaemia,
unhealthy diet, physical inactivity, obesity, diabetes mellitus, cardiac
disease, excessive alcohol intake and psychosocial factors. There is overwhelming evidence that the treatment of cardiovascular
risk factors reduces the risk of stroke, but the target levels in primary
prevention are less stringent than those in secondary prevention and depend
on comorbidities such as diabetes mellitus and active smoking; these targets
may differ between men and women. There is good evidence to support risk factor modification as primary
prevention in individuals aged 40‒75 years, but the optimal target levels
for the management of hypertension and dyslipidaemia in persons outside this
age range are less well established. , 
Hypertension, diabetes mellitus, dyslipidaemia, smoking, unhealthy diet,
obesity, physical inactivity and atrial fibrillation (AF) are the strongest
and most common modifiable risk factors for stroke, , and most
guidelines include these risk factors. Based on an extensive literature,
most primary prevention guidelines recommend the use of risk tables, which
take age and comorbidities into account. In a European setting, the
Systematic COronary Risk Evaluation (SCORE) tables, accessible through the
European Society of Cardiology website, are appropriate, since they are
derived from a mixed European population. An adapted version for older
people, SCORE-OP, is available. 
Self-management, with or without the use of technology such as eHealth and
mobile health (mHealth) initiatives, may offer the possibility of delivering
primary prevention in a range of healthcare settings, including
geographically remote areas in Europe. However, the expected impact on risk
factor improvement is modest at best, and sustainability of effects is a
major challenge. A consistent and constructive collaboration between healthcare
professionals in primary, secondary and tertiary care is likely to be
essential for sustainable primary prevention.

## Primary prevention in public health
Primary prevention can be delivered at the individual, community and
population levels. Public health interventions targeting highly prevalent
risk factors that do not require pharmacological intervention, including
discouraging smoking and encouraging a healthy lifestyle, should be
implemented at several levels; such interventions may include legislative
changes, media campaigns, labelling of food and educational and preventive
measures in schools, workplaces and the community. Although there is only
limited high-quality evidence for a direct effect on the incidence of stroke
and CVD, initiatives such as building cycle lanes, guiding people to stairs,
serving healthy food in public places, smoking bans, decreasing the amount
of salt and sugar in processed food and soft drinks, health education and
public health campaigns to increase awareness of modifiable stroke risk
factors are sensible public health interventions and should be pursued.
From a population perspective, it is not sufficient to target only those
individuals at high risk of CVD. The majority of strokes will develop in
persons with low or intermediate risk, and hence broad prevention strategies targeting the wider population
are indicated, particularly considering the high prevalence of some of the
strongest risk factors for stroke. A combination of opportunistic screening
of those at increased risk (based, for example, on demographic
characteristics) and systematic screening for risk factors is probably most appropriate. In particular, raising awareness of hypertension as a risk factor for
stroke could increase early detection rates and lead to earlier initiation
of treatment. Many risk factors are more prevalent among people with low
socioeconomic status, and extra effort to reach these people with preventive
strategies is warranted. In all situations, the potential benefits and risks ‒ such as
over-medicalisation ‒ should be carefully evaluated.

## State of current services
There are major differences among European countries, indirectly reflecting the
state of local services, in terms of risk factor prevalence and control. Moreover, awareness of the modifiable risk factors for stroke can vary
markedly between populations. The organisation of primary prevention services differs greatly between
European countries. Some countries, such as the Netherlands and the United
Kingdom, have a strong primary care system, and extensive guidelines that
include the primary prevention of CVD are in place, whereas in other countries,
it is less clear who is principally responsible for primary prevention. There
are currently no generally accepted European guidelines as to which populations
should be screened, for which risk factors and at which age. A national NCD
action plan is a prerequisite for successful primary prevention strategies that
are feasible and realistic for each country, but not all European countries have
such a plan. 

## Blood pressure management
The prevalence of hypertension in people above the age of 18 years ranges
from 20 to 40% in Europe. Of those on medical treatment, only a minority sustainably reach
their target blood pressure. 

## Smoking
A steady decline in smoking since 1990 has occurred among men and women in
most European countries. However, 10–28% of the adult populations in
European countries still smoke. , 

## Obesity, diet and physical activity
The prevalence of overweight and obesity has increased dramatically over the
last 25 years. National programmes to reduce salt consumption have been
successful in many European countries, with high evidence of a beneficial
effect on cardiovascular mortality in some countries. Furthermore, 6 out of
10 European citizens do not reach the WHO-recommended 150 min of moderate
intensity physical activity per week. 

## Dyslipidaemia
The number of people with untreated dyslipidaemia has decreased over the last
25 years, but adherence to treatment with cholesterol-lowering drugs is
still poor, with less than half of patients being sustainably adherent to
their medication. 

## Diabetes mellitus
Diabetes care can be organised in outpatient clinics or in primary care,
coordinated by specialised nurses. The percentage of patients with adequate
diabetes control can be estimated based on the glycated haemoglobin
(HbA1C) level and varies between European countries,
reflecting different levels of service.

## Atrial fibrillation
AF-related stroke is increasing in incidence and prevalence: this may be
related to better detection but is at least partly the result of the
increasing incidence of AF with age and the ageing population in most
countries. In people with AF with an appropriate
CHA2DS2VASc score, the beneficial effect of
anticoagulation is evident, but the value of wider screening for AF and the
clinical significance of short episodes of paroxysmal AF are currently under
debate, particularly if it concerns primary prevention. The balance between
benefits and harms of long-term anticoagulation as primary prevention is
questionable in some AF patients, particularly those with very short
episodes of AF or a low CHA2DS2VASc score. 
Because stroke and CVDs share many common risk factors, research initiatives
in primary prevention of stroke should not be undertaken in isolation. Close
collaboration with primary prevention initiatives from cardiology, primary
healthcare and public health is strongly recommended and should be covered
by a regional or national NCD action plan. Such initiatives should be
aligned with WHO initiatives such as the Action Plan for NCD, and updated as
necessary when these are revised.

## Research and development priorities

Which factors are responsible for major health disparities in Europe,
including risk factor prevalence and control, and access and
adherence to primary prevention? What are the effects of low
socioeconomic status and other social factors?
Can the current risk prediction models be improved by extending the
current 10-year risk prediction to 20-year or life-time risk for
those at younger age (<40 years), and five-year or life-time risk
for those over 75 years?
Can further individualisation of primary prevention strategies, for
example, by considering multiple comorbidities, poly-pharmacy,
geographic and ethnic differences and polygenetic risk profiles,
enhance effectiveness?
Can public awareness of the potential for primary prevention of
stroke be improved by personalised and public health education about
modifiable risk factors?
What are the benefits and harms of screening for stroke risk factors
in different populations, using different approaches such as
systematic and opportunistic screening?
Can adherence to primary prevention interventions be improved by
using eHealth or mHealth approaches to encourage self-management,
using drug combinations (for example, in ‘polypill’ formulations),
and combining individualised approaches with public health
interventions?

## Targets for 2030

Achieving universal access in Europe to primary preventive treatments
based on improved and more personalised risk prediction.
Full implementation of national strategies for multisectorial public
health interventions promoting and facilitating a healthy lifestyle,
and reducing environmental, socioeconomic and educational factors
that increase the risk of stroke.
Making available evidence-based screening and treatment programmes
for stroke risk factors in all European countries.
Having blood pressure detected and controlled in 80% of persons with
hypertension.
As with the research and development priorities, close collaboration and
alignment with cardiovascular disease prevention targets are essential to meet
these proposed targets.

## Organisation of stroke services

## State of the art
The organisation of stroke services is fundamental to quality care across the
spectrum of care that progresses from prevention via acute therapy to long-term
care. Definitions of the different facilities for stroke care included into this
document are provided in . The focus of this section is on the organisation of acute
stroke treatment services, since other elements will be presented in the
sections dealing with specific domains. Although organised services exist in
most European countries, there is large variability in the practical application
of treatment guidelines and adherence to quality indicators. Awareness programmes have been shown to have an impact on the number of
acute stroke calls, but this effect is not sustained in the long term. National or regional quality registries have been implemented in several
countries to monitor key performance indicators, and programmes to certify
stroke units and stroke centres have been established in others. Research activities, covering both experimental and clinical studies, and
funding have significantly increased during the last decades. 
 Appropriate training of emergency medical services (EMS) personnel and
dispatchers increases the number of patients arriving early at hospital, and
several countries have established clear transportation routes to the closest
suitable hospital. Pre-hospital identification of patients with acute stroke by use of
validated tools and scales has been recognised as being important for prompt
treatment: the Face Arm Speech Test (FAST) is the easiest and the most commonly
used, but all pre-hospital scales demonstrate suboptimal specificity, even with
adequate training. , The development of stroke teams (including all disciplines
required for acute stroke management including radiology) has been shown to lead
to shorter delays and more rapid management, particularly when the team is
pre-notified of the imminent arrival of the patient. , The concept of delivering
personnel and equipment to the patient via mobile stroke units seems to be
effective, but this option is not widely available. The same is true for helicopter transportation, which may be useful in
certain settings. 
Admission to centralised, rather than non-centralised, facilities for acute
hospital care increases the likelihood of receiving thrombolytic treatment,
which has a direct impact on stroke outcome. Hospitals with greater use of thrombolysis achieve statistically and
clinically significantly shorter delays in administering tissue plasminogen
activator (tPA) after arrival in hospital. This may be also true for mechanical thrombectomy, but data on this are
limited at present. Treatment in dedicated stroke units significantly reduces
the risk of disability, institutional care and death by 20%, irrespective of
stroke severity and age. All hospitals should ensure that patients with suspected stroke have
rapid access to brain imaging, including vascular imaging at all times, since
immediate brain imaging is the most cost-effective approach in stroke. Early supported discharge (ESD) in a multidisciplinary setting is
beneficial for patients with mild to moderate stroke and is a likely cause of
the significant reduction in length of stay in stroke units in these
patients. , 
In remote regions without specialist stroke expertise, telemedicine in community
hospitals may help to provide evidence-based acute stroke treatment, including thrombolysis. Certification and sentinel stroke audit programmes support the delivery
of high-quality organised care: it has been shown that high performance in
audited process indicators reduces mortality by up to 25%. This emphasises the need for continuing quality improvement processes,
particularly in view of the known differences in care quality related to time
and day of admission. Auditing measures lead to a better quality of stroke care, and more
sustained stroke care performance over time. 

## State of current services
Political awareness of the burden of stroke has increased in recent years, but
still varies significantly across Europe. Although significant progress has been
made, there is still large heterogeneity in the organisation of stroke care in
Europe, as shown by a recent ESO survey in 44 countries. Hence, reliable and precise information about the structure and
organisation of stroke care, and the implementation of stroke management
pathways, is still lacking in many countries. In most, but not all, European
countries, health services and political structures are linked to a national
stroke society, and these linkages help to coordinate stroke services and foster
quality improvements of stroke care. Most countries have an EMS system with
regional organisation and written protocols for acute stroke. However, many do
not have obligatory transport routes to the closest suitable hospital or
procedures for pre-hospital notification of hyper-acute stroke. Although stroke
symptoms and the importance of immediate action have repeatedly been
communicated to the public, awareness is still unsatisfactory among the general
population.
The crucial impact of time in acute stroke has constantly been stressed, but
fewer than 10% of stroke patients reach the hospital within 60 min of symptom
onset. In many countries, the symptom-to-hospital delay has not decreased in
recent years. Several countries have built a nationwide network of hospitals
with stroke units or stroke centres following written protocols. However, only
limited information on the definitions of stroke units and comprehensive stroke
centres in the various countries is available. Moreover, only a minority of
countries have established a certification system with well-defined quality
criteria, or a monitored system for benchmarking delivery of care, that is
evaluated at regular intervals. Among the options for acute stroke care,
mechanical thrombectomy is the latest and the most challenging component, and
there is currently huge variation in the delivery of this treatment across Europe. 
Only a few countries have established a continuous quality improvement system
with a predefined set of criteria that are regularly measured and compared with
benchmarks. The reimbursement structures for stroke care are still highly
variable between European countries, leading to gaps in care quality in some
countries. The challenges for acute stroke care differ markedly between
countries, and between different regions (e.g. cities, rural areas), but only a
few countries monitor the delivery of stroke care at a patient level to ensure a
defined standard of service.

## Research and development priorities

Can we identify the most relevant barriers to the implementation of
evidence-based stroke care? What is the role of economical
aspects?
What is the health-economic impact of strokes and the return of
investment in stroke care?
Which are the most cost-effective concepts to improve the
organisation of stroke care in countries with limited resources?
Which are the minimum educational criteria for stroke experts
(physicians, nurses or therapists)?
What are the optimum numbers and ratios of stroke centres and stroke
units for municipal and rural areas?
What is the role of telemedicine systems for acute stroke,
rehabilitation and long-term care?
What is the appropriate structure to manage childhood stroke?
How can regional networks of EMS, stroke units and rehabilitation
centres be developed most effectively?
How can evidence-based media campaigns be organised in order to
promote public awareness and knowledge of stroke signs and the
importance of immediate action?
What elements are needed to enable more effective participation in
decision making among patients and relatives?

## Targets for 2030

Establishing a medical society and stroke support organisation in each
country, which collaborates closely with the responsible body in
developing, implementing and auditing the national stroke plan.
Guiding national stroke care by evidence-based pathways that cover the
entire chain of care. These pathways are understood by the public and
may be adapted to meet regional circumstances to ensure equal access to
stroke care irrespective of patient characteristics, region and time of
hospitalisation.
Managing and delivering stroke care by competent personnel and teams, and
creating plans for effective recruitment and training as part of a
national stroke plan.
All stroke units and other stroke services undergo regular certifications
or equivalent auditing processes for quality improvement.

## Management of acute stroke

## State of the art
Acute stroke is a medical emergency. The benefit of recanalisation therapies in
patients with acute ischaemic stroke is strongly time-dependent, with earlier
intervention achieving better outcomes. Stroke care systems should therefore minimise the time to assessment and
initiation of treatment, before brain injury becomes irreversible. , All
patients with ischaemic stroke or intracranial haemorrhage (ICH) benefit from
specialist attention and organised care within a designated stroke unit (number
needed to treat (NNT) to prevent poor outcome, 18) including rapid diagnostic
imaging, probably due in part to the prevention or early treatment of
complications such as infections and fever. Randomised trials testing strategies to prevent complications are
ongoing. , 
For ischaemic stroke, aspirin ‒ started within two days of the onset of symptoms
‒ has a small benefit (NNT 79) but is suitable for a large number of patients.
Although unproven, the benefit of early treatment with clopidogrel is probably
comparable. In selected patients with acute ischaemic stroke or TIA, dual
antiplatelet therapy in the first weeks confers additional benefit. Selected interventions, including intravenous thrombolysis, endovascular
thrombectomy (EVT) and hemicraniectomy, offer greater benefit but are applicable
to fewer patients than antiplatelet therapy. Timely restoration of blood flow
through intravenous thrombolysis (IVT, NNT 5‒9) or EVT (NNT 3) is the first
priority. The earlier the treatment with IVT is initiated, the greater the
benefit, irrespective of age or stroke severity. In patients with acute ischaemic stroke caused by occlusion of a proximal
intracranial artery of the anterior circulation, EVT strongly increases the
chance of a good outcome and, like alteplase, improves global functional
outcomes. The initial evidence of benefit with EVT was largely limited to
patients in whom treatment could be started within 6 h of symptom onset, but
recent evidence suggests that, in highly selected patients with acute ischaemic
stroke and considerable residual mismatch between perfusion deficit and infarct
volume, EVT can offer benefit when used up to 24 h of symptom onset. In recent
trials, EVT was associated with a 19% absolute reduction in the risk of a poor
outcome, but nevertheless 29‒67% of the patients randomised to the intervention
arm were dead or dependent at three months. 
The wake up study reported that in selected patients with acute stroke with an
unknown time of onset, intravenous alteplase guided by a mismatch between
diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR)
in the region of ischemia is beneficial. 
For patients aged 60 years or younger with large, space-occupying infarctions,
surgical decompression involving hemicraniectomy and duraplasty strongly reduces
the risk of death or dependency (NNT 2‒4). The benefit in older patients is questionable because surgical
decompression in the elderly reduces the risk of death at the cost of a large
increase in the risk of long-term dependency in activities of daily living (ADL). For patients with ICH, care on a stroke unit is the only treatment that
has been demonstrated to be beneficial. Early intensive blood pressure lowering
may improve outcome, although the NNT is relatively large. To date, the use of haemostatic agents to prevent early haematoma growth
has not been proven effective. Surgical treatment may be life-saving in some
patients, but a surgical intervention policy has not been shown to improve
outcome in patients with ICH in general. , 
In patients with subarachnoid haemorrhage (SAH) caused by a rupture of an
intracranial aneurysm, the primary goal is the prevention and treatment of
complications such as rebleeding, delayed cerebral ischaemia and hydrocephalus.
The risk of rebleeding can be reduced by occlusion of the aneurysm with
endovascular or microneurosurgical techniques; coiling is preferred in cases
where both treatment options appear equally feasible. Oral nimodipine reduces
the risk of delayed cerebral ischaemia and increases the chance of a favourable
outcome. , Early, short-term, treatment with tranexamic acid to reduce
the risk of recurrent SAH before the aneurysm is secured, is currently under
study.
Many in-hospital deaths of stroke patients occur after a decision to withhold or
withdraw life-sustaining treatments. Observational studies have demonstrated a
strong relation between treatment restrictions, such as do-not-resuscitate
orders and an increased risk of in-hospital mortality. It remains uncertain
whether this relation is causal, and whether refraining from do-not-resuscitate
orders would result in better outcomes. 

## State of current services
A recent survey of access to, and delivery rates of, acute stroke unit care, IVT and
EVT in 44 European countries found major inequalities in acute stroke treatment
between and within countries. Overall, there were 1.5 stroke units per 1000 annual incident ischaemic
strokes, but individual country-level data indicate that both access to and delivery
of acute stroke care are insufficient or lacking in many countries. Furthermore,
regional differences were reported within 28 countries.
Fewer than 20% of patients with acute ischaemic stroke had access to treatment with
IVT, and the overall rate of IVT in incident ischaemic stroke was 7.3%, with
considerable inter- and intra-country variability. EVT was performed in only 0.4
centres per 1000 annual incident ischaemic strokes, and only 1.9% of all acute
ischaemic stroke patients were estimated to have received this treatment. Moreover,
28 countries lacked full EVT coverage. 
The mainly Western European SITS-MOST registry has reported a median
onset-to-treatment time of 140 min, compared with 150 min reported by the Eastern
European SITS-EAST registry. A median door-to-needle (DNT) time of 70 min has been
reported in international European registries; continuous improvement of processes
can limit median DNT times to just 20 min in experienced and high-volume
centres.
Guidelines for the management of ICH generally recommend early blood pressure control
in patients with acute ICH. Unfortunately, European data on the use of
antihypertensive treatment in this setting, and the degree of blood pressure control
achieved, are scarce.

## Research and development priorities

How can disparities in access to stroke unit care across European
countries be diminished?
Which reperfusion options should be used, based on patient-, service-
and cost-specific factors?
How can the speed, safety and effectiveness of reperfusion approaches
(drugs or devices) be optimised in Europe?
Which pharmacological or other strategies will reduce the extent of
irreversible brain damage in ischaemic stroke patients before
recanalisation therapies are started?
Which strategies will improve outcomes in ischaemic stroke patients
who are not eligible for reperfusion therapies, or who do not
recover after recanalisation?
Which treatment strategies will improve outcomes in patients with
ICH: haemostatic and surgical approaches, prevention of secondary
injury, or intensive and tailored blood pressure management?
Which treatment strategies will further improve outcomes in patients
with SAH by reducing brain injury?

## Targets for 2030

Treating 90% or more of all patients with stroke in Europe in a
stroke unit as the first level of care.
Guaranteeing access to recanalisation therapies to 95% of eligible
patients across Europe.
Decreasing median onset-to-needle times to <120 min for
intravenous thrombolysis and onset-to-reperfusion times to
<200 min for endovascular treatment.
Achieving IVT rates above 15%, and EVT rates above 5%, in all
European countries.
Decreasing first-month case-fatality rates to <25% for ICH, and
increasing the rate of good functional outcomes to >50%.
Decreasing first-month case-fatality rates to <25% for SAH, and
increasing the rate of good functional outcomes to >50%.

## Secondary prevention

## State of the art
In the Helsingborg Declaration of 2006, the goals for 2015 were to reduce stroke mortality by at least 20%, and
for all patients with TIA or stroke to receive appropriate secondary preventive
measures. Within Europe, all countries agree that stroke risk factors, most
importantly hypertension and smoking, should be reduced in their populations,
but implementation of secondary prevention measures varies considerably between
countries, with declining success rates from west to east.
Secondary prevention encompasses the reduction of further stroke and TIA, any
other vascular disease, and other complications including cognitive decline and
dementia, mood disturbances or anxiety, fatigue and poor quality of life.
Secondary prevention applies to almost all patients with stroke or TIA and can
reduce stroke recurrence by 80%. Investigation and treatment must commence in
hospital (stroke unit or stroke clinic) and continue throughout life in the
community. Applicable ESO and national guidelines are regularly updated, and
most investigations and interventions are available to healthcare systems across
Europe. The routine use of these guidelines will ensure equity of access and
equality of care across Europe.

## Investigations
Investigations of incident stroke, and its cause(s) and risk factors, should
follow guideline-based local protocols including rapid and appropriate brain
and vascular imaging ( ); recurrent strokes should be re-investigated since the
mechanism may be different from that of the original stroke. If magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) is performed, it should include T2, FLAIR, DWI and
blood-sensitive sequences. If there is no obvious cause of stroke,
identifying paroxysmal AF and patent foramen ovale (PFO) become
important.
 The identification of risk factors has two major cornerstones: identifying
‘lifestyle’ risk factors that would benefit from a personalised approach and
‘medical’ risk factors for which management guidelines exist. Modifiable
risk factors such as poor diet, alcohol and tobacco use, drug addiction,
obesity, high blood pressure and cholesterol, AF, diabetes mellitus and
sleep apnoea, must be addressed in every patient ( ). Non-modifiable factors,
such as age, sex, race or ethnicity and family history, modulate the
importance of modifiable factors: national stroke registers should record
the presence of these factors, and interventions used to prevent or treat
modifiable risk factors.
 The minimum standard of care for secondary prevention consists of lifestyle
advice and lowering elevated blood pressure; in patients with ischaemic
events, antithrombotic therapy, a statin and carotid endarterectomy (if
appropriate) should be added. Patient and carer education about prevention strategies should be delivered at every opportunity by all healthcare
professionals working in stroke care. Interventions should be started in
hospital, with targets that are defined by a multidisciplinary panel and
reviewed on a regular basis. The effect of treatment on blood pressure and
lipids should be assessed at follow-up.
Following the diagnosis of ischaemic stroke or TIA, the aetiological cause
(large artery disease, cardioembolism, small vessel disease (SVD), stroke of
other determined aetiology and stroke of undetermined aetiology) should be
identified. This approach allows treatment with appropriate secondary
preventative strategies ( ); this summary of
interventions will be updated in future ESO and other guidelines. A similar
approach should be taken for the diagnosis of ICH, which may be lobar
(typically due to cerebral amyloid angiopathy) or deep (typically related to
hypertension) and may also be related to rupture of an aneurysm or
arteriovenous malformation, or other aetiologies ( ).
Surgical or radiological procedures such as carotid endarterectomy and
stenting, and closure of PFO and the atrial appendage, are highly operator
dependent. Success rates should be monitored and are dependent on proper
training and mentoring, and on performing an adequate number of procedures
each year.
Patients require long-term follow-up to monitor adherence to therapy and the
development of cerebrovascular events. Typically, this is done in the
community, but the use of home-based point-of-care devices and wearables may
improve follow-up data collection and diagnosis of subsequent events.
Most patients benefit from investigation and preventative interventions after
a stroke or TIA, and advanced age is not a contraindication. However,
patients with significant frailty, dementia or dependency might be spared
some prevention strategies by taking account of their wishes and those of
their family. Patients with stroke or TIA often have co-existing cardiac,
renal or peripheral arterial disease, and this needs investigation and
treatment. Depression and anxiety can be detrimental to lifestyle and
adherence and are risk factors for stroke and dementia.

## State of current services
Although there is wide variation in the provision of secondary prevention across
Europe, accurate country-specific data are not available for most interventions,
and published data are usually 5–10 years old. This indicates an urgent need for
more accurate monitoring and reporting of secondary prevention (Appendix 2).
Available data suggest that more than 60% of patients presenting with a stroke
are hypertensive; although 80–90% of these are treated, fewer than 40% will have
their blood pressure adequately controlled. Reasons for inadequate blood
pressure control include a lack of monitoring, under-treatment and low adherence
rates. Similarly, although statin prescription rates on discharge from hospital
are high, long-term adherence rates are low. Furthermore, many patients with AF
still do not receive oral anticoagulation.

## Research and development priorities

## For all patients

Do technological solutions improve compliance?
Do biomarkers identify patients at high of stroke recurrence and
improve secondary prevention?
Can identification of non-responders to antithrombotic therapy
improve secondary prevention?
Can prevention be enhanced in patients taking recommended
prophylaxis?
Which preventive measures are beneficial in the very old?
What preventive therapies are effective in sporadic small vessel
(lacunar) stroke and monogenic cerebrovascular disorders, such
as CADASIL (Cerebral Autosomal Dominant Arteriopathy with
Subcortical Infarcts and Leukoencephalopathy) and Anderson Fabry
disease?

## Healthcare delivery

Should patients with a minor stroke or TIA be rapidly assessed in
a fast-track one-stop TIA clinic or in the stroke unit following
admission?
Should all patients be followed up long-term, e.g. at one
year?

## Lifestyle and risk factors

What is the optimal blood pressure target for each type and
subtype of stroke?
Does treatment of sleep apnoea reduce stroke recurrence?
Which nutritional interventions physical activities reduce stroke
recurrence?

## Large artery atherosclerosis

Does best medical therapy obviate the need for carotid
intervention in asymptomatic patients?
Are new antithrombotic strategies required?
Will advanced stenting procedures further reduce recurrence?
Will new lipid-lowering drugs further reduce stroke
recurrence?
Should patients be investigated for asymptomatic
atherosclerosis?
What is the optimal treatment for intracranial stenosis causing
recurrent events?

## Cardioembolism

Which patients benefit from PFO closure?
What is the optimal treatment strategy in patients with AF and a
high risk of ischaemic and haemorrhagic stroke?
What is the optimal time to start oral anticoagulation after
AF-associated stroke?
How should patients with AF and atherosclerosis be treated?

## SVD

How can SVD-related cerebral lesions and their progression be
prevented?
Should the presence or burden of SVD lesions influence secondary
prevention decisions?

## Cryptogenic stroke/embolic stroke of undetermined source

Which preventive therapies are effective?

## ICH

Which patients with AF on oral anticoagulants can be restarted
with oral anticoagulants following ICH?
When should statins be (re-)started after ICH in patients with
ischaemic vascular disease?

## SAH

Understand the mechanisms of aneurysm formation and rupture in
order to prevent recurrent SAH.

## Targets for 2030

Including secondary prevention in national stroke plans with
follow-up in primary/community care.
Ensuring that at least 90% of the stroke population is seen by a
stroke specialist and have access to secondary prevention management
(investigation and treatment).
Ensure access to key investigational modalities: CT (or MR) scanning,
carotid ultrasound, ECG, 24-h ECG, echocardiography (transthoracic
and transoesophageal), blood tests (lipids, glucose,
HbA1c, coagulation, erythrocyte sedimentation rate,
C-reactive protein and autoantibodies).
Ensuring access to key preventative strategies: lifestyle advice,
antihypertensives, lipid-lowering agents, antiplatelets,
anticoagulants, oral hypoglycaemic agents and insulin, carotid
endarterectomy and PFO closure.

## Rehabilitation

## State of the art
In the Helsingborg Declaration of 2006, the goal for 2015 was that all stroke patients in Europe would have
access to a continuum of care from acute management to appropriate
rehabilitation, delivered in dedicated stroke units.
Among adults, stroke is the most common cause of new disability leading to more
than one impairment that could affect daily activities ( ). Rehabilitation has been
defined by the WHO as ‘a set of measures that assist individuals, who experience
or are likely to experience disability, to achieve and maintain optimal
functioning in interaction with their environments’. It is instrumental in enabling people with functional limitations to
remain in or return to their home or community, live independently and
participate in education, work and civic life. The United Nations Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD) includes the right to rehabilitation, but the 2017 SAFE report on Stroke in Europe has clearly shown that access to rehabilitation varies across Europe. In
the same year, WHO made a call for action, ‘Rehabilitation 2030’, to address the
significant rehabilitation needs across the world and the substantial apathy
towards these needs shown by many governments. 
 

## Care in hospital – stroke units and early rehabilitation
Acute stroke care, skilled nursing care and specialist rehabilitation are all
core aspects of a comprehensive stroke unit, and treatment in such
facilities has been shown to reduce mortality and disability. Rehabilitation includes occupational, physical and speech and
language therapy, with input from psychologists and social workers as
necessary. It should involve a multidisciplinary approach from stroke
physicians in a comprehensive stroke team, and an ordered plan for discharge
from hospital with documented responsibility for continuing rehabilitation
needs in the community.
Patients and carers need information about stroke, rehabilitation and planned
discharge and follow-up. This information improves knowledge, patient satisfaction and reduces
depression. How this information is best delivered remains unclear, but
active involvement of both patients and family members seems to be
beneficial.

## Transition from hospital to home – early supported discharge and
community rehabilitation
ESD , is an
innovative approach to rehabilitation, in which services are provided at
home by a mobile rehabilitation team, and should be seen as a part of the
stroke treatment pathway. The target audience is mainly patients with mild
or moderate stroke symptoms, which includes about 30% of the stroke
population in most settings. Studies show that access to ESD services
reduces length of hospital stay by a mean of six days and reduces the odds
of being dead or dependent after stroke by 20%. Patients with moderate to
severe stroke should still have access to stroke rehabilitation, either
during a prolonged stay in hospital or with adequate rehabilitation to
address their needs in the community.
As recovery continues and stamina increases, the intensity of training may
increase. For patients with aphasia, this can mean high-intensity training
over a prolonged period, which has proven effective in terms of improved
functional communication, reading, writing and expressive language. 
There is evidence that continued ADL training in the home setting after
discharge has a beneficial effect for up to one year after stroke. Different modes of rehabilitation delivery during the first year,
such as domiciliary, day-case hospital care and home-based care have been
shown to improve independence in personal ADL.
Stroke survivors are often physically deconditioned, with muscle weakness in
both the affected and unaffected sides, and impairments in cardiorespiratory
fitness. Physical fitness training after stroke reduces disability, improves
walking ability and may improve other stroke-related deficits such as
cognition, mood and fatigue. , Access to green areas
and walking space may facilitate physical activity. 

## Later rehabilitation and reintegration
Whether rehabilitation provided for more than one year after a stroke can
improve recovery remains unclear. People who are recovering from a stroke
often have persistent disabilities after one year or more. A Cochrane review
has found that there are few studies in this area, and hence data are
inconclusive, although there appears to be a tendency towards improved
recovery with rehabilitation. However, targeted training, such as balance training, gait training
with different devices, and upper extremity training more than one year
after stroke seems to have a positive effect. , Language training in
specific groups or with computer programs has also been reported to be
beneficial. This can be performed in peer-support patient organisation
groups, or in other forms of group training. For younger persons, returning to work raises issues of identity and
quality of life, as well as a means of living; hence, access to vocational
rehabilitation is important for patients in whom a return to work seems possible. 
It is important to recognise that improvement can continue for a long time
after stroke, and that the patient’s needs will vary over time. Therefore,
it is never too late for rehabilitation.

## State of current services
There is large variability in access to rehabilitation between and within
countries in Europe. These differences probably reflect international
differences in the organisation of stroke services, strategic approaches to
stroke and available resources. Comprehensive stroke units are still lacking in
many countries, and the slow rehabilitation documented in stroke unit trials is
almost absent. Patients with moderate to severe stroke benefit even more from
stroke unit care. If this is not possible, the stroke rehabilitation unit
provides an evidence-based alternative for continuing in-patient treatment.
There is a need to increase the number and capacity of comprehensive stroke
units, in order to ensure that all patients have equitable access. There is also
a shortage of rehabilitation and nursing staff with expertise in stroke and an
understanding of rehabilitation. Rehabilitation in a comprehensive stroke unit
should be available at all times.
There is a shortage of ESD services in all European countries, and in some areas,
this is not offered as part of the stroke pathway. Similarly, physical fitness
training programmes are not common in Europe but are now being developed in
Italy and the UK.

## Research and development priorities
How can we efficiently implement long-term rehabilitation strategies,
including measures such as ESD?
How can we deliver more cost-effective long-term rehabilitation?
Do self-management programmes improve long-term outcomes of stroke
rehabilitation?
How can rehabilitation be implemented with evidence-based results on
timing, level and type of intervention?
How can we improve participation and integration into society among
stroke survivors?

## Management of neurological deficits

Can post-stroke fatigue be more effectively managed?
Can post-stroke visual problems be more effectively managed?
Can post-stroke language problems be more effectively
managed?
Can post-stroke cognitive impairment be more effectively
managed?
Can depression or anxiety be more effectively managed?
Can post-stroke upper limb problems be more effectively
managed?
Can rehabilitation in an enriched environment improve
outcome?

## Targets for 2030

Guaranteeing that at least 90% of the population have access to early
rehabilitation within the stroke unit.
Providing ESD to at least 20% of stroke survivors in all
countries.
Offering physical fitness programmes to all stroke survivors living
in the community.
Providing a documented plan for community rehabilitation and
self-management support for all stroke patients with residual
difficulties on discharge from hospital.
Ensuring that all stroke patients and carers have a review of the
rehabilitation and other needs at three to six months after stroke
and annually thereafter.

## Evaluation of outcomes and quality improvement

## State of the art

## Background
There are huge variations in the quality of care for stroke patients in
Europe, both between and within countries. This is partly due to
differential access to resources, but often it is due to less easily
explained differences in the organisation and delivery of care. The goal set
for 2015 in the Helsingborg Declaration of 2006 was that all countries
should establish a system for the routine collection of data needed to
evaluate the quality of stroke management including patient safety issues. This has been only partially achieved, but there is evidence of
benefit in those countries that have successfully implemented quality
improvement programmes. The Action Plan for Stroke in Europe 2018‒2030 aims
to raise the overall standards of care that patients can expect, in
accordance with international evidence-based practice and to enable weaker
services to improve.

## Guidelines
Comprehensive guidelines need to be developed and used to set standards for
clinical services. While international guidelines such as the ESO stroke
guidelines can form the basis for national guidelines, these need to be
adapted for use within different health systems. The guidelines should form
the basis for developing audit standards.

## Measuring quality (audit)
Clear standards and assessment of the quality of stroke services are
essential if quality improvement is to be achieved. This information is
needed to allow individual clinicians to monitor and modify their practice,
for stroke services (hospital and community), for funders of healthcare to
ensure that funded services are being adequately delivered, and for
healthcare planners at national and international level. Additionally, it is
important that the results of quality monitoring, with appropriate
interpretation, are made available to patients and the public, to provide
assurance that high-quality care is being delivered. If valid and reliable
comparisons are to be made between services nationally and internationally,
it is essential that definitions and terminology are standardised across
countries. One of the reasons for apparent differences in incidence and
outcomes after stroke is that different countries collect and report data in
different ways. This is particularly evident with the definition of TIA, but
there are also variations in the way that International Classification of
Diseases (ICD) codes are used to classify stroke.
To fully describe a service, data are needed on the
structure of stroke services (facilities, staffing,
etc.), on the processes of care (door to needle times,
intensity of rehabilitation provided, time to get to a stroke unit, etc.)
and outcomes (mortality, physical, cognitive and
psychological disability, frequency of complications such as pneumonia,
etc.). The measures used should address aspects of care for the whole
patient pathway, including acute care, rehabilitation, post-hospital care
and secondary prevention. It is important both to record the care provided
and the patients’ experience of care and patient-reported outcomes. Registry
data can be a powerful research tool to confirm that randomised controlled
trial (RCT) evidence is transferable to routine services and can be used to
address questions that could never be tested in RCTs.

## Supporting improvement
Different audit models have been used across Europe, ranging from ‘snapshot
audit’ where a consecutive cohort of patients have their care quality
measured for a short period to audits that attempt to collect data on all
stroke patients. However, collecting and reporting data alone is not
sufficient to produce quality improvement: support is needed to enable
change. This may involve local clinical leadership, managerial support,
external help through peer review and sometimes the provision of additional
resources. Sometimes, a major service reconfiguration may be required.

## State of current services
Health service structures and payment systems often determine the pathways of
care. The organisation of stroke services varies considerably around Europe,
with stroke patients being managed within general neurology services, by
full-time stroke specialists, or within general medical services. Specialist
care is common for the hyperacute phase of treatment, but rehabilitation is more
often managed separately within generic rehabilitation facilities. Community
care is even more diverse, with few countries extending specialist care to
domiciliary services. Few countries or regions have appointed a national
clinical lead for stroke, with the exception of England, Scotland and Ireland.
National guidelines for stroke management have been produced in many countries,
including the UK, Sweden, the Republic of Ireland, Spain, France and Italy. In
addition, some European Guidelines have been developed to cover specific aspects
of stroke care, and others are in development. 
There are few international comparisons of care that are based on high-quality
data. The 2017 SAFE report is the most up-to-date picture of stroke care in Europe but does not
address quality of care. However, based partly on the Global Burden of Disease
studies, it does show large variations in case fatality rates, which range from
3% in Denmark to 18% in Latvia. Research studies, some funded by the EU, have compared stroke care in
different countries, but these are usually performed at individual hospital
level rather than nationally.
Comprehensive stroke quality registers (with participation from all hospitals
treating acute stroke patients) are available in some countries and regions,
including Sweden, the UK, Germany, Catalonia, the Republic of Ireland, the
Netherlands, Norway and Finland. A quality register is operating in Eastern
Europe (RES-Q), which is rapidly recruiting participating centres. However, only
Sweden and the UK attempt to provide data for patients after leaving hospital,
and few countries make the quality data available to the general public.
Regional, rather than national, initiatives for quality improvement are in place
in some countries, such as Spain and Italy, and this can result in significant
within-country variations in care quality. Quality indicators for stroke have
been published in France and Turkey, and a consensus paper on core standards for
measuring quality has been published. 

## Research and development priorities

What definitions should be used across Europe for the recording and
reporting of data on stroke and TIA?
What are the most effective and efficient systems for the collection
of data on the quality of stroke care across Europe?
How can data on the quality of care be used to compare process and
outcomes of care, taking into account variations in case-mix, and
what is the minimum dataset that is needed?
What are the systems needed to allow international comparisons of the
clinical and cost-effectiveness of care, and reporting of
within-country variations and variations by other factors such as
geographical region (urban versus rural), and variations over
time?
What are the most effective quality improvement tools that will
enable learning from examples of best practice?

## Targets for 2030

Defining a Common European Framework of Reference for Stroke Care
Quality that includes: (a) development or update of European
guidelines for management of acute stroke care, longer term
rehabilitation and prevention; (b) definition of a common dataset
covering core measures of stroke care quality to enable accurate
international comparisons of care both in hospital and in the
community (including structure, process, outcome measures and
patient experience).
Assigning a named individual who is responsible for stroke quality
improvement in each country or region.
Establishing national- and regional-level systems for assessing and
accrediting stroke clinical services, providing peer support for
quality improvement and making audit data routinely available to the
general public.
Collecting patient-reported outcomes and longer term outcomes (e.g.
six months and one year), covering both hospital and community
care.

## Life after stroke

## State of the art
Life after stroke was not addressed specifically in the 2006 Helsingborg Declaration, because historically it has been largely considered as an aspect of
rehabilitation: however, it has become increasingly apparent that this area
merits recognition in its own right. Life after stroke is a large and
overarching domain, and includes those who had a stroke in childhood (for whom
it represents an entire lifespan) as well as those who had their stroke later in
life. The domain includes consideration of family, friends and others who
provide care and support for the stroke survivor, and whose own quality of life
is also potentially affected; it covers stroke survivors living at home and in
institutional homes.
Life after stroke has only been regarded as a separate entity in recent years. As
a result, there are relatively few research studies covering the entire
lifespan, and those that do tend to focus on reporting outcomes from
rehabilitation interventions. Few of the current adult UK guidelines
specifically address longer term stroke management, reflecting the paucity of evidence in this area. The World stroke
Organization (WSO) has identified evaluating the best ways to address and
improve life after stroke as a stated priority, although to date, this has not
been adequately addressed. Similarly, the Global Stroke Bill of Rights also underlines the importance of providing longer term support. However,
in reality, there is relatively little reference to life after stroke in
national guidelines.
The few studies identifying long-term consequences after stroke report that
around a third of stroke survivors are disabled, have poor post-stroke cognitive
ability and poor mental health. From stroke survivors’ own perspectives, surveys
show that they also experience unmet needs in terms of communication, social
relationships, loneliness, incontinence, fatigue and finances. , It has
been estimated that one in four strokes occur in people aged 65 and under, whose needs may also include support to return to work.
There is also parallel emerging evidence of the profound and long-term impact on
carers; a 2013 report from the UK Stroke Association found that 80% of informal
carers experienced anxiety, and that there were significant strains on
relationships, with 1 in 10 people experiencing a breakdown of their
relationship with their partner. There are also indications that there are growing numbers of young carers
providing support for parents.
Qualitative research, and the Burden of Stroke in Europe Report, have documented the everyday plight of some survivors and their families.
However, much of this information has not been collected systematically or
rigorously, and there are countries for which there is no information available.
Nevertheless, the illustrative texts paint a complex picture of life after
stroke, and for many, it would seem that coping is tackled on an ongoing, daily
basis with recognition that ‘it’s a new life; you have to adjust to what
you can do’. There are also documented effects on family members (‘…people are
very lonely after they have lost these abilities [physical functions]. ….
The families are very, very tired’) and family members (‘No
one explained to my partner what it was going to be like moving forward,
what the consequences might be, what they might not be’). Thus, although some survivors report positive experiences from changing
their priorities after stroke, from focusing on relationships, and from deepened
experiences, for many, there are significant day-to-day challenges. With an
increasingly ageing population and more people surviving a stroke, it is
therefore vital that stroke survivors and their families are empowered to
optimise their quality of life and attain their maximum level of independence.
This must be considered in relation to home, education and work, according to
the stage of the person’s life and their individual priorities. It is also
important that this is considered in relation to other long-term conditions such
as diabetes, hypertension, AF, depression, cognitive impairment, epilepsy, pain
and spasticity. However, there is little robust evidence to support different
approaches or models of care, and no agreement on what is meant by long-term
survival: studies include people from six months to more than 20 years
post-stroke as ‘long-term survivors’. Furthermore, no recognised scale exists to
measure participation of stroke survivors in community activities.
The current literature lends itself to considering the issues surrounding life
after stroke under four overlapping categories: health issues, activity issues,
adjustment and wellbeing and information and support issues ( ). General
principles surrounding these issues include: recognition by society of the worth
and value of those with disabilities, including the importance of community
integration and legislation; the need for a care plan after formal
rehabilitation ends; the need for a seamless, structured and co-ordinated chain
of support (still encompassing individual and tailored options) and the
provision of services across the lifespan.
 Life-long services required after stroke include access to ongoing diagnostics,
therapy, medication, psychological support, rehabilitation and equipment as
required, regular review and access to family support and self-management
strategies. 
shows graphically how these might be integrated, as described in the 2007 UK
National Stroke Strategy from the UK. 
 

## State of current services
There are relatively few robust data available across Europe on longer term
management and care after stroke. Where data exist, collection has been
relatively unsystematic, and the service data are therefore both patchy and
anecdotal; little attention has been paid to developing, let alone evaluating,
longer term care. Stroke survivors seem ill prepared for the transition from
rehabilitation, and many studies report survivors and their carers feeling ‘abandoned’. There is evidence of six-month reviews being conducted in some European
countries, but there is a conspicuous reduction in data from survivors or their
carers beyond this time. Similarly, there is no Europe-wide agreed model for the
long-term support for children or young people who have had a stroke. Their
needs, and those of their families, are typically provided by community services
that usually also cover cerebral palsy, acquired brain injury and allied
neurological conditions. However, it is rare for a child to receive intensive
residential rehabilitation services after discharge from hospital. Families may
have access to specialist tertiary level support around the time of diagnosis,
but continuing access to this support varies and typically tapers off over time.
Overall, there appears to be little evidence of holistic and coordinated
support. There is no pathway for survivors, who often find themselves on
parallel paths for other conditions (e.g. depression and diabetes); longer term
review may enable stroke survivors and their carers to better follow their
individual disease management plan. Most importantly, there is no model of what
best care looks like following discharge from specialist services. The large and
growing number of stroke survivors with long-term needs must be addressed; we
need to develop minimum standards of care and measure these.
There is a growing interest in collecting patient-reported outcome measures
(PROMs) data that would best reflect patients’ views about their care and
provide additional information beyond the traditional clinician-reported
measures. Patient representatives have played an important role in the
development of these measures. The American Heart Association has advocated
broader use of PROMs in both clinical practice and research. Similarly, the Swedish Stroke Register has gradually broadened to more fully cover the quality of services and
late outcomes after stroke, through follow-up at three months and at one year
after the event. There is an emphasis on PROMs relating to ADL, self-perceived health,
health-related quality of life, mood, pain, satisfaction with stroke services,
rehabilitation and community support; all of these are important for stroke
survivors. Questions about the need for support for the carer may also be
included.

## Research and development priorities

What are the experiences and needs of stroke survivors at different
times during their lifespan?
What are the needs of different cohorts of stroke survivors? This
needs to include patient- and carer-reported outcomes, and to
address the challenges of stroke survivors with multiple
morbidities, and their carers, in order to enable the design of
optimal care pathways.
What would a model of best care and long-term support look like? This
should include the provision of three to six-month and annual
reviews and specific roles to provide holistic coordinated
support.
What products and services (digital and physical) would support
self-management, community integration, education and
healthcare?
How can high-quality information and training to help non-specialist
staff, especially social care staff, be targeted? It is envisaged
that this will involve research around staffing levels, core
competencies and the involvement of non-governmental and
non-profit-making bodies such as charities and voluntary groups.

## Targets for 2030

Appointing government-level individuals or teams responsible for
championing life after stroke and ensuring that national stroke
plans address survivors’ and their families’ long-term unmet needs.
Minimum standards set for what every stroke survivor should receive
regardless of where they live.
Formalising the involvement of stroke survivors and carers, and their
associations, in identifying issues and solutions to enable the
development of best patient and support practices.
Establishing, through national stroke care plans, the support that
will be provided to stroke survivors, regardless of their place of
residence and socioeconomic status.
Supporting self-management and peer support for stroke survivors and
their families, by backing stroke support organisations
Supporting the implementation of digitally-based stroke self-help
information and assistance systems.

## Prioritised research areas for translational stroke research

## State of the art
Clinical discoveries have resulted in huge improvements in the management and
treatment of acute ischaemic stroke patients. There have been advances in
understanding the pathophysiology of stroke and chronic cerebrovascular diseases, but the goal of translating this knowledge into successful treatments has
not been achieved. The efficacy of mechanical thrombectomy increases the
potential for successful translation of neuroprotective agents. Technological
developments offer new opportunities for deciphering pathophysiological
processes underlying cerebrovascular diseases, identifying novel targets for
drug therapies and drug repurposing. There is also increasing interest in
personalised medicine approaches utilising genomics, imaging and other
biomarkers for stratification of stroke patients. However, novel opportunities
run the risk failing in translation, unless accompanied by conceptual changes in
the way research is performed.
Bridging the ‘translational gap’ between basic and clinical stroke research is
critical for the development of effective treatments. Key requirements here
include improved networking between laboratory scientists and clinicians, better
experimental designs and the development of more relevant experimental models
that mirror the complexity of human diseases. The disappointing outcome of translation in the last decades demands
novel methodological strategies. , 
The following sections highlight major research topics where recent advances
offer new opportunities for translational studies, where there is urgent need
for therapeutic strategies, or both. Next, we analyse critical problems in the
current pipeline of translational research and suggest action points aimed at
changing conventional practice by designing novel strategies to tackle
translational bench-to-beside research.

## Key translational research topics

## Reperfusion
Current optimal treatment for acute ischaemic stroke is recanalisation with
intravenous tPA, endovascular treatment or both. However, microvascular
reperfusion is not always achieved, not all patients benefit from
endovascular treatment, and many patients are not eligible for reperfusion
therapies.
Improving tissue reperfusion: Strategies designed to
dissolve thrombi or prevent thrombus formation locally in the capillary bed
should be investigated, either alone or in combination with mechanical
recanalisation. Recent research has identified cellular and molecular
targets that may help achieve optimal reperfusion according to clot
composition and location.
Reducing reperfusion injury: Secondary complications of
reperfusion therapies, such as haemorrhagic transformation, should be
minimised. Complications due to previous treatments, such as antiplatelet
drugs and anticoagulants, and the effective use of antidotes, require
further investigation. Current experimental evidence suggests that oxidative
or nitrosative stress and thrombo-inflammation impair the benefits of reperfusion, but this concept awaits
translation to the clinic.

## Protective drugs for treatment and prevention
Neuroprotection: Translation of drug treatments to the new
clinical recanalisation scenario offers opportunities for novel and old drug
candidates that have failed in the past when administered too late or in the
absence of reperfusion. The concept of neuroprotection has evolved because protection is
needed for functional units composed of neurons, glial cells, pericytes,
macrophages and the vasculature. Approaches to protecting the white matter,
which is under-represented in most animal models of stroke, need further
development.
Vascular protection: Protecting the vasculature is critical
in ischaemia and reperfusion since the vasculature plays a major role in
propagating injury through both acute and chronic vascular dysfunction. A
good collateral circulation can reduce infarct size and secondary growth by
supplying blood to the penumbra, but we still do not know how to effectively
modulate collateralisation for preventive or acute therapy. Detailed
investigation, using advanced imaging techniques and vascular biology
research, is required to obtain data on vascular integrity, haemodynamic
responses and blood–brain barrier (BBB) function.

## Inflammatory and immune responses
Promising cellular and molecular inflammatory mechanisms, with potential
impacts on acute stroke outcomes and post-stroke recovery, have been identified. However, substantial basic research is required for a more
comprehensive understanding of the complex neuro-immune interactions before
translational strategies are attempted. Chronic inflammation has emerged as
an important pathogenetic mechanism in neurodegenerative and chronic
cerebrovascular diseases, and may be relevant for cognitive decline and dementia. Stroke triggers a multiphasic systemic inflammatory response that
involves neural signals and soluble mediators, including cytokines,
vasoactive substances, alarmins and acute phase proteins, followed by an
inhibition of immune responses that increases the risk of post-stroke
infection. Imbalance of peripheral immune homeostasis after stroke
represents a promising therapeutic target that requires investigation.
Repurposing of available drugs in clinical use for other inflammatory
conditions could improve the translational efficacy in testing
anti-inflammatory therapies for stroke. 

## Intracerebral haemorrhage and SAH
New cellular and molecular processes, including inflammation, are recognised
as critical players for brain damage after ICH. A genetic contribution to these processes has been identified and
requires exploration in experimental models, as well as translation to
pharmaceutical targets. Research in ICH is particularly needed given the
devastating clinical consequences of ICH and the current lack of treatment
options for this condition. Appropriate experimental models of ICH and SAH,
and models mimicking aneurysm rupture, are required. Mechanisms of early
ischaemic damage preceding vasospasm after SAH should be investigated.

## SVD
Specific treatments for established SVD are lacking, despite its enormous
health importance as the cause of 20% of ischaemic strokes, and a major
cause of intracerebral haemorrhage, vascular cognitive impairment or
dementia. Incomplete understanding of SVD pathogenesis and a lack of
appropriate animal models are obstacles to progress. Large-scale studies of
systems biology can provide insights into the underlying mechanisms of
complex diseases and responses to treatment. Key priorities in this area include: better understanding of the
pathogenic contribution of endothelial dysfunction or BBB disruption,
inflammation and hemodynamic factors; understanding the role of proteins and
pathways involved in monogenic forms of SVD and (multifactorial) sporadic SVD; understanding the mechanisms leading to cognitive impairment and
deciphering the intricate relationship with Alzheimer’s disease; designing
protective approaches to reduce progression of white matter damage;
expanding the identification of genetic and other molecular biomarkers and
translating the new putative targets discovered through genetic, molecular
and cellular biology data into disease-modifying therapies.

## Functional recovery and rehabilitation
A key objective is to expand our knowledge on functional recovery mechanisms
and potential therapeutic targets to enhance the effects of physical
rehabilitation in the chronic phase after stroke. Research is needed on
neuronal plasticity and network recovery, and their interaction with delayed
pathophysiological mechanisms such as neuroinflammation, apoptosis,
neurogenesis and angiogenesis. This will require the adoption of methodology
from stem cell research, gene therapy, optogenetics, non-invasive brain
stimulation and other fields. The methodology for evaluating functional
recovery in experimental stroke models should be improved.

## Key research pipeline priorities
A critical question is how translational research should be performed if it is to
be successful. Despite promising novel advances, the field risks propagating the
same methodological errors that have blocked translation to the present day. A
number of crucial strategic steps are proposed to overcome the block in
translation, and action points relating to these are summarised in .
 

## Exploratory versus confirmatory studies
Preclinical research has traditionally lacked genuine confirmatory studies
for testing treatment efficacy. Instead, exploratory studies identifying and
investigating novel molecular or cellular pathways and mechanisms were
frequently combined with therapeutic experiments. However, these are often
hampered by insufficient statistical power and poor designs, resulting in
low reproducibility.

## Preclinical, confirmatory studies as an intermediate translational
step
Clinical trials based on preclinical target identification and drug
development have typically relied on a few small-scale, single-centred and
underpowered studies. As a result, current translational efforts represent
an enormous leap from small exploratory studies to large, confirmatory
trials in a highly variable human disease. This huge gap requires an
intermediate step to improve the translational reliability and solve the
problem of lack of replication.

## Improve experimental modelling
An important reason why translation has failed so far is that current
experimental modelling lacks internal, external and construct validity.
Experiments are mostly performed in young, male, genetically identical
rodents, housed in artificial pathogen-free conditions, under anaesthesia.
As a result, they may not accurately reflect the diverse conditions
encountered in clinical medicine.

## Adopt a ‘Team Science’ approach
Large-scale collaborations with a ‘Team Science’ approach are needed to guide
further development in translational research. Clinicians should be
partnering with basic researchers by specifying research needs and
contributing to preclinical study design from a clinical perspective.
Initiatives for large-scale preclinical multicentric trials using, as much
as possible, protocols commonly accepted for clinical trials, have started,
but the utility of this tool remains to be shown.

## Improve efficacy of early stage clinical trials
Early-stage clinical trials represent an intermediate step between
preclinical drug development and large-scale clinical trials. As such, the
designs should keep up with the pace of preclinical target identification,
be sufficiently sensitive to test novel approaches in a stratified, optimal
target population and when possible seek a genetic rationale for drug
effects.

## Involvement of various parties
Commitment is needed from EU and national funding agencies to invest in stroke
research in a proportionate manner to the magnitude and prevalence of the health
problem. Strategies designed to validate findings from exploratory research
require a joint effort that exceeds the capacity of individual projects or small
sporadic collaborative endeavours. Strong independent institutional support is
required to make the transition from classical designs to a novel concept of
organised research structures and data validation that aims to facilitate
reliable translation of preclinical findings to clinical practice. The
pharmaceutical industry should also be engaged in this process: involvement of
pharmaceutical companies could be increased by facilitating exchanges between
academic and pharmaceutical research at the point of transition from exploratory
to confirmatory preclinical studies. Finally, researchers must disseminate their
findings to bring stroke research closer to patient associations and the general
population.

## Targets for 2030

Achieving an organisational framework by implementing confirmatory
preclinical research through ‘Team Science’ and by providing novel
instruments for advanced experimental designs to increase
validity.
Establishing and implementing guidelines for preclinical trials of
new treatments to maximise the success of clinical translation.
Focusing experimental stroke research on identification of new
treatable targets with high translational potential that lead to
successful clinical trials by 2030.

## Conclusions
ESAP provides a comprehensive overview of the current state of stroke management, as
well as specific targets and research and development priorities for stakeholders.
The ESAP Implementation Plan will be drafted after having assessed an updated
epidemiological report on stroke incidence, prevalence and mortality and receiving
detailed and reliable data from quality registries from national stroke and patient
societies. It is anticipated that the progress towards the targets and research and
development priorities laid out in this paper will be reviewed in 2021 and 2024,
with a mid-term review scheduled for 2024. The extent to which the targets have been
achieved will be reviewed in 2030.

## Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the ESO Head Office, Basel, Switzerland, and especially we want to
thank Luzia Balmer for excellent secretarial assistance. We are grateful to the Carl
von Siemens Stiftung for providing the venue for the Munich workshop. Editorial
support in the preparation of this paper, funded by the ESO, was provided by Michael
Shaw PhD (MScript Ltd, Hove, UK).

## Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared the following potential conflicts of interest with respect to
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: Bo Norrving has
received honoraria for DSMB work for Astra Zeneca and Bayer; Valeria Caso has
received honoraria for participation in advisory boards, consulting fees, or as a
symposium speaker for Daiichi-Sankyo, Bayer, BMS, Pfizer, Amgen and
Boehringer-Ingelheim; Charlotte Cordonnier was investigator in clinical trials for
Pfizer, Astra-Zeneca, Boehringer-Ingelheim, Daichii-Sankyo, Servier, participated to
advisory boards for Bayer, Medtronics, Daichii-Sankyo, BMS-Pfizer (fees were paid to
research account from Adrinord or the Lille University Hospital. No personal
funding); Alla Guekht has received grants/research support from EVER NeuroPharma and
Takeda; Jon Barrick reported that SAFE receives educational grants and project
sponsorship from Commercial organisations; Richard Hobbs has received consultancy
fees from Boehringer-Ingelheim, Bayer and Pfizer/BMS; Patrik Michel reports research
grants from Boehringer-Ingelheimand BMS; speaker fees from Boehringer-Ingelheim,
Bayer, Daiichi-Sankyo, Medtronic and Amgen; consulting fees from Medtronic,
Astra-Zeneca and Amgen, and honoraria from scientific advisory boards from
Boehringer-Ingelheim, Pfizer and BMS (all fees paid goes to CHUV, no personal fees);
Peter Rothwell has received honoraria from Bayer for Executive Committee of the
ARRIVE Trial; Christian Gerloff has received fees from Abbott, Acticor Biotech,
Amgen, Bayer Vital, Boehringer Ingelheim, Prediction Biosciences, Sanofi Aventis;
Aleksandra Pavlovic has received travel grants by Richter Gedeon and PharmaSwiss;
Heinrich Audebert has received speaker honoraria and consultancy fees by Boehringer
Ingelheim, Pfizer, BMS, Bayer, Lundbeck, Roche, Sanofi, Daiichi Sankyo, Ever Pharma
and Novo Nordisk; Urs Fischer has received consultancy fees from Medtronic and
Stryker; Kennedy R Lees has received fees from Applied Clinical Intelligence,
Boehringer Ingelheim, EVER NeuroPharma, Hilicon, Nestlé, Parexel; Mikael Mazighi has
received fees from BMS-Pfizer, Boehringer, Servier, Astra Zeneca, Medtronic,
Acticor, Amgen; Bart van der Worp has received fees from Boehringer Ingelheim and
Bayer; Philip Bath has received fees from Diamedica, Nestle, Phagenesis, ReNeuron
and report share ownership in Diamedica, Platelet Solutions; Hans-Christoph Diener
has received honoraria for participation in clinical trials, contribution to
advisory boards or oral presentations from Abbott, Achelios, Allergan, AstraZeneca,
Bayer Vital, BMS, Boehringer Ingelheim, CoAxia, Corimmun, Covidien, Daiichi-Sankyo,
D-Pharm, Fresenius, GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen-Cilag, Johnson & Johnson, Knoll,
Lilly, MSD, Medtronic, MindFrame, Neurobiological Technologies, Novartis,
Novo-Nordisk, Paion, Parke-Davis, Pfizer, Portola, Sanofi-Aventis, Schering-Plough,
Servier, Solvay, St. Jude, Syngis, Talecris, Thrombogenics, WebMD Global, Wyeth and
Yamanouchi and financial support for research projects from AstraZeneca, GSK,
Boehringer Ingelheim, Lundbeck, Novartis, Janssen-Cilag, Sanofi-Aventis, Syngis and
Talecris; Jean-Louis Mas has received fees from Bayer, Boerhinger-Ingelheim, Bristol
Myers Squibb and Daiichi-Sankyo; Maurizio Paciaroni has received fees from Aspen,
Sanofi-Aventis, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bayer, Bristol Meyer Squibb, Daiiki Sankyo and
Pfizer; Katharina S Sunnerhagenhas received fees from Allergan; Jesse Dawson has
received fees from Bayer, Bristol Myers Squibb and Boeringher Ingelheim; Didier Leys
was investigator in clinical trials for Pfizer, Astra-Zeneca, Sanofi Aventis,
Boehringer-Ingelheim, Daichii-Sankyo, Servier, participated to advisory boards for
Bayer, BMS-Pfizer, Astrazeneca, Boeringher-Ingelheim, (fees were paid to research
account from Adrinord or the Lille University Hospital. No personal funding);
Andreas Luft has received fees from Hocoma AG; Yannick Béjot has received fees for
participation in advisory boards, consulting fees, or as a symposium speaker for
AstraZeneca, Daiichi-Sankyo, MSD, Bayer, Medtronic, BMS, Pfizer, Amgen and
Boehringer-Ingelheim; Hugh Markus has received fees from Astra Zeneca for
preparation of educational material. The other authors report no conflicts.

## Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article: The costs for the preparation of the
ESAP were borne by the ESO. There was no private sector involvement in the
preparation and development of the ESAP.

## Ethical approval
Ethical approval was not necessary for the work described in this paper.

## Informed consent
Not applicable.

## Guarantor
A special guarantor does not exist. The working group has jointly developed the
manuscript.

## Contributorship
All listed authors have contributed to the preparation and writing of the manuscript.
All authors reviewed and approved the final version of the manuscript.

 

## Appendix 1. Members of the working group
The Steering Committee consisted of Bo Norrving (chair; Lund, Sweden),
Valeria Caso (co-chair; Perugia, Italy), Martin Dichgans (Munich, Germany),
Joanna M Wardlaw (Edinburgh, UK), Charlotte Cordonnier (Lille, France),
Robert Mikulik (Brno, Czech Republic), Alla Guekht (Moscow, Russia), Antonio
Davalos (Girona, Spain), Kursad Kutluk (Izmir, Turkey), and Jon Barrick
(London, UK).
Members of the ESAP working groups were as follows. Primary
prevention: Edo Richard (Chair), Department of Neurology,
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University
Medical Centre, Nijmegen, and Department of Neurology, Academic Medical
Centre, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Eivind Berge, Departments of Internal
Medicine and Cardiology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway; Catarina
Fonseca, Hospital de Santa Maria, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal;
Richard Hobbs, Nuffield Department of Primary Care Health Sciences,
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK; Stefan Kiechl, Department of Neurology,
Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria; Patrik Michel, Stroke
Center, Neurology Service, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne,
Switzerland; Jelena Misita, Stroke Alliance For Europe, Brussels, Belgium;
Violetta Mkrtchyan, Research and Clinical Center for Neuropsychiatry of
Moscow, Moscow, Russia; Peter Rothwell,* Centre for Prevention of
Stroke and Dementia, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK; and Jakko
Tuomilehto,* Dasman Diabetes Institute, Dasman, Kuwait, and
National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland.
Organization of stroke services: Darius Nabavi (Chair),
Department of Neurology, Vivantes Hospital Neukölln, Berlin, Germany; Hanne
Christensen,* Bispebjerg Hospital and University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; Miquel Gallofré, Stroke Program of
Catalonia, Barcelona, Spain; Christian Gerloff, Department of Neurology,
University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf (UKE), Hamburg, Germany; Damian
Jenkinson, Dorset County Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Dorchester, UK;
Aleksandra Pavlovic, Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade,
Serbia; Thorsten Steiner, Department of Neurology, Klinikum Frankfurt
Höchst, Frankfurt, and Department of Neurology, Heidelberg University
Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany; Danilo Toni, Department of Human
Neurosciences, University La Sapienza, Rome, Italy; Alexander
Tsiskaridze,* Faculty of Medicine Tbilisi State University,
Tbilisi, Georgia; and Georgios Tsivgoulis, Second Department of Neurology,
Attikon University Hospital, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens,
Athens, Greece. Management of acute stroke: Carlos A Molina
(Chair), Department of Neurology, Hospital Vall d´Hebron Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain; Anita Arsovska, University Clinic of Neurology, University
Ss Cyril and Methodius, Skopje, Macedonia; Heinrich Audebert, Center for
Stroke Research Berlin, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany;
Urs Fischer, Department of Neurology, University Hospital Bern, Bern,
Switzerland; Zuzana Gdovinova, Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine,
PJ Šafárik University and University Hospital L Pasteur, Kosice, Slovakia;
Werner Hacke,* University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany;
Catharina JM (Karin) Klijn,* Department of Neurology, Donders
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Medical
Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands; Kennedy R Lees, Institute of
Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK;
Mikael Mazighi, Lariboisière Hospital and Foundation Rothschild Hospital,
Paris, France; and Bart van der Worp, Department of Neurology and
Neurosurgery, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
Secondary prevention and follow-up: Philip Bath
(Chair), Stroke Trials Unit, Division of Clinical Neuroscience, University
of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK; Zauresh Akhmetzhanova, National Centre for
Neurosurgery, Astana, Republic of Kazakhstan; Hugues Chabriat, Department of
Neurology, Hopital Lariboisiére, Université Denis Diderot, Paris, France;
Frank-Eric de Leeuw, Department of Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center,
Nijmegen, the Netherlands; Hans-Christoph Diener, Department of Neurology,
University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany; Jean-Louis Mas,*
Department of Neurology, Hôpital Sainte-Anne, Université Paris Descartes,
Paris, France; Ivan Milojevic, Department of Neurology, Ćuprija, Serbia;
Serefnur Ozturk, Faculty of Medicine, Selcuk University, Konya, Turkey;
Maurizio Paciaroni,* Stroke Unit and Division of Cardiovascular
Medicine, Santa Maria della Misericordia Hospital, University of Perugia,
Perugia, Italy; and Alastair Webb, Centre for Prevention of Stroke and
Dementia, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. Rehabilitation:
Katharina S Sunnerhagen (Chair), Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology,
Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden; Michael Brainin, Danube
University, Krems, Austria; Jesse Dawson,* Institute of
Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life
Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK; Peter Langhorne, Institute of
Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK;
Didier Leys, Inserm U1171, Univ-Lille, CHU Lille, Hôpital Roger Salengro,
Lille, France; Monique Lindhout, Stroke Alliance for Europe/Dutch Brain
Injury Association (Hersenletsel.nl), Velp, the Netherlands; Andreas Luft,
University Hospital Zurich and Cereneo Center for Neurology and
Rehabilitation, Vitznau, Switzerland; Gillian Mead, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, UK; Jan Mehrholz, Technical University Dresden, Faculty of
Medicine, Dresden, Germany; and Marion Walker,* Faculty of
Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
Evaluation of outcomes and quality: Anthony Rudd
(Chair), Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust and National Clinical
Director for Stroke NHS England, London, UK; Sonia Abilleira, Stroke
Programme/Agency for Health Quality and Assessment of Catalonia, Barcelona,
Spain; Yannick Béjot, Dijon Stroke Registry, University Hospital and Medical
School of Dijon, University of Burgundy, Dijon, France; André de Rosa
Spierings, Stroke Alliance For Europe (SAFE)/Hersenletsel.nl, Velp, the
Netherlands; Marie Eriksson,* Department of Statistics, USBE,
Umeå University, Sweden; Joseph Harbison, Department of Medical Gerontology,
University of Dublin, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland; Tatiana
Kharitonova,*Saint Petersburg Research Institute of Emergency
Medicine, St Petersburg, Russia; Dilek Necioğlu Orken, Department of
Neurology, Istanbul Bilim University, Istanbul, Turkey; Francesca Pezella,
San Camillo-Forlanini Hospital, Rome, Italy; and Igor Voznuk, Saint
Petersburg Research Institute of Emergency Medicine, St Petersburg, Russia.
Translational research priorities: Anna Planas (Chair),
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques de Barcelona (IIBB), Consejo Superior
de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques
August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain; Denis Vivien, Université
Normandie, CHU de Caen Normandie, Caen, France; Stephanie Debette, Bordeaux
Population Health Research Center and Department of Neurology, CHU de
Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France; Adam Denes, Institute of Experimental Medicine,
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary; Ulrich Dirnagl, Charite
Universitätsmedizin Berlin and Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany;
Arthur Liesz, Institute for Stroke and Dementia Research, Klinikum der
Universität München, Munich, Germany; Hugh Stephan Markus, Clinical
Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; and Geert Jan
Biessels, Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, the Netherlands . Life after stroke: Avril
Drummond (Chair), School of Health Sciences, University of Nottingham,
Nottingham, UK; Juliet Bouverie, Stroke Association, London, UK; Anne
Gordon, Guy's & St Thomas' Hospital NHS Foundation Trust and King's
College London, London, UK; Janika Kõrv,* Department of Neurology
and Neurosurgery, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia; Charlotte Magnusson,
Department of Design Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden; Chris
McKevitt,* School of Population Health & Environmental
Sciences, King's College, London, UK; Harriet Proios, Department of
Educational and Social Policy, University of Macedonia, Thessaloniki,
Greece; Markus Wagner, Stroke Alliance For Europe, Brussels, Belgium; and
Diana Wong, SAFE-Stroke Alliance for Europe, Lisbon, Portugal.
*Members responsible for defining research priorities.

## Appendix 2. Issues in secondary prevention of stroke
Accurate data are scarce, with few countries having national registries and
most published data being 5–10 years old. Hence, there is an urgent need for
contemporaneous accurate monitoring and reporting. In an ESO survey of
national stroke societies performed in 2017, there was wide variation in the
availability of evidence-based secondary prevention treatments: in most
Western European countries, TIAs were routinely assessed on the same day or
within 48 h, usually as an inpatient or in a dedicated TIA clinic, whereas
in some Eastern European countries TIA patients were still routinely
reviewed in general medical clinics or primary care, often after more than a
week. Although most patients undergo carotid imaging by ultrasound and
24–48-h monitoring for AF, few countries offer more prolonged monitoring to
the majority of patients, and assessment by ECG alone remains the commonest
method in some Eastern European countries. Across Europe, blood pressure
after stroke or TIA is most often assessed by clinic readings and ongoing
management is commonly devolved to primary care; few countries regularly use
ambulatory or home monitoring of blood pressure.
Less than half of countries routinely provide lifestyle management programmes
after stroke, although such programmes are more common in Western Europe;
only smoking cessation programmes are consistently available, and
reimbursement for such programmes is rare. Adherence to antiplatelet therapy
is high, but after one year, fewer than half of patients are estimated to be
still on statins in some countries. While 60‒80% of patients in the highest
performing countries report blood pressure control at one year,
significantly lower national rates of control are common. Interventional
carotid endarterectomy is widely available, but the time to treatment is
highly variable, from within a week for patients in the best-performing
nations to routine waits of greater than one month in others. Finally,
although advanced procedures (carotid stenting, atrial appendage/PFO
closure, neurosurgery and radiosurgery) were more commonly available overall
in the west, their use varied substantially, largely independently of the
economic background of the reporting nation.
Overall, provision of secondary prevention services is highly variable in
Europe, with a consistent east–west divide for many interventions. Improving
the availability of lifestyle management, rates of risk factor control and
treatment adherence, and increased access to interventions, is needed across
Europe.