PLoS OnePLoS ONE440plosone101285081plosPLoS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC7176083PMC7176083.1717608371760833232042810.1371/journal.pone.0230416PONE-D-19-189001Research ArticleResearch and Analysis MethodsResearch AssessmentCitation AnalysisResearch and Analysis MethodsScientific PublishingScience PolicyScience PolicyOpen ScienceOpen Access PublishingResearch and Analysis MethodsScientific PublishingPublication PracticesOpen Access PublishingResearch and Analysis MethodsResearch AssessmentBibliometricsResearch and Analysis MethodsResearch AssessmentReproducibilityScience PolicyResearch FundingComputer and Information SciencesArtificial IntelligenceMachine LearningSupport Vector MachinesThe citation advantage of linking publications to research data
The citation advantage of linking publications to research datahttp://orcid.org/0000-0002-9806-084XColavizzaGiovanniConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologySoftwareWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing http://orcid.org/0000-0002-9673-5559HrynaszkiewiczIainConceptualizationData curationFunding acquisitionMethodologyProject administrationResourcesWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing StadenIslaConceptualizationInvestigationSoftwareVisualizationWriting – review & editing http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8498-4059WhitakerKirstieConceptualizationData curationInvestigationSoftwareVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing McGillivrayBarbaraConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionMethodologyProject administrationSoftwareSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 
1
The Alan Turing Institute, London, United Kingdom

2
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands

3
Springer Nature, London, United Kingdom

4
Public Library of Science, Cambridge, United Kingdom

5
Queen Mary University, London, United Kingdom

6
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom
WichertsJelte M.Editor ]. While some journals have required data sharing by researchers (authors) for more than two decades, these requirements have tended to be limited to specific types of research, such as experiments generating protein structural data [ ]. It is a more recent development for journals and publishers covering multiple research disciplines to introduce common requirements for sharing research data, and for reporting the availability of data from their research in published articles [ ].
Journal research data policies often include requirements for researchers to provide Data Availability Statements (DAS). The policies of some research funding agencies, such as the UK’s Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC), also require that researchers’ publications include DAS. A DAS provides a statement about where data supporting the results reported in a published article can be found, whether those data are available publicly in a data repository, available with the published article as supplementary information, available only privately, upon request or not at all. DAS are often in free-text form, which makes it a non-trivial task to automatically identify the degree of data availability reported in them. This is one of the novel contributions of our study. While DAS can appear in different styles and with different titles depending on the publisher, they are a means to establish and assess compliance with data policies [ – ]. DAS are also known as Data Accessibility Statements, Data Sharing Statements and, in this study, ‘Availability of supporting data’ and ‘Availability of data and materials’ statements.
Research data policies of funding agencies and journals can influence researchers’ willingness to share research data [ , ], and strong journal data sharing policies have been associated with increased availability of research data [ ]. However, surveys of researchers have also shown that researchers feel they should receive more credit for sharing data [ ]. Citations (referencing) in scholarly publications provide evidence for claims and citation counts also remain an important measure of the impact and reuse of research and a means for researchers to receive credit for their work.
Several studies explored compliance with journal data sharing policies [ – ]. For example, DAS in PLOS journals have been found to be significantly on the rise, after a mandated policy has been introduced, even if providing data in a repository remains a sharing method used only in a fraction of articles [ ]. This is a known problem more generally: DAS contain links to data (and software) repositories only too rarely [ – ]. Nevertheless there are benefits to data sharing [ – ]. It is known that, for example, the biomedical literature in PubMed has shown clear signs of improvement in the transparency and reproducibility of results over recent years, including sharing data [ ]. Some previous studies have shown that, mostly in specific research disciplines—such as gene expression studies [ , ], paleoceanoagraphy [ ], astronomy [ ] and astrophysics [ ]—sharing research data that support scholarly publications, or linking research data to publications, are associated with increased citations to papers [ ]. However, to our knowledge, no previous study has sought to determine if providing a DAS, and specifically providing links to supporting data files in a DAS, has an effect on citations across multiple journals, publishers and a wide variety of research disciplines. Making data (and code) available increases the time (and presumably cost) taken to publish papers [ ], which has implications for authors, editors and publishers. As more journals and funding agencies require the provision of DAS, further evidence of the benefits of providing them, for example as measured through citations, is needed.
In this study, we consider DAS in journal articles published by two publishers: BMC and PLOS. We focus on the following two questions:
are DAS being adopted as per publisher’s policies and, if so, can we qualify DAS into categories determined by their contents? In particular, we consider three categories: data available upon request, data available in the paper or supplementary materials, and data made available via a direct link to it.
Are different DAS categories correlated with an article’s citation impact? In particular, are DAS which include an explicit link to a repository, either via a URL or permanent identifier, more positively correlated with citation impact than alternatives?

## Materials and methods

## Data
To make this study completely reproducible, we focus only on open access publications and release all the accompanying code (see Section). We use the PubMed Open Access (OA) collection, up to all publications from 2018 included [ ]. Publications missing a known identifier (DOI, PubMed ID, PMC ID or a publisher-specific ID), a publication date and at least one reference are discarded. The final publication count totals N = 1, 969, 175.
Our analyses focus on a subset of these publications, specifically from two publishers: PLOS (Public Library of Science) and BMC (BioMed Central). PLOS and BMC were selected for this study as they were among the first publishers to introduce DAS. Identifying PLOS journals is straightforward, as the journal names start with ‘PLOS’, e.g. ‘PLOS ONE’. We identify BMC journals using an expert-curated list (see footnote 3 below). We further remove review articles and editorials from this dataset, and are left with a final publication count totalling M = 531, 889 journal articles. Our data extraction and processing pipeline is illustrated in . The processing pipeline, including DAS classification, as well as the descriptive part below were all developed in Python [ ], mainly relying on the following libraries or tools: scipy [ ], scikit-learn [ ], pandas [ ], numpy [ ], nltk [ ], matplotlib [ ], seaborn [ ], gensim [ ], beautifulsoup (https://www.crummy.com/software/BeautifulSoup), TextBlob (https://github.com/sloria/textblob) and pymongo (MongoDB, https://www.mongodb.com).
 

## Data availability statements: Policies and extraction
On 1 March 2014, PLOS introduced a mandate which required DAS to be included with all publications and required all authors to share the research data supporting their publications [ ]. In 2011 BMC journals began to introduce a policy that either required or encouraged authors to include an equivalent section in their publications, ‘Availability of supporting data’ [ ], and the number of BMC journals that adopted one of these policies increased between 2011 and 2015. In 2015 BMC updated and standardised its policy and all of its journals (more than 250 journals) required—mandated—a DAS (styled as ‘Availability of data and materials’) in all their publications. This provides sufficient time for publications in these journals to accrue citations for the analysis. Further, all papers published in the BMC and PLOS journals are open access and available under licenses that enable the content and metadata of the articles to be text-mined and analysed for research purposes. We encoded the dates in which these policies were introduced by the different BMC journals, and the type of policy (that is, DAS encouraged or DAS required/mandated) in the list of journals—which also include PLOS journals [ ].
The extraction of DAS from the xml files is straightforward for PLOS journals, while it requires closer inspection for BMC journals. We established a set of rules to detect and extract statements from both sets of journals, as documented in our repository. A total of Md = 184, 075 (34.6%) publications have a DAS in our dataset. We focus this study on DAS provided in the standard sections of articles according to the publisher styles of PLOS and BMC. While this choice does not consider unstructured statements in publications that might describe the availability of supporting data elsewhere, such as sentences in Methods or Results sections of articles, our analysis intentionally focuses on articles in journals with editorial policies that include the use of a DAS.

## Data availability statements: Classification
The content of DAS can take different forms, which reflect varying levels of data availability, different community and disciplinary cultures of data sharing, specific journal style recommendations, and authors’ choices. Some statements contain standard text typically provided by publishers, e.g. ‘The authors confirm that all data underlying the findings are fully available without restriction. All relevant data are within the paper and its Supporting Information files.’ In other cases, the authors may have decided to modify the standard text to add further details about the location of the data for their study, providing a DOI or a link to a specific repository. Where research data are not publicly available, authors may justify this with additional information or provide information on how readers can request access to the data. In other cases, the authors may declare that the data are not available, or that a DAS is not applicable in their case.
We identified four categories of DAS, further described in . We use fewer categories than [ ], not to impede reliable classification results. Our four categories cover the most well-represented categories from this study, namely: not available or ‘access restricted’ (our category 0); ‘upon request’ (our category 1); ‘in paper’ or ‘in paper and SI’ or ‘in SI’ (our category 2); ‘repository’ (our category 3). We consider category 3 to be the most desirable one, because the data (or code) are shared as part of a publication and the authors provide a direct link to a repository (e.g. via a unique URL, or, preferably, a persistent identifier). We manually categorized 380 statements according to this coding approach, including all statements repeated eight or more times in the dataset (some DAS are very frequent, resulting from default statements left unchanged by authors) and a random selection from the rest. We used a randomly selected set of 304 (80%) of those statements to train different classifiers and the remaining 76 (20%) statements to test the classifiers’ accuracy. The classifiers we trained are listed below:
NB-BOW: Multinomial Naïve Bayes classifier whose features are the vectors of the unique words in the DAS texts (bag-of-words model);
NB-TFIDF: Naïve Bayes classifier whose features are the vectors of the unique words in the DAS texts, weighted by their Term Frequency Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) score [ ];
SVM: Support Vector Machines (SVM) classifier [ ] whose features are the unique words in the DAS texts, weighted by their TF-IDF score;
ET-Word2vec: Extra Trees classifier [ ] whose features are the word embeddings in the DAS texts calculated using the word2vec algorithm [ ];
ET-Word2vec-TFIDF: Extra Trees classifier whose features are the word2vec word embeddings in the DAS texts weighted by TF-IDF.
 TF-IDF is a weighting approach commonly used in information retrieval and has the effect of reducing the weight of words like the, is, a, which tend to occur in most documents. It is obtained by multiplying the term frequency (i.e. the number of times a term t appears in a document d divided by the total number of terms in d) by the inverse document frequency (i.e. the logarithm of the ratio between the total number of documents and the number of documents containing t).
We experimented with different parameter values, as detailed below:
Stop words filter (values: ‘yes’ or ‘no’): whether or not we remove stop words from the texts before running the classifiers. Stop word lists include very common words (also known as function words) like prepositions (in, at, etc.), determiners (the, a, etc.), auxiliaries (do, will, etc.), and so on.
Stemming (values: ‘yes’ or ‘no’): whether or not we reduce inflected (or sometimes derived) words to their word stem, base or root, for example stemming fishing, fished, fisher results in the stem fish.
The best combination of parameter values and classifier type was found to be an SVM with no use of stop words and with stemming, so this was chosen as the model for our subsequent analysis. Its accuracy is 0.99 on the test set, 1.00 only considering the 250 top DAS in the test set by frequency, and the frequency-weighted accuracy is also 1.00. The average precision, recall, and F1-score weighted by support (i.e. the number of instances for each class) are all 0.99. The classification report containing precision, recall, F1-score, and specificity (true negative rate) by category is shown in . The retained classifier was finally used to classify all DAS in the dataset, keeping manual annotations where available.
 

## Results

## The presence of data availability statements over time

 show the number of articles in the dataset between the years 2000 and 2018 inclusive. The solid vertical lines show when the publisher introduced a DAS mandate (1 May 2015 for BMC, 1 March 2014 for PLOS [ ]). BMC journals show a delayed uptake of this policy in published articles, presumably as it was introduced for submitted manuscripts rather than accepted manuscripts. The delay accounts for the time these papers would have been undergoing peer review and preparation for publication at the journals. PLOS journals, in comparison and despite PLOS announcing its policy would apply to submitted manuscripts also, appear to have put more effort into early enforcement and therefore have a slightly faster uptake, which may not be accounted for by average submission to publication times. Both publishers show clear adoption of DAS after their introduction of a mandate: in 2018 93.7% of 21,793 PLOS articles and 88.2% of 31,956 BMC articles had data availability statements.
 Where the two publishers strongly differ are in the proportion of the different categories of data availability statements. Looking at the two most recent years in the data set, 2017 and 2018, the largest category for BMC (60.0% of 54,719 articles with DAS) is category 1: “Data available on request or similar”. The remaining BMC articles were 19.2% (10,500 of 54,719) category 2 DAS and 12.2% (6,656 of 54,719) category 3 DAS. Over this same date range, the largest category for PLOS (65.2% of 43,388 articles) is category 2: “Data available with the paper and its supplementary files”. The remaining PLOS articles were 14.0% (6,065 of 43,388) category 1 DAS and 20.8% (9,013 of 43,388) category 3 DAS. The overrepresentation of categories 1 and 2 for BMC and PLOS articles respectively is likely due to the two publishers having different recommendations in their guidance for authors. For example, 37.3% (40,904 of 109,815) of all PLOS articles which contain a DAS have identical text: “All relevant data are within the paper and its Supporting Information files”. We note that although there are an order of magnitude more PLOS ONE articles than those published in all other PLOS journals (20,6824 compared to 34,336 in our data set) the pattern of DAS classes are very similar ( ). In comparison, the most common DAS (4.8%, 3,594 of 74,260) for BMC is “Not applicable”, followed by 3.5% (2,582 of 74,260) which have “The datasets used and/or analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.” These most common statements are, or have been, included as example statements in guidance to authors, suggesting authors often use these as templates, or copy them verbatim, in their manuscripts. These statements remain the most common in the latest two years in the dataset (2017 and 2018) at 16.5% (PLOS) and 3.6% (BMC) although the proportions have decreased, hopefully indicating a more customised engagement with the data availability requirement by authors. BMC, in 2016, updated its data availability policy including the example DAS statements in its guidance for authors, in conjunction with other journals published by its parent publisher, Springer Nature.
BMC Series journals were encouraged to include a section on the “Availability of supporting data” [ ] from July 2011. Although the majority of articles published between the encouraged and mandated dates did not have a DAS, 6.0% (1927 of 31,965) of the articles did include this information ( ). Of these articles with encouraged, rather than mandated, DAS, 65.9% of them (1,270 of 1,927) were category 3: “Data available in a repository”. Category 3 DAS are closest to “best practice” data management recommendations, and it is unsurprising that the authors who elected to complete this section when they were not required to do so have shared their data in the most usable manner. Taken together with the most common standard statements described above, we conclude that mandates are beneficial in increasing the number of data availability statements in published articles, but note that they do not guarantee ease of access or re-use.
There are differences in the proportion of DAS classes across academic domains. For example, BMC Genomics shows a strong representation of class 3 DAS during both the encouraged and required time periods ( ). In comparison, and unsurprisingly given the sensitive nature of the data presented in its articles, the journal Trials has a high proportion of class 1 DAS ( ). We select the journal Parasites and Vectors to illustrate that there are also research topics that have high variability of DAS classes within them ( ).

## Citation prediction
We focus next on predicting citation counts as a means to assess the potential influence of DAS in this respect.

## Dependent variable
Citation counts for each article are calculated using the full PubMed OA dataset (N articles above). Citations are based on identifiers, hence only references which include a valid ID are considered. Under these limits, we consider citations given within a certain time-window from each article’s publication (2, 3 and 5 years), calculated considering the month of publication, in order to allow for equal comparison over the same citation accrual time (e.g., the three year window for an article published in June 2015 runs to June 2018).

## Independent variables
We use a set of article-level variables, commonly considered in similar studies [ – ]. We include the year of publication, to account for citation inflation over time; the month of publication (missing values are set to a default value of 6, that is June), to account for the known advantage of publications published early in the year; the number of authors and the total number of references (including those without a known ID), both usually correlated with citation impact.
The reputation of authors prior to the article publication has also been linked to the citation success of a paper [ ]. In order to control for this, we had to identify individual authors, a challenging task in itself [ – ]. We focus on an article-level aggregated indicator of author popularity: the mean and median H-index of an article’s authors at the time of publication, calculated from the PubMed OA dataset. In so doing, we minimize the impact of errors arising from disambiguating author names [ , ], which would have been higher if we had used measures based on individual observations such as the maximum H-index. We therefore used a simple disambiguation technique when compared to current state of the art, and considered two author mentions to refer to the same individual if both full name and surname were found to be identical within all PubMed OA. The total number of authors we individuated with this approach is S = 4, 253, 172.
We further consider the following journal-level variables: if an article was published by a PLOS or BMC journal; if an article was published under encouraged or required DAS mandates; the domain/field/sub-field of the journal, as given by the Science-Metrix classification [ ], in order to control for venue and research area. Despite the fact that journal-level article classifications are not as accurate as citation clustering or other alternatives, the Science-Metrix classification has been recently found to be the best of its class and an overall reasonable choice [ , ]. We also control for the journal as a dummy variable in some models. An overview of the variables we use is given in , while a set of descriptive statistics for some of them are reported in .
 The dataset we analyse and discuss here is based on a citation accrualuses a window of three years, and thus includes only publications until 2015 included, in order to allow for all articles to be compared on equal footing. The number of publications under consideration here is thus M2015 = 367, 836, of which with a DAS. Correlation values among a set of variables are given in , calculated over this specific dataset. While the high correlation between the mean and median H-indexes might indicate multicollinearity, in practice they are not capturing the same signal, as evidenced by similar coefficients when only using one or the other, or both. Results using windows of two or five years, thus considering articles with a corresponding citation accrual time, are consistent.
 

## Model
The model we consider and discuss here is an Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) model based on the following formula:
 ln(n_cit3+1)=ln(n_authors)+ln(n_references_tot+1)+p_year+p_month+ln(h_index_mean+1)+h_index_median+das_category_simple+is_plos+das_encouraged+das_required+journal_field+das_category*is_plos(1)
An OLS model for citation counts, after a log transform and the addition of 1, has been found to perform well in practice when compared to more involved alternatives [ , ]. We nevertheless use a variety of alternative models [ ], which are made available in the accompanying repository and all corroborate our results. The models we test include ANOVA, tobit and GLM with negative binomial (on the full dataset and on the dataset of papers with 1 or more received citations), zero-inflated negative binomial, lognormal and Pareto 2 family distributions. We further test two mixed effects models nesting articles within journals, one assuming normality on log transformed citation counts (as in the main reported model), another assuming lognormality on untransformed citation counts. We also test different model designs, including logistic regression on DAS category and on whether or not a paper is cited at least once. We compare standard OLS and robust OLS here, noting how robust regression results do not differ significantly. Despite robust OLS providing even stronger results for the effect of DAS on citations, we report results from standard OLS in what follows for simplicity. The last interaction term between PLOS and the DAS classification is meant to single out the effect of DAS categories for the two publishers. The results of fitted models are provided in . All the modelling has been performed in R [ ] and RStudio [ ], mostly relying on the DMwR [ ], glamss [ ], mass and nnet [ ], vgam [ ], ggplot2 [ ], tidyverse [ ] and stargazer [ ] packages.
 Regression results point out to a set of outcomes which are known in the literature, namely that articles with more authors and references tend to be slightly more highly cited. We also find a known citation inflation effect for more recent articles (reminding the reader that we consider an equal citation accumulation window of three years overall). Crucially, the mean author H-index is strongly correlated with higher citations, while not so much the median, indicating the preferential citation advantage given to more popular authors. We also find substantial effects at the journal field level, e.g. with General Science and Technology negatively impacting citations (we note that PLOS ONE falls entirely within this category). Articles from PLOS are also, overall, more cited than those from BMC.
Turning our attention to the effect of DAS on citation advantage, we note that the encouraged and required policies play a somewhat minor role. Nevertheless, all DAS categories positively correlate with citation impact, with category 3 standing out and contributing, when present, to an increase of 22.65% (± 0.96%) over the average citation rate of an article after three years from publication, which is 1.26 in the dataset under analysis in this section. The increase is of 25.36% (± 1.07%) considering the 1.13 average citation rate of an article over the whole dataset instead. These positive contributions are less effective for PLOS articles, after controlling for the publisher. When we further control for individual venues (journal), DAS category 3 is the only one remaining significantly correlated with a positive citation impact. Furthermore, we find a minor positive significant interaction (only) between DAS category 3 and the mean author H-index (see repository). These results suggest that the citation advantage of DAS is not as much related to their mere presence, but to their contents. In particular, that DAS containing actual links to data stored in a repository are correlated to higher citation impact. Lastly, we report that the same model (1) just with DAS categories as independent variable shows category 3 with a coefficient of 0.296, which goes to 0.252 in the full model ( ), hence corroborating a robust effect. Coefficients are lower and their drop proportionally larger for categories 1 and 2.
When interpreting these results it should be noted that we consider a relatively small sample of citations compared to the full citation counts of the papers under analysis. We, however, assume that the distribution of citations of the sample is representative of the real citation distribution. We tested this assumption for PLOS ONE publications using Web of Science (WoS). We were able to match 199,304 publications over 203,307 using their DOI. We compared the WoS global citation counts (updated to Summer 2019) with the global citation counts from our dataset (updated to December 2018 included). We find a positive correlation of 0.83 and that citation counts from PubMed OA on average account for 18% of the ones from WoS, supporting our assumption. Based on this assumption, we conclude that there is a positive and significantan up to 25.36% relative gain in citation counts in general for a paper with DAS category 3. We discuss some possible motivations for this effect in our conclusions.

## Discussion
Our study has a set of limitations. First of all, the willingness to operate fully reproducibly has constrained our choices with respect to data. While the PubMed OA collection is sizable, it includes only a fraction of all published literature. Even with respect to indicators based on citation counts (H-index, received citations), we decided not to use larger commercial options such as Web of Science or Scopus. A future analysis might consider much larger citation data, perhaps at the price of full reproducibility. We further focus on DAS given in dedicated sections, potentially missing those given in other parts of an article. Furthermore, we do not assess what a given repository contains in practice: this is not a replication study. Finally, citation counts are but one way to assess an article’s impact, among many. These and other limitations constitute potential avenues for future work: we believe that by sharing all our data and code, this study can be updated and built upon for the future analyses.
Future research that evaluates the contents and accuracy of DAS in a more detailed way than in this analysis, e.g., with more sophisticated and granular categorisation of DAS, would be valuable. For example, by comparing whether DAS that are highly templated from journals’ guidance for authors are associated with differences in citation counts compared to non-standard statements, and whether DAS are an accurate description of the location of data needed to reproduce the results reported in the article. We assume that non-templated statements imply more consideration of the journal’s data sharing policy by the authors, and potentially more rigorous approaches to research data management. However, we found non-templated statements to appear with a lower frequency than statements such as “All relevant data are within the paper and its Supporting Information files”.
There are several potential implications of our results. All stakeholders, from funding agencies to publishers and researchers, have further evidence of an important benefit (a potential for increased citations) of providing access to research data. As a consequence, requests for strengthened and consistent research data policies, from research funders, publishers and institutions, can be better supported, enforced and accepted. Introducing stronger research data policies carry associated costs for all stakeholders, which can be better justified with evidence of a citation benefit. Our finding that journal policies that encourage rather than require or mandate DAS have only a small effect on the volume of DAS published will be of interest to publishers, if their goal is to improve the availability of DAS. However, policies often serve to create cultural and behavioural change in a community and to signal the importance of an issue [ ], and it is not uncommon for journals and publishers to introduce new editorial policies in a progressive manner, with policies, such as on availability of data and code, increasing in strength and rigour over time. Springer Nature, for example, have indicated they intend to support more of their journals with data sharing policies that do not mandate a DAS to mandate a DAS [ ].
Our DAS classification approach, and release of the data and code, may be helpful for stakeholders interested in research data policy compliance, as it enables more automated approaches to the detection, extraction and classification of DAS across multiple journals and publishers, at least in the open access literature. Even wider adoption of DAS as a standard data policy requirement for publishers, funding agencies and institutions would further facilitate the visibility of links to data as metadata, enhancing data discoverability, credit allocation and positive research practices such as reproducibility. In fact, machine readable DAS would allow for the development of a research data index extending existing citation indexes and allowing, potentially, to monitor sharing behaviour by researchers and compliance with data policies of different stakeholders. DAS also provides a mechanism for more focused search and enrichment of the literature with links between research data/code, and scholarly articles. Links to research data provided within a DAS are most likely to refer to research data generated by or analysed in a study, potentially increasing the accuracy of services such as EU PubMed Central and Scholarly Link Exchange (Scholix), which can link scholarly publications to their supporting data.

## Conclusion
In this contribution we consider Data Availability Statements (DAS): a section in research articles which is increasingly being encouraged or mandated by publishers and used by authors to state if and how their research data are made available. We use the PubMed Open Access collection and focus on journal articles published by BMC and PLOS, in order to address the following two questions: 1) are DAS being adopted as per publisher’s policies and, if so, can we qualify DAS into categories determined by their contents? 2) Are different DAS categories correlated with an article’s citation impact? In particular, are preferred DAS which include an explicit link to a repository, either via a URL or permanent identifier (category 3 in this study) more positively correlated with citation impact than alternatives? These questions are prompted by our intention to assess to what extent open science practices are adopted by publishers and authors, as well as to verify whether there is a benefit for authors who invest resources in order to (properly) make their research data available.
We find that DAS are rapidly adopted after the introduction of a mandate in the journals from both publishers. For reasons in large part related to what is proposed as a standard text for DAS, BMC publications mostly use category 1 (data available on request), while PLOS publications mostly use category 2 (data contained within the article and supplementary materials). Category 3 covers, for both publishers, just a fraction of DAS: 12.2% (BMC) and 20.8% (PLOS) respectively. This is in line with previous literature finding that only about 20% of PLOS One articles between March 2014 and May 2016 contain a link to a repository in their DAS [ ]. We also note that individual journals show a significant degree of variation with respect to their DAS category distributions.
The results of citation prediction clearly associates a citation advantage, of up to 25.36% (± 1.07%), with articles that have a category 3 DAS—those including a link to a repository via a URL or other permanent identifier, consistent with the results of previous smaller, more focused studies [ – ]. This is encouraging, as it provides a further incentive to authors to make their data available using a repository. There might be a variety of reasons for this effect. More efforts and resources are put into papers sharing data, thus this choice might be made for better quality articles. It is also possible that more successful or visible research groups have also more resources at their disposal for sharing data as category 3. Sharing data likely also gives more credibility to an article’s results, as it supports reproducibility [ , ]. Finally, data sharing encourages re-use, which might further contribute to citation counts.

## Data and code availability
Code and data can be found at: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3470062 [ ].

The authors would like to thank Jo McEntyre and Audrey Hamelers at European Bioinformatics Institute / EUPMC for advice on using their APIs in the planning stage of this study. The authors also thank Angela Dappert at Springer Nature for support in obtaining journal metadata from Springer Nature. GC acknowledges finally thanks James Hetherington, director of Research Engineering at The Alan Turing Institute, for support and advice through the project. GC lastly acknowledges the Centre for Science and Technology Studies, Leiden University, for providing access to their databases.
Publisher's Note: The article involves the independent analysis of data from publications in PLOS ONE. PLOS ONE staff had no knowledge or involvement in the study design, funding, execution or manuscript preparation. The evaluation and editorial decision for this manuscript have been managed by an Academic Editor independent of PLOS ONE staff, per our standard editorial process. The findings and conclusions reported in this article are strictly those of the author(s).
 10.1371/journal.pone.0230416.r001Decision Letter 0
WichertsJelte M.Academic Editor© 2020 Jelte M. Wicherts2020Jelte M. WichertsThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
2 Sep 2019

PONE-D-19-18900
The citation advantage of linking publications to research data
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr Colavizza,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
I have asked two experts to comment on your submission and also read your submission with great interest. Both the reviewers and I agree that your work is timely and important and that it sheds important light on journal data policies and their relation with data sharing and eventual impact as reflected in citations. However, you need to consider carefully the major statistical issues raised by the second reviewer, and several minor issues concerning details of the data, methods, and results.
MINOR ISSUES
The first reviewer asks for clarifications and details to be added to different sections of your manuscript. This reviewer also rightly notes that the use of causal terms is not warranted given the correlational data that you used. The second reviewer also provided useful feedback (als in his attached PDF) that could help you improve the writing and details of the manuscript.  Finally, I wondered myself whether you could add more details on the citation data in relation to the well known Scopus and ISI Web of Science databases.
MAJOR ISSUE
The second reviewer was rather critical of your analyses. I agree with this reviewer that many different models could potentially be run and that the choice of analysis can affect the key result of the citation advantage. It is important that you do not oversell the results (not necessary here at PLOS) and that you avoid the issue of overfitting (or any selection of models that could inflate the citation advantage). Moreover, I agree with this reviewer that given the typically very skewed distribution of citation data, it would be better to use negative binomial regressions (or a zero-inflated Poisson model) instead of normal regressed based on the log of number of citations (plus 1). I ask you to consider carefully the statistical issues raised by this reviewer and re-run the key models to ensure that the outcomes are robust agains the use of alternative statistical and predictive models.
We would appreciate receiving your revised manuscript by Oct 14 2019 11:59PM, but please let us know if you need more time. When you are ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter.
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). This letter should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. This file should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. This file should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Manuscript'.

Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Jelte M. Wicherts
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
1. When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
http://www.journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and http://www.journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2. We note that Iain Hrynaszkiewicz is affiliated with the Public Library of Science (PLOS). To ensure transparency, please include this information in the Competing Interests statement.
3. Thank you for stating the following in the Financial Disclosure section:
This work was supported by The Alan Turing Institute under the EPSRC grant EP/N510129/1 and by Macmillan Education Ltd, part of Springer Nature, through grant RG92108 "Effect of data sharing policies on articles' citation counts" both granted to BMC and IH.
We note that one or more of the authors are employed by a commercial company: Macmillan Education Ltd
1. Please provide an amended Funding Statement declaring this commercial affiliation, as well as a statement regarding the Role of Funders in your study. If the funding organization did not play a role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript and only provided financial support in the form of authors' salaries and/or research materials, please review your statements relating to the author contributions, and ensure you have specifically and accurately indicated the role(s) that these authors had in your study. You can update author roles in the Author Contributions section of the online submission form.
Please also include the following statement within your amended Funding Statement.
“The funder provided support in the form of salaries for authors [insert relevant initials], but did not have any additional role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. The specific roles of these authors are articulated in the ‘author contributions’ section.”
If your commercial affiliation did play a role in your study, please state and explain this role within your updated Funding Statement.
2. Please also provide an updated Competing Interests Statement declaring this commercial affiliation along with any other relevant declarations relating to employment, consultancy, patents, products in development, or marketed products, etc.  
Within your Competing Interests Statement, please confirm that this commercial affiliation does not alter your adherence to all PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials by including the following statement: "This does not alter our adherence to  PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.” (as detailed online in our guide for authors http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/competing-interests) . If this adherence statement is not accurate and  there are restrictions on sharing of data and/or materials, please state these. Please note that we cannot proceed with consideration of your article until this information has been declared.
Please include both an updated Funding Statement and Competing Interests Statement in your cover letter. We will change the online submission form on your behalf.
Please know it is PLOS ONE policy for corresponding authors to declare, on behalf of all authors, all potential competing interests for the purposes of transparency. PLOS defines a competing interest as anything that interferes with, or could reasonably be perceived as interfering with, the full and objective presentation, peer review, editorial decision-making, or publication of research or non-research articles submitted to one of the journals. Competing interests can be financial or non-financial, professional, or personal. Competing interests can arise in relationship to an organization or another person. Please follow this link to our website for more details on competing interests: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/competing-interests
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Partly
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: This article describes a rigorous and technically sound research effort to examine the content of a large sample of data availability statements (DAS) reported in PLOS and BMC journals and their association with citation impact. It is highly commendable that the article is accompanied by a detailed repository containing the research data and analysis scripts which should enable verification and re-use (note that other than a cursory examination, I have not actually tried to use these files myself). Limitations of the research design are discussed forthrightly in the discussion section and generally the conclusions seem well calibrated to the research design and the evidence obtained. I only have minor suggestions to improve the clarity of reporting.
“DAS in PLOS” – should the specific PLOS journal be specified?
I suggest that the abstract and introduction mention briefly describe the use of a classifier was used as this was a key part of the method.
“We established a set of rules to detect and extract statements from both sets of journals, as documented in our repository” – it is not obvious where to find the relevant details in the repository and more details in manuscript would be helpful. The repository is commendably detailed, but linking directly to the relevant section will help readers find the correct information more quickly.
“We identified four categories of DAS, further described in Table 1. We use fewer categories than [16], mainly due to the sparsity of most of them” – the referenced study is based on PLOS, is there good reason to believe these statement types are also sparse in the BMC dataset?
Description of classifier results – Table 2 and corresponding text – I think further explanation would be very helpful here. I don’t think the headings in Table 2 are clearly defined and the text refers to ‘accuracy’ which doesn’t appear in the table. As far as I can tell, the results pertain to sensitivity, but not specificity i.e., do we know how many DAS the classifier might miss? Also, if I have understood correctly, the training set and test set were specifically populated with DAS from four pre-selected categories. If so, how do we know how the classifier will perform in the wild? (i.e., when handling other DAS types).
Figure 2 – I suggest the legend includes actual category descriptions/names rather than “class 1” etc. Otherwise the reader has to keep moving between the main text and the figure.
Generally, the conclusions are well calibrated to the evidence. However, occasionally, language that implies a causal relationship is used when that is not warranted by the present research design e.g., “all DAS categories positively impact citation counts”
Reviewer #2: Review of PONE-D-19-18900
This is a review of Colavizza et al “The citation advantage of linking publications to research data”, as submitted to PLOS ONE. The article addresses the hypothesis that the type of Data Availability Statement (DAS) included at the end of a published paper affects its subsequent citation rate.
The authors gather a very large dataset of Open Access articles from the PubMed OA collection, all from either PLOS or BMC journals. They use Natural Language Processing to extract the DAS and then classify them into four categories according to their level of detail. The authors then apply a linear model that includes many other variables known to influence citation count (e.g. time since publication, author popularity, and manuscript field). After accounting for these other variables they find a small but significant boost from including a DAS, particularly the most detailed category (3).
This is a decent article and will become a useful contribution, but I would like the authors to address the following points.
First, the model fitting is the weakest aspect of the article. The red flag for me is in the abstract, “can have up to 25.36% higher citation impact”, as this phrasing sounds like the authors tried many different models before arriving at one that shows the largest effect of DAS on citations. This might also explain why the model presented in the article contains both h_index_mean and h_index_median, but leaves out journal. I appreciate that decisions about model building are difficult, and reviewers always want some variable included/excluded, but the authors need to avoid the appearance of p-hacking; this is best done by deciding exactly what question(s) the article is testing and focus on one or two models that test it most efficiently (even if the outcome is less compelling).
A more robust approach that is used in the medical literature for similar circumstances (i.e. observational data) is as follows. First, estimate the strength of the relationship between your central variable of interest (DAS category) and citations. This will approximately estimate the amount of variance in citations that DAS category could explain. Next, present the full model, including all the covariates that could also affect citation count, either independently (e.g. year) or through their effects on DAS (e.g. H-index, where more meticulous researchers have both better DAS and better articles, and hence more citations). The effect size associated with DAS category will certainly go down, but what matters here is by how much: a large drop implies that the other covariates were driving most of the initial effect size, whereas a small decrease shows that DAS category itself has a robust effect on citations.
The authors should be also using a mixed effects model, where articles are nested within journal, allowing journal identity to act as a random effect. This approach also eliminates the need for a separate subject area and publisher variables. The extremely wide scope of PLOS ONE presents some difficulties, but the authors could consider splitting PLOS ONE articles up by their broad subject category (e.g. PLOS_ONE_biology_and_life_sciences), and using this as journal identity for these articles instead.
Since citations are count data and the mean is close to zero (Table 4), the model should be using a Poisson distribution and not a normal distribution. Using a normal model under these circumstances may lead to odd results, such as predicting negative citations (which are clearly impossible). If the majority of articles have zero citations, it may be better to use a negative binomial model or even a zero-inflated Poisson model. Moreover, x-axis variables should remain untransformed unless there is a specific a priori reason to transform them, or if transforming them corrects a serious issue with the distribution of the residuals: one cannot put in both the transformed and the untransformed covariates and pick the one that looks best by p-value. Note that it’s the model residuals that need to be normally distributed, and not the covariates themselves.
The authors may also want to consider including subsequent analyses that home in on particular subsets of the data. For example, the types of DAS encountered seems to differ quite significantly between the ‘encouraged’ and the ‘mandatory’ time period, with high quality category 3’s dominating the former. These category 3 DAS likely come from competent, highly motivated groups, and these are expected to get more proportionally more citations even in the absence of the DAS. Analysing the ‘encouraged’ and ‘mandatory’ data separately would help readers better understand this difference. As it is, I was left with the suspicion that the significant citation advantage for the category 3 DAS in the main model is driven principally by the ‘encourage’ part of the dataset.
I was also (initially) puzzled why the authors include year and month of publication as separate variables. They state that there is a “known advantage of publications published early in the year” (line 243), but don’t provide a reference. Is this advantage above and beyond that expected because an article published in January is 11 months older than one published in December of the same year? If this advantage really does exist, does the reader really need to worry about it? My initial idea was to recommend having ‘months since publication’ as a single variable, as it’s simpler and easier to understand, but it seems that the citation data are calculated only for articles that appear 36 months after publication of the focal article, so ‘months since publication’ is constant. It would be worth making this a bit clearer in the article. Minor point: does the number of citations in the dataset grow each year just because the number of OA articles published each year is growing? Or is the number of references in each article increasing too?
I’ve made a number of other suggestions directly onto the pdf.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files to be viewed.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: PONE-D-19-18900_reviewer.pdf
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0230416.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
3 Oct 2019

See attached file.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Reviews.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0230416.r003Decision Letter 1
WichertsJelte M.Academic Editor© 2020 Jelte M. Wicherts2020Jelte M. WichertsThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
19 Dec 2019

PONE-D-19-18900R1
The citation advantage of linking publications to research data
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr Colavizza,
Thank you for submitting your revised manuscript to PLOS ONE. Please accept my apologies for the delay in handling your manuscript which was caused by a host of events including sickness in my family and the fact that I was in the midst of moving houses.
After careful consideration, we feel that your revised submission can form an interesting addition to the literature on the citation advantage of data sharing, but that it does not yet fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Although the reviewers and I agree that your revisions have strengthened the manuscript, the second reviewer continues to be critical of several key issues in the presentation of results and the analyses you reported. I agree with this critique, and so It is crucial that you do not oversell your results and that you consider carefully the statistical points raised by this reviewer. It is particularly important to address the last point on the real possibility that your results are not entirely robust against alterations in the statistical model. Given that you did not pre-register your analyses, the best approach here is to add additional sensitivity analyses to an (online) appendix and discuss these results in an open manner in your discussion, even if they turn out to show several results not to be entirely robust against alterations in your statistical model. It is better to be safe (and open) than sorry on this issue.
We would appreciate receiving your revised manuscript by Jan 30 2020 11:59PM. When you are ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter.
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). This letter should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. This file should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. This file should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Manuscript'.

Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Jelte M. Wicherts
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Note from Editorial Staff: Note that if the manuscript is accepted for publication, the following Publisher's Note will be added:
'Publisher's Note: The article involves the independent analysis of data from publications in PLOS ONE. PLOS ONE staff had no knowledge or involvement in the study design, funding, execution or manuscript preparation, although one of the authors has since been employed by PLOS whilst the manuscript was under consideration for publication. The evaluation and editorial decision for this manuscript have been managed by an Academic Editor independent of PLOS ONE staff, per our standard editorial process. The findings and conclusions reported in this article are strictly those of the author(s).'
If you have any questions about this, please feel free to contact our office at plosone@plos.org.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Partly
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Most of my comments have been adequately addressed. I have no further comments.
Reviewer #2: Review of PONE-D-19-18900R1 “The citation advantage of linking publications to research data”
This article has been revised in response to the first round of peer review. I’m largely supportive of publication at this point, but I still (strongly) object to the authors’ use of the phrase ‘can have up to’ in the abstract – by focusing their most sensational result they are not accurately reporting what they found.
They should follow their own suggestion in the response to reviewers: “We believe that quantifying the average increase in citations a paper with a DAS has in the abstract is quite important to convey the whole point of the analysis” and focus on the average increase in citations that they found, not the largest increase. Expressing it as a percentage also obscures the relatively small effect size (approx. 1.51 citations after three years with a type 3 compared to 1.14 with type 0)
There are still lingering issues with the statistics. At this point I’m fairly sure they don’t undermine the main result, but it would good to have them addressed.
First, the mean and median of the h-index are closely correlated (0.82 in Table 5) so the authors are not convincing when they claim they are capturing a different signal (lines 264 to 267). Given the known difficulties in making sense of coefficients for closely correlated variables, they should also refrain from over-interpreting this aspect of the results (“Crucially, the mean author H-index is strongly correlated with higher citations, while not so much the median, indicating the preferential citation advantage given to more popular authors.” Lines 283-284).
Second, including an interaction term in the model (das_category*is_plos) means that the coefficients for these variables alone (das_category and is_plos) no longer have a simple interpretation. For example, the coefficient 0.252 for C(das_category)3 in Table 6 only applies to when is_plos is 0 (i.e. just BMC articles). Since the das_category is their main focus, the authors need to address this throughout.
Third, I still disagree with the authors’ philosophical approach to their analyses and would much prefer that they decide on their statistical model before they collect their data and stick with that. Analysing their data in lots of different ways with many different variables just looks like p-hacking, even if that’s not how the authors perceive it.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files to be viewed.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0230416.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
14 Feb 2020

Please see attached file.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: response_round_2.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0230416.r005Decision Letter 2
WichertsJelte M.Academic Editor© 2020 Jelte M. Wicherts2020Jelte M. WichertsThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
2 Mar 2020

The citation advantage of linking publications to research data
PONE-D-19-18900R2
Dear Dr. Colavizza,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it complies with all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you will receive an e-mail containing information on the amendments required prior to publication. When all required modifications have been addressed, you will receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will proceed to our production department and be scheduled for publication.
Shortly after the formal acceptance letter is sent, an invoice for payment will follow. To ensure an efficient production and billing process, please log into Editorial Manager at https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the "Update My Information" link at the top of the page, and update your user information. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to enable them to help maximize its impact. If they will be preparing press materials for this manuscript, you must inform our press team as soon as possible and no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
With kind regards,
Jelte M. Wicherts
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0230416.r006Acceptance letter
WichertsJelte M.Academic Editor© 2020 Jelte M. Wicherts2020Jelte M. WichertsThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
1 Apr 2020

PONE-D-19-18900R2 
The citation advantage of linking publications to research data 
Dear Dr. McGillivray:
I am pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper at this point, to enable them to help maximize its impact. If they will be preparing press materials for this manuscript, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
For any other questions or concerns, please email plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE.
With kind regards,
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Jelte M. Wicherts 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE