2967acscentsciACS Central ScienceACS Cent SciAmerican Chemical SocietyPMC7181310718131071813103234198810.1021/acscentsci.0c00390Introducing “In Focus”, Community Resources Accelerating
Science
BertozziCarolyn REditor-in-Chief,
Stanford University GarakyaraghiSofiaManaging Editor, American
Chemical Society✉E-mail: bertozzi@centralscience.acs.org.
134202064446446–4472742020Copyright © 2020 American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoIssue date 2020 Apr 22.

As an entirely
Open Access journal that is free both for readers and authors, ACS Central Science is in a unique position to serve the
scientific community. Each issue includes research articles across
many subdisciplines of the chemical and allied sciences. Our readership
extends beyond research scientists to the public at large, including
students at all levels, educators, and policy makers. This broad reach
makes ACS Central Science a powerful platform for
community building and for disseminating potential solutions to global
challenges.
To fulfill these key elements of our mission, we
maintain a broad view of the kinds of articles the journal hosts.
In addition to our core content comprising research articles, outlooks,
and various front matter pieces, from time to time we have received
submissions that “broke the mold” in content and format,
which, through the urging of our expert reviewers, we published as
nontraditional research articles. One of our first such manuscripts
was published in late 2016, “Open Source
Drug Discovery: Highly Potent Antimalarial Compounds Derived from
the Tres Cantos Arylpyrroles” by Todd and co-workers.
This article featured global authorship spanning industry and universities
including authors from GSK, Switzerland, U.K., Australia, Canada,
Belgium, United States, Spain, and India and describes an open source
approach to the discovery of antimalarial drugs. In 2018, we published
“Canvass:
A Crowd-Sourced, Natural-Product Screening Library for Exploring Biological
Space” by Hall, Rohde, and co-workers. The Canvass
library was established through a nation-scale collaborative effort
between the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences,
National Institutes of Health, and both academic and industrial researchers
with the aim to provide a mechanism to evaluate the biological activities
of natural products in a variety of assays. Another unique example
is “BigSMILES:
A Structurally-Based Line Notation for Describing Macromolecules” by Olsen and co-workers, which
details a proposed line notation representation system for polymers,
paving the way for polymer informatics by presenting an effective
language for communication across this community. And most recently
we published “The Natural
Products Atlas: An Open Access Knowledge Base for Microbial Natural
Products Discovery” by Linington and co-workers,
which features a comprehensive open access online database of microbially
derived natural product structures. This foundational repository is
intended to catalyze the integration of independent natural product
data sets to further advance discovery in this field.
In each
case, the response from readers was tremendous. These articles brought
research communities together from across the globe, focusing on central
challenges and common goals, and established new paradigms for how
the chemical sciences can impact the world—and readers were
inspired.
With this in mind, we are thrilled to introduce our
newest manuscript type, In Focus, which provides
a venue for authors to publish resources of broad significance to
the chemistry community or of public interest. The format is intended
to be digestible for a broad audience and foster uptake and wide dissemination
of the work to bridge communities and accelerate scientific advancement.
At this moment in time, amidst the COVID-19 pandemic, the need
for such resources and their open access availability is urgent. Therefore,
we are pleased to have published our inaugural In Focus article,
“Research
and Development on Therapeutic Agents and Vaccines for COVID-19 and
Related Human Coronavirus Diseases” by Liu and co-workers
in our March issue. Since the outbreak and global spread of the novel
coronavirus disease COVID-19, caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus, scientists
and physicians have been racing to understand the new virus and its
pathophysiology, and develop possible treatments. Many chemists across
all industries have answered this global community call and quickly
shifted their research focus to support ongoing efforts to address
this pandemic. The resultant rapid research output on SARS-CoV-2 virus
and COVID-19, over just a few months, exemplifies the scientific communities’
commitment to meet global needs. This report provides an overview
of published scientific literature and patents in the CAS content
collection on human coronavirus. This collection is intended to accelerate
ongoing R&D on therapeutic agents and vaccines for novel coronavirus
disease COVID-19, and like all of our content, it is fully open access.
Looking ahead, we hope the In Focus series continues
to inform and inspire and also provides the chemical community
with a platform to share ideas and solutions with the world.
Views expressed
in this editorial are those of the authors and not necessarily the
views of the ACS.