PLoS OnePLoS ONE440plosone101285081plosPLoS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC7425871PMC7425871.1742587174258713279069910.1371/journal.pone.0237007PONE-D-20-046311Research ArticleSocial SciencesAnthropologyCultural AnthropologyReligionSocial SciencesSociologyReligionBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyMusic CognitionMusic PerceptionBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyMusic CognitionMusic PerceptionSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyMusic CognitionMusic PerceptionBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyPerceptionSensory PerceptionMusic PerceptionBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyPerceptionSensory PerceptionMusic PerceptionSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyPerceptionSensory PerceptionMusic PerceptionBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceSensory PerceptionMusic PerceptionEngineering and TechnologySignal ProcessingWhite NoiseSocial SciencesSociologyCultureCross-Cultural StudiesPeople and PlacesGeographical LocationsAsiaJapanScience PolicyResearch IntegrityResearch EthicsBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyDecision MakingBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyDecision MakingSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyDecision MakingBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitionDecision MakingBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyBehaviorProsocial BehaviorSocial SciencesPsychologyBehaviorProsocial BehaviorBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologySocial CognitionProsocial BehaviorBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologySocial CognitionProsocial BehaviorSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologySocial CognitionProsocial BehaviorBiology and Life SciencesPsychologySocial PsychologySocial CognitionProsocial BehaviorSocial SciencesPsychologySocial PsychologySocial CognitionProsocial BehaviorReplicating and extending the effects of auditory religious cues on dishonest behavior
The effect of auditory religious cues on cheating behaviorhttp://orcid.org/0000-0003-2536-5850NicholsAaron D.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing http://orcid.org/0000-0002-2231-1059LangMartinConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionMethodologyVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing KavanaghChristopherData curationWriting – review & editing KundtRadekData curationFunding acquisitionWriting – review & editing YamadaJunkoData curationInvestigationWriting – review & editing ArielyDanResourcesSupervisionWriting – review & editing MitkidisPanagiotisConceptualizationSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Questrom School of Business, Boston University, Boston, MA, United States of America2
Social Sciences Research Institute, Duke University, Durham, NC, United States of America3
LEVYNA Laboratory for the Experimental Research of Religion, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic4
Institute of Cognitive & Evolutionary Anthropology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom5
Department of Behavioral Science, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan6
Department of Management, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmarkvan ElkMichielEditor – ]. To contribute additional empirical data to this ongoing debate, we investigate the effects of religious auditory cues on individual honesty and extend the research literature on religious priming by adapting the methodology employed by Lang and colleagues [ ]. Using a more generalizable sample and a less biased cheating task, we replicate important conceptual results observed by Lang and colleagues [ ] yet fail to find evidence for the anticipated moderating effect of self-reported religiosity. Our results add important nuance to previous results by investigating how the efficacy of culturally specific religious primes are impacted not only by self-reported religiosity but also by religious socialization, identity, and ritual participation.
Perceptual cues associated with religion have been observed to affect decision-making across many behavioral domains [ – ] and their unconscious effects on ethical behavior have been studied extensively [ , , ]. One particular behavioral domain studied in relation to religious cues is cheating. As an example, Aveyard [ ] conducted two experiments investigating the effects of religious cues on ethical behavior in Middle Eastern participants. In the first experiment, participants unscrambled Arabic sentences with embedded religious or non-religious themes prior to taking a math test. The math test was incentivized, but unsupervised- so crucially, participants were able to dishonestly report their performance to earn more money. Aveyard [ ]observed that participants’ honesty was unaffected by their exposure to religious (or non-religious) anagrams. However, in a second experiment, listening to the Islamic call to prayer, athan, was observed to impact reporting in the unsupervised math test. Specifically, participants that listened to the Islamic call to prayer were more honest than the control participants who did not listen to the call to prayer. These results indicate that auditory religious primes can affect individual behavior. Further, Aveyard’s findings suggest that individuals must have deep and natural associations with the sacred cue in order for it to change behavior.
Recently, however, religious priming has been the subject of a heated debate concerning the replicability of individual effects and the broader validity of this technique [ – ]. In a meta-analysis of 93 published and unpublished religious priming studies, religious priming was observed to have a consistent, small effect on the behavior of religious individuals [ ]. These findings were contested as van Elk et al. [ ] raised concerns that questionable research practices (QRPs) in social psychology confound meta-analysis results. They observed that religious priming effects are significant when Bayesian meta-analytic methods are used, but are non-significant when a Precision-Effect Testing–Precision-Effect Estimate with Standard Error (PET-PEESE) is used [ ]. As these conflicting findings suggest, meta-analyses are not a panacea [ ]; they are dependent upon the quality of the original data included and are subject to researchers’ degrees of freedom involved with conducting analyses and interpreting the results [ ]. PET-PEESE methodology, for instance, is sometimes unreliable when the true effect size is small and when the meta-analysis includes twenty or fewer studies, studies that have small sample sizes, or studies that exhibit a large degree of heterogeneity of effect sizes [ , ]. Taken together, while meta-analyses are useful and needed tools for research, they are often inconclusive and should be supplemented with replication efforts, including both direct and conceptual replications [ ].
To determine the validity and generalizability of religious priming, improved experiment procedures and more diverse samples must be explored. Oftentimes, religious priming research has utilized dictator games to measure prosociality [ , , – ]. However, behavior in dictator games has been observed to lack global generalizability, as people from different cultures demonstrate unique norms for altruism when playing dictator games [ , ]. The method of religious priming can also influence results as recent work indicates that explicit religious primes (i.e., writing tasks) produce only small effects on prosociality, while implicit religious primes (i.e., anagrams) do not appear to influence responses to prosocial measures [ ]. Furthermore, religious priming effects have primarily been studied using largely homogeneous, WEIRD (Western, Educated, Industrialized, Rich, and Democratic) samples, raising additional concerns about the generalizability of observed effects across other populations [ , , ]. Indeed, a cross-cultural study of 15 small-scale societies found that religious priming inconsistently impacts people across cultural and religious contexts [ ; see also , ]. Consequently, replication attempts should test novel, yet conceptually-relevant prosociality measures that seek to avoid the limitations of existing measures and should investigate if an observed effect replicates in the same sample (typically Western university students), but also across various cultural and religious settings, where an effect is claimed to have cross-cultural validity.
To that end, the current study attempts to replicate and extend the findings from Lang et al. [ ], examining whether priming with instrumental religious music would decrease the rate of participants’ dishonest behavior. Notably, this replication effort is distinct from what is sometimes referred to as a direct replication [ ]. In this work, we adapt aspects of the methodology employed by Lang et al. [ ] to investigate the conceptual consistency of their results. We designed this replication to provide results that would either increase or decrease the confidence in the interpretation of Lang et al. [ ]. Therefore, this study utilizes the Open Science Framework (OSF) method of replication that, “reduces emphasis on operational characteristics of the study and increases emphasis on the interpretation of possible outcomes” [ ]. (For a comparison of replication methodologies across disciplines, see Goméz and colleagues [ ].)Below, we provide a succinct overview of Lang et al. [ ]. Thereafter, we outline the unique aspects of this research and clarify the strategic motivations for modifying the procedure of Lang et al. [ ]. Finally, in the Discussion, we detail how our adapted methodology may have limited our ability to replicate the findings observed in Lang et al [ ].
Lang and colleagues [ ]conducted a cross-cultural study on the effects of auditory cues on normative behavior using treatment with three musical stimuli (religious, secular, or white noise) prior to completing an arithmetic task designed to measure dishonest reporting for monetary reward (the Matrix Task, adapted from Mazar and colleagues [ ]). Whereas they did not observe a main effect of musical treatment on dishonest reporting, the results revealed a Treatment*Religiosity interaction, such that participants self-reporting higher religiosity claimed less money upon hearing a religious musical track. Drawing from their results and previous research [ ], Lang and colleagues [ ] hypothesized that, “…instrumental music can serve as a reminder of normative behavior, but only for participants who previously formed an association between religion and specific music.” Here, we re-examine this learned association hypothesis and test the impact of exposure to religious symbolism (music) on cheating behavior. As opposed to studying various forms of voluntary sharing and altruism that vary across cultures, we examine cheating as an anti-social behavior that is frequently and explicitly targeted by religious norms [ – ]. Critically, this study builds on previous efforts in four distinct ways.
First, to strengthen the link between musical stimuli and their effect on dishonest reporting, the musical tracks were played on-loop, throughout the entirety of the experimental task (rather than 2 minutes before the task as in Lang and colleagues [ ]). Second, we use a decision-making task that allows us to benchmark participants’ self-reported earnings against factually correct answers over 200 total trials (the Dots Game, adapted from Gino and colleagues [ ]). Compared to the previously used Matrix Task, the Dots Game provides a less biased measurement of cheating and allows the participant more opportunities to report dishonestly, strengthening the signal without increasing time requirements. In the Matrix Task employed by Lang et al. [ ], the researchers were unable to determine participant accuracy in a specific trial. Rather, Lang et al. [ ] measured an aggregate of self-reported ‘correctly solved matrices’ to make calculated assumptions about cheating behavior. In comparison, the Dots Game records accuracy in each trial and, therefore, enables the direct measurement of beneficial mistakes (cheating), which decreases the likelihood that genuine, erroneous participant judgments will impact our model. Third, we add a no-music condition to compare the impact of not listening to any sounds at all. Finally, we broaden the generalizability of this research by diversifying the sample, adding an East Asian (Japan) site to our sample in which the religious traditions represented are non-exclusive and focus more on practice (orthopraxy) than belief (orthodoxy) [ , ]. Given the population size of Japan (126.2 million: [ ]) and the prevalence of orthopraxic religion in East Asia [ ], adding a Japanese sample enables further examination of the generalizability of the hypothesized religious priming relationships. For a detailed summary of the differences between the design employed in this paper and the design used in Lang et al. [ ], see S1 Table H in .
Data were collected from three culturally distinct samples that differ in intriguing ways in their general religiosity levels: the Czech Republic, Japan, and the USA. While the majority of people in Japan [ ] and in the Czech Republic [ ] indicate that religion is not important in their lives, the majority of people in the USA think religion is important in their lives [ ]. Further, only a minority of people in the USA are not affiliated to any religion (16%), while the majority of people in the Czech Republic (76%) and in Japan (57%) report no affiliation [ , ]. Despite their high level of non-affiliation, however, over 40% of Japanese people indicated that they believe in god and a majority (62.7%) indicated they go to religious places at least once a year [ ]. Japanese religious systems are also broadly non-exclusive and there is substantial overlap in the ritual and festival practices performed in both Shinto shrines and Buddhist temples [ , – ]. Hence, differences between these sites should enable useful comparisons of the hypothesized effect, as they introduce variation in levels of ritual participation, religious belief, and the significance of religious affiliations. Critically, the inclusion of a Japanese sample enabled us to test for the effect of using musical performances drawn from a distinctive non-Western musical heritage, echoing Lang and colleagues’ [ ] choice to include Mauritian music.
Importantly, to date, there is only one published study that has investigated religious priming effects using a Japanese sample [ ]. Miyatake and Higuchi [ ] attempted a direct replication of Shariff and Norenzayan [ ], utilizing identical methodology, and found that visual religious priming did not affect individuals’ pro-sociality. As Miyatake and Higuchi [ ]suggest, these results may have been due to their decision to use primes that relied on the Western, Christian references traditionally employed in religious priming techniques. Their suggestion that “if local religions and culture had been reflected in the religious primes, the results might have been different” [ ] supported our decision to select culturally relevant auditory cues for each sample (see Materials).
To isolate the effects of religious music, we designed four conditions: religious, secular, white noise, and control (no music). Following Lang et al.’s [ ] learned-association supposition and their results, we predicted there would be no main effect of condition on dishonest behavior, but we expected an interaction between religiosity and condition. Specifically, we expected that participants higher in self-reported religiosity would behave more honestly than their less-religious peers but only when religious participants were listening to religious music. We also examined two supplementary hypotheses assuming: a) the moderating effects of affiliation to a religious organization that is congruent with the religious stimuli(religious affiliation) and b) the moderating effects of ritual participation frequency on the relationship between religious music and dishonest behavior.
The motivation for adding these supplementary hypotheses was to provide further nuance to previous findings by exploring the specific mechanisms that may facilitate the tentative effects of religious cues on normative behavior. The fact that Lang et al. [ ] did not observe any main effect of condition on dishonest behavior and, consequently, that we do not expect such an effect in the present study supports the broader thesis that priming materials inherently connected to a specific cultural context will not affect people’s behavior indiscriminately. That is, to the extent that priming effects rely on symbolic communication, they should be detected only in people who are able to access the symbol’s conventional meaning and its connection to behavioral norms. Of course, some symbols include anthropomorphic characteristics that may exert additional effects on normative conduct. For instance, symbols with eyes may induce normative behavior because the presence of eyes, in general, indicates that one is being watched [ , , ]. However, for most culturally specific cues(i.e., instrumental religious music), symbolic meaning and its association to moral norms must be learned and reinforced. In Lang et al. [ ], the authors approximate individual reinforcement of religious music and its associated normative conduct by utilizing a concept of religiosity that subsumes dimensions such as religious belief, practice, experience, and commitment [ ]. While this broad measure of religiosity is a useful and easy to use approximation, it does not afford for the precise estimation of an individual’s commitment to and understanding of culturally specific religious symbols.
Indeed, being religious or spiritual does not guarantee that one will understand the meaning of a symbol and its connection to the normative structure of a religious system. In multi-religious contexts (USA and Japan in our sample) or in contexts where people declare to be religious/spiritual but unaffiliated (Japan and the Czech Republic in our sample), people may believe in various supernatural agents and take part in many religious activities that are not directly connected to the religious system from which we sampled our priming material. In other words, participants who do not self-affiliate with religious organizations that practice the specific tradition of our religious stimuli may not have learned the conventional meaning and associations of the specific cue used in the present study (despite self-reporting high religiosity). Compared to religiosity, affiliation may serve as a more fine-grained predictor of the learned association between a religious cue and normative behaviors. To examine this idea in greater detail, we measured affiliation and tested its interaction with our treatment, anticipating that religious affiliation would enhance the effects of religious music on ethical behavior.
Furthermore, in many Western religious systems (i.e., Protestantism), religiosity is often associated with personal belief [ – ]. However, in other more orthopraxic oriented religious systems, the dominant dimension of religiosity may be ritual behavior. Together, collapsing orthopraxic and orthodoxic perspectives under the measure of religiosity obfuscates clear distinctions between the effects of practice and belief on behavior [ , ]. Critically, Lang et al. [ ] suggested that it is through communal rituals, rather than belief itself, that the conventional association between a sacred symbol and norms are established and perpetuated. Relatedly, previous findings have observed that increased frequency of ritual behavior facilitates favorable treatment of other co-religionists in real-life and in laboratory contexts, and across various economic games [ , , – ]. Music is central to many religious rituals [ , ], serving several functions like coordination and synchronization [ , , ], but also creating lasting associations between ritual context and normative conduct. Importantly, Lang and colleagues [ ] observed a relationship between frequency of ritual participation and the effectiveness of an auditory religious prime on moral behavior. Thus, to provide a more nuanced investigation of this issue, we also included a measure of ritual participation frequency and interacted this measure with our manipulation, expecting that frequent ritual participation would strengthen the effects of religious music on honest behavior.

## Materials and methods

## Participants
Data were collected at universities across three sites: the USA, the Czech Republic, and Japan. A total of 460 (228 females) adults were randomly assigned to one of four conditions: religious, secular, white noise, or control (no sound). Due to self-reported suspicion on the goals of the experiment and previous experience with studies using the Dots Game, a total of 52 participants were excluded from the analysis. In support of this decision, supplementary analyses of the incorrectly claimed higher-paying sides in the Dots game showed that the excluded participants had 5.5 higher odds of incorrectly claiming all money from the higher-paying side (100% claimed) compared to participants in the included sample (see S1 Table G in for the analysis of the full sample). Five additional participants had missing data on crucial variables such as sex and age. Data included in the analyses therefore comprise: 123 American participants (Mage = 25.5, SD = 9.8), 128Czech participants (Mage = 24.4, SD = 3.4), and 157 Japanese participants (Mage = 19.8, SD = 0.9). Within the four experimental conditions, there were:100 participants in the control condition, 103 participants in the white-noise condition, 103 participants in the secular condition, and 102 participants in the religious condition. Based on the increase of 0.023 in R2 for the interaction between condition and religiosity found in Lang et al. [ ], this sample size should give us 0.85 power to detect the same interaction at alpha = 0.05 (calculated in G*Power).
Experiments were conducted in laboratory settings containing tables, chairs, and computers with headphones. Participants were seated in cubicles such that only the content of their own screen was visible. Experimental materials, informed consent forms, and scripts were translated into local languages (Czech and Japanese) from English. The institutional review boards of Duke University, Hokkaido University, and Masaryk University approved this research. All participants provided an informed consent before taking part in the experiment.

## Materials
The Dots Game is designed to measure participants’ willingness to cheat for real monetary rewards (adapted from Gino et al. [ ]). The Dots Game is a digital task consisting of 200 trials in which dots quickly appear and disappear on a vertically bisected screen. In order to ensure comprehension, all participants completed 10 practice trials before starting the 200 trials that earned compensation. After each trial, participants were asked to indicate the side of the screen (left or right) that had contained more dots. There was no time limit for participants to make their decisions.
The total number of dots presented in each trial summed to 22 and a minimum of eight dots was randomly presented on the left or right side in every trial. Of the 200 payment trials, 120 displayed more dots on the left side while only 80 trials displayed more dots on the higher paying, right side. During the task, earnings accumulated and were displayed at the top of each participant’s screen as selections were made. Although participants were instructed to be as accurate as possible, accuracy does not affect payment in the Dots Game.
It was explained to participants that detecting more dots on the left side of the screen is easier and that the payment for right-side selections would therefore be worth more than left-side selections. Specifically, indicating that the left side of the screen contained more dots always earned the participant $0.005 USD while indicating that the right side of the screen contained more dots always earned the participant $0.05 USD. To measure cheating, we do not look to the total number of higher paying selections made [ ]; rather, we limit response bias by observing the percentage of inaccurately claimed higher-paying sides [ ]. In Japan and the Czech Republic, compensation was paid in local currency and approximately equaled USD amounts ($0.05 and $0.005). Therefore, a maximal cheater could earn $10 and a completely honest and accurate player would earn $4.60. Musical tracks (religious, secular, white noise) played on-loop were added to the Dots Game for the purposes of this experiment.
Musical tracks were pre-tested using participant pools specific to each site (online with Lancers in Japan and Amazon’s Mechanical Turk in the USA, and with a student population in the Czech Republic). At each site, we compared eight 2-minute musical tracks across their musical characteristics, including tempo, affect, and impact. See S1 Table I in for the musical tracks tested in each population. The songs selected for the USA and CzR samples were identical to the ones used in Lang and colleagues [ ]. For the USA sample, Johan Sebastian Bach’s Jesu joy of man’s desiring was chosen as the religious track, while Bach’s Sleepers awake was chosen as the secular track. In the Czech Republic, Bach’s Ave Maria (Gounod’s interpretation) was used as the religious music, while Tchaikovsky’s Romance for piano in F Minor, Op. 5 was selected for the secular music. A Gagaku(雅楽) musical track was selected as the religious stimuli for the Japan sample. Gagaku music is a form of traditional classical music performed by an orchestra and usually features the distinctive sound of a traditional mouth organ, referred to as Shō(笙). Gagaku has been described as the world’s oldest orchestral music and is associated with Shinto ritual performances and ceremonies conducted at the imperial court [ , ]. For the Japanese secular music condition, music performed on a koto (箏), a traditional Japanese stringed instrument, was selected. Furthermore, in order to avoid any associations with traditional ritual or religious settings, a koto performance of a more contemporary arrangement was selected [ ]. Across all sites, the selected religious and secular musical tracks were instrumental only and included no vocal elements. They differed in perceived sacredness but were similar in tempo and affect (See ‘Manipulation Check’). Finally, the white noise comprised a loop of white noise played through headphones at all sites, while the control condition comprised just silence.
Surveys were administered after completion of the Dots Game to assess religiosity (0 –Not religious at all, 4 –Very religious/spiritual person), ritual attendance frequency (0 –Never, 6 –More than once per week), religious organization affiliation (i.e., church), and religious tradition participants were affiliated with. Participants in the music conditions (religious, secular, and white noise) rated how secular/religious and profane/sacred the sound was on a 7-point Likert scale (1 = Secular, 7 = Religious; 1 = Profane, 7 = Sacred). Additionally, music condition participants used a 5-point Likert scale (1 = Not at all, 5 = Extremely) to rate the extent to which the song they heard was: sad, fast, boring, pleasant, happy, irritating, slow, exciting, deep, interesting, distressing, powerful, relaxing, and distracting. Recognition of the musical track (Yes, No) was also assessed for music conditions’ participants. All participants were asked about the perceived difficulty of the task (1 –Very easy, 5 –Very difficult), as well as their age and gender. Given the Dots Game was developed and studied locally, US participants also indicated their involvement in previous research using the Dots Game (Yes or No).

## Procedure
Participants were first randomly assigned to one of four conditions: religious music, secular music, white noise, or control (no music). Participants were informed that the research was studying decision-making and at each site, local research assistants facilitated the experiment.
Upon arrival to the lab, participants were seated in front of a tablet or a computer and could see their screen only. First, participants read instructions for the Dots Game where it was explained that the game consisted of 200 trials in which dots would temporarily flash onto computer screens. For the duration of the game, the computer screens were divided into two vertical halves (left and right) and, after each trial, participants were asked to accurately determine which side of their screen contained the majority of the dots that had appeared by pressing either the ‘M’ key (to indicate right) or the ‘Z’ key (to indicate left) on a computer keyboard. Dots remained visible on the computer screen for only one second before participants were prompted to make their selection. As participants made their selections, earnings accumulated and were displayed at the top of each participant’s screen. On average, it took participants six minutes and four seconds (SD = 1.15 minutes) to finish the Dots Game.
All participants were instructed to wear the headphones at their computer for the entire duration of the game. Control participants played the Dots Game without music; all other participants played the Dots Game while listening to their site-specific and randomly assigned musical track on-loop. The research assistant was available in an adjacent room to provide any necessary assistance. After the game was over, participants completed a post-study questionnaire (see Materials for overview, Supporting Information for detailed review) and received the reward amount they had earned in the Dots Game. Completing the Dots Game and survey took participants no more than 30 minutes.

## Results
All data were analyzed in R (version 3.4.3, R Core Team 2017). We first constructed an Ordinary Least-Square Regression (OLS) model with treatment as a factor variable, investigating the main effects of musical condition on the percentage of dishonestly claimed earnings. We set the religious condition as a reference category to compare its effects with various controls (secular music, white noise, control), while holding the effects of age, gender, and site constant as simple fixed effects. Note that the USA was set as a reference category for the site factor variable; however, this selection was arbitrary and did not affect any of the main estimates of interest. Next, three interaction OLS models were constructed, looking at the moderating effects of religiosity, ritual participation, and religious affiliation on the relationship between the treatment and dishonest behavior. Religious affiliation was determined using religious organization affiliation and religious identity responses. Specifically, a participant was considered affiliated if they belonged to a religious organization and self-identified with the religion associated with the religious stimulus at each site (i.e., Christianity in the Czech Republic and US, Shinto in Japan). Note that while Lang and colleagues [ ]used beta regression to model the percentage data in their previous analyses [ ], the current results from OLS regressions are qualitatively similar to the results of beta regression; hence we opted for simpler models. The results from beta regression models are reported in the, S1 Table D in . Likewise, since our participants were nested within sites, it would be more appropriate to use linear mixed models to investigate our main hypotheses. However, given that there are only three categories in our nesting variable, estimating individual site intercepts from the partially pooled data did not yield qualitatively different results compared to using sites as simple fixed effects (see S1 Table E in ). Additionally, we adjusted our models to account for: the perceived difficulty of the dots task, the difference between the average trial completion time, and the completion times for trials where participants cheated. In the final robustness check, we hold constant the ratings of musical stimuli to ensure that the observed effects were not caused by differences between the stimuli’s perceived affect, tempo, or impact (see S1 Table F in ).

## Manipulation check
Perceived sacredness was observed to be significantly different between musical conditions [F(2,299) = 53.8]. Across all sites, the religious track received significantly higher ratings of sacredness than did the secular(β = -0.85; 95% CI = [-1.21, -0.49]) or white-noise tracks (β = -1.91; 95% CI = [-2.27, -1.54] see for descriptive statistics). Similar results were obtained with the secular/religious measure [F(2,300) = 40.34], showing higher religiosity ratings of the religious song compared to the secular (β = -1.32; 95% CI = [-1.69, -0.95]) or white-noise tracks (β = -1.60; 95% CI = [-1.97, -1.23]).
 

## Dishonest behavior
Dishonesty in the Dots Game was observed by measuring the proportion of inaccurate higher paying (right side) selections made. This dishonesty metric was calculated by dividing the number of times a participant inaccurately indicated that the higher paying side contained more dots by the number of trials (120) in which the lower paying (left side) truly contained more dots. Participants across all sites earned an average of $5.86 (SD = $1.52), indicating right side incorrectly on average in 27.39% of trials (SD = 29.21%). Interestingly, the average rates of dishonest reporting differed between our sites: while in the Czech Republic, participants claimed on average 11.69% (SD = 13.72%) incorrectly, in Japan and the USA the rates were as high as 29.88% (SD = 28.43%) and 40.56% (SD = 34.28%), respectively (see ).
 Looking at the distribution of dishonest reporting across our musical treatment, we observed that the control condition had the lowest amount of cheating, followed by the religious, white-noise, and secular conditions (see and ). However, these raw results ignore the hierarchical structure of our data where participants are nested within sites. Hence, to examine the effects of our treatment on dishonest reporting more rigorously, we regressed the incorrectly claimed right sides on our musical treatment, holding the site-specific mean levels of dishonest reporting constant. This regression model revealed that there were no substantial differences between the religious and the secular (β = 3.45; 95% CI = [-4.02, 10.91]), white-noise (β = 3.21; 95% CI = [-4.21, 10.62]), or control conditions (β = -4.91; 95% CI = [-12.37, 2.55]; see ). The inability to find differences between conditions replicates Lang and colleagues’ [ ] previous finding.
 Following the absence of treatment main-effect, we tested three moderator models, investigating the role of self-declared religiosity, ritual frequency, and religious affiliation. First, we did not observe an interaction between condition and self-reported religiosity. While an increase in self-declared religiosity predicted decrease in the proportion of incorrectly reported right sides in the religious music condition (β = -2.12), this decrease was imprecisely estimated and the 95% CI crossed zero (-6.77, 2.53). Furthermore, this religiosity coefficient was not substantially different from coefficients in the secular (βdifference = 2.97; 95% CI = [-3.40, 9.35]), white-noise (βdifference = -1.40; 95% CI = [-7.94, 5.14]), or control conditions (βdifference = 0.82; 95% CI = [-5.49, 7.13]; see ). For site-specific results, see S1 Table A in .
 Following the effects of ritual participation found in Lang et al.[ ], we built a second moderator model measuring the effect of the ritual attendance frequency and its interaction with treatment. An increase of one on the ritual frequency scale (0 –Never, 6 –More than once per week) predicted a decrease of roughly 4 percentage points in dishonestly claimed compensation in the religious condition (β = -4.19; 95% CI = [-7.34, -1.03]). Importantly, the slope of the ritual attendance differed between conditions, showing that ritual attendance decreased the ratio of incorrectly claimed right sides only to a small extent in the secular condition(βdifference = 3.46, 95% CI = [-1.01,7.94]), and had no effect in the noise(βdifference = 4.49, 95% CI = [-0.10, 9.08]) and control conditions(βdifference = 3.89; 95% CI = [-0.48,8.26]). See also and and S1 Table B in for site-specific results.
Finally, in the third moderator model, we analyzed the effects of self-reported affiliation matching the specific religious stimulus at each site(binary yes/no variable) and its interactions with the musical treatment. Religious affiliation had a strong negative relationship with dishonest reporting in the religious condition, predicting roughly 26 percentage points lower number of unfairly claimed compensations (β = -26.09; 95% CI = [-40.12, -12.06]). Importantly, we observed a significant Condition*Affiliation interaction: the effect of religious affiliation was much weaker in all three remaining conditions (Secular: βdifference = 23.78, 95% CI = [5.64, 42.90]; Noise: βdifference = 21.84, 95% CI = [2.76, 40.92]; Control: βdifference = 24.94, 95% CI = [5.97, 43.91]; see and ). These findings indicate that participants who affiliated with a religious tradition matching our stimuli were less dishonest when listening to the religious song, but affiliation had no effect in the remaining conditions (see S1 Table C in for site-specific results). See also, S1 Table D in for a robustness check of these results using the Beta regression and S1 Table E in for using linear mixed models (these robustness checks support our findings obtained with simpler models reported here).
As a final robustness check, we also adjusted our models for the mean completion time of the dots task, perceived difficulty of the task, and musical characteristics of our stimuli (see S1 Table F in ). Across all models, we observed that the rates of dishonest behavior were predicted by faster completion times on the dishonestly reported trials. That is, the less time participants dedicated to decision making, the more likely they were to report dishonestly because correct answers required deliberately counting the dots and making sure one selected the correct answer. This finding is congruent with perceived difficulty of the task, which negatively predicts the number of incorrectly reported dots. Notably, these findings can be explained by dishonest participants’ willingness to pre-determine the higher compensation choice (hold down the ‘M’ key), which would naturally decrease participation time and task difficulty. After adjusting our models for these variables, the moderating effects of ritual participation frequency and religious affiliation remained stable. Furthermore, we assessed whether the reported results hold even after the models accounted for the musical characteristics of our stimuli: tempo, influence, positivity, and negativity (see S1 Table F in ). While perceived negativity of the played track predicted dishonesty, we still observed the effect of ritual and religious affiliation as well as the interactions of Condition*Affiliation and Condition*Ritual, albeit we could not assess the effects of musical characteristics in the control condition due to the fact this condition had no musical stimulus. These findings indicate that the religious condition tracks did not affect cheating in the Dots Game due to their musical characteristic ratings; rather, participants who affiliated with a religious organization and participated in rituals were uniquely affected by the sacred music primes and, in turn, played less dishonestly than unaffiliated participants.

## Discussion
In the present study, we conducted a cross-cultural replication and extension of religious priming research by Lang et al. [ ]. Specifically, we tested the hypothesis that auditory religious cues decrease unethical behavior in cheating games compared to other auditory cues (secular, white noise, and control). We collected data on university populations from three countries with distinct religious and cultural norms: the Czech Republic, Japan, and the United States of America. All participants played a cheating game, the Dots Game, during which they listened to a musical track and had an opportunity to maximize their earnings by playing dishonestly. There was no main effect of musical treatment on cheating behavior. Further, we were unable to replicate the interaction effect of Condition*Religiosity observed by Lang et al. [ ]. However, we did observe interactions between condition and religious affiliation and condition and ritual participation. Auditory religious cues were found to decrease dishonest reporting for participants frequently attending religious services and for those affiliated with a religious organization matching our religious stimuli.
Taken together, our results generally provide support for Lang and colleagues’ [ ] observation that exposure to religious music is not enough to prime honest behavior in all contexts. Notably, our findings provide additional evidence for a mechanism they proposed; specifically, an entrenched association between music and the religious values it reinforces is required for the activation of normative behavior. In their paper, Lang & colleagues [ ] observed that situational religious factors, such as reported religiosity and ritual participation, played a role in the activation of religious cues and facilitation of their effects on ethical behavior. Although we did not observe the Condition*Religiosity interaction in the present research, we did observe similar interactions indicating that individual religious characteristics play a role in how people react to religious auditory cues.
In order to understand why we were unable to replicate the Religiosity*Treatment interaction, it is important to consider two points. First, compared to the Mauritian sample in Lang et al. [ ], our Japanese sample included greater religious diversity. All Mauritian participants were Hindu in Lang et al. [ ], hence the selected religious music was generally familiar and associated with their affiliated tradition. In our Japanese sample, however, participants from a variety of religions were represented (Christianity, Buddhism, Shinto, Judaism, atheism, unknown, and other). While Gagaku music is sometimes performed as part of Buddhist religious ceremonies, it is most strongly associated with Shintoism. Therefore, it is possible that for some of our participants this music did not cue normative behavior typical for the targeted religious affiliation. Second, religion in Japan, as elsewhere in Asia, is typically regarded as non-exclusive and has been described as having a ‘practical’ orientation wherein adherence to religious beliefs is seen as of secondary importance to ritual practices [ , , ], potentially confounding the measure of religiosity. For instance, Kavanagh and Jong [ ], recently demonstrated that while only 10% of 1,000 Japanese respondents self-identified as religious, 34% in the same sample identified as Buddhist, 5% as Shinto, and 33% endorsed the existence of God.
The increased religious diversity of our sample implies that religiosity in the current paper has a distinct meaning as it is understood within the context of an individual’s religious background. Indeed, the site-specific analyses of the Condition*Religiosity interaction (see S1 Table A in ) revealed that in Japan, religiosity had the smallest effect on dishonest behavior in the religious condition (albeit these coefficients were imprecisely estimated). This finding is in line with similar research showing that in multi-religious societies, cross-religious symbols may reduce trust and cooperation [ , but see also ].
Secondly, the relationship between affiliation, ritual participation, and religiosity is complex. It is entirely possible for someone to be religious/spiritual and, at the same time, be unaffiliated with a specific religion or religious organization. In the USA, for instance, where religiosity is typically understood as affiliation to a specific church [ ], more than a quarter (27%) of adult respondents indicated they were spiritual, but not religious [ ]. However, if a person is spiritual without being affiliated to a specific religious institution, they may lack the necessary associations with the sacred auditory cues we selected and therefore could be less, or entirely, unaffected by our stimulus. To make the relationship clearer, we coded affiliation to specific religious organizations and demonstrated that membership in the matching tradition had an effect. We conjecture that this is due to people affiliated with a religious organization having more exposure to sacred music in meaningful contexts than unaffiliated peers and consequently, affiliated persons are likely to have stronger associations to the moral implications of religious auditory cues than the unaffiliated. In support of this, research on exposure and learning has demonstrated that a person’s affective response to a stimulus can change over time [ ]. In addition to repeated exposure, the meaningfulness of a stimulus can affect a person’s response to it [ ]. With repeated exposure to meaningful stimuli, people are able to create associations and have the ability to strengthen their judgments about the stimuli and its propositions [ ].
It is also important to consider the fact that unaffiliated religious people often have differing beliefs about the connection between specific religions, belief in God(s), and morality [ ]. The majority of religiously affiliated people in the USA (55%) agree that the belief in God is necessary to be moral; conversely, however, of all adults—affiliated and unaffiliated—the majority in the Czech Republic (78%), Japan (55%), and in the USA (56%), do not think it is necessary to believe in god to be moral [ , ]. Based on previous literature and on the findings of the present research, we suggest that religious auditory stimuli cue ethical behavior only for participants who believe that their affiliated religion is inherently linked to morality.
This interpretation is congruent with the results from the regression model of the interaction between condition and the frequency of ritual attendance, where ritual attendance has the largest negative effect on dishonest reporting in the religious condition. Through repetitive reminders of sacred cues during religious ceremonies, the association between a specific sacred cue and the moral doctrine of a specific religion is strengthened and the cue is emotionally charged with special significance [ ]. This in turn may result in a larger influence over participants’ behavior being exerted upon perception of the cue [ , ]. Importantly, collective rituals are also a public venue for communicating commitment to supernatural agents and the norms they impose on believers [ – ]. However, the commitment is not signaled only to other believers but also to oneself as a form of auto-signaling reassuring participants about their beliefs in supernatural agents [ , , ]. Hearing religious music may be a subconscious reminder of participation in rituals, strengthening the auto-communicated commitment signals. While the effect of ritual participation was weaker compared to religious affiliation (similar to the findings of Lang et al. [ ]), we still detected a signal supporting this interpretation.
It is important to note that our analyses do not take into account what type of rituals our participants attend as well as the frequency with which our religious stimuli are played during specific religious ceremonies; hence, the signal is noisy. A larger, high-powered sample allowing for testing a three-way interaction between treatment, religiosity, and affiliation to specific religious organization may solve this issue in future studies. Furthermore, our sample consisted predominantly of university students. While the sample was culturally and religiously diverse, it generally lacked diversity in age or employment status. Moreover, due to specific lab guidelines, participants in the Czech sample received an additional reward of points that were redeemable for a course credit, which may have partially decreased their motivation to report dishonestly for monetary compensation. Indeed, this motivation may have acted as a boundary condition for religious priming across samples. As previously noted by other researchers using priming techniques [ , ], there may have been little room to observe religious priming effects if the motivation to be dishonest was relatively low in the Czech Republic. To avoid these problems, cross-cultural researchers should be careful to align laboratory incentive structures across samples. Moreover, future studies on priming with religious music should consider sampling from more populations with cultural and demographic diversity that would allow for the assessment of between-site differences in the hypothesized effects (see S1 Tables A-C in ). Likewise, since stimulus selection can influence Type I error rates if stimuli are not representative of their theoretical construct and are treated as fixed-factors [ ], the selection of locally salient religious stimuli should be made more robust by including at least three different stimuli at each site. Future researchers should also explicitly control for stimulus variation by employing mixed models that treat both participants and stimuli as random factors [ ].
Additionally, it is useful to consider the limitations of single-item scales when interpreting our results [ ]. The reliability of the religiosity measure we employed was not clearly established in this research. This measure contained only a single-item and was not pre-tested between sites prior to experimentation [ ]. Therefore, it may have been the case that religiosity was understood and expressed idiosyncratically within each of our cross-cultural samples. Furthermore, the religiosity scale was asymmetrical as the word “spiritual” was not included at both ends of the scale (see Questionnaire materials in ). This scale asymmetry was consistent across all sites and was due to an error in implementing the materials of Lang et al [ ]. Together, the lack of pre-tested validity of our single-item measure as well as the scale’s asymmetry, may have limited our ability to replicate the primary Condition*Religiosity interaction observed in Lang et al [ ]. To explicitly address such concerns, future researchers should investigate the reliability of different religiosity scales across cultures, peoples, and religions.
Finally, it is worthwhile to discuss a limitation of the Dots Game procedure. The Dots Game has been utilized to measure ethical decision-making preferences for nearly a decade [ ] (See Materials for a review of the procedure). In this research, we use the Dots Game to observe cheating behavior as it provides a less biased- and more granular- measurement than the Matrix task employed by Lang and colleagues [ ]). Furthermore, we investigated religious priming effects on honesty because normative regulations of altruism and sharing may vary across cultures substantially more compared to norms regulating cheating [ , ]. Despite the benefits of using the Dots Game (see in-depth discussion in Introduction), our results may be influenced by signal detection biases (for a review of signal detection research, see [ – ]). Due to the compensation scheme, participants may have preferred the higher-paying (right) side and therefore, may have had an unconscious bias to detect more dots on the higher-paying side.
Indeed, research has shown that Dots Game participants attend more to the higher-paying side in incentivized Dots Games [ ]. Unconscious attentional bias may increase ambiguity, making it less clear to participants when their choices are inaccurate. Thus, cheating behavior may have been facilitated by an interaction of signal detection bias with various factors(e.g., noise, perceived difficulty or distraction). Greater familiarity with a musical track, for example, could have increased participants’ bias for detecting higher-paying side dots, which in turn may have increased participants’ likelihood to report inaccurate higher-paying selections. However, given the potential for third variable problems, we adjusted our models for perceived difficulty and musical ratings (See Supporting Information for an in-depth review). Furthermore, it is unlikely that unconscious signal detection biases can fully explain the cheating behavior we observed in this paper, as other findings indicate that Dots Game participants are at least partially conscious of their unethical behavior [ ].
We recommend that future research extends the religious priming literature by exploring methods that will provide less biased cheating data. Specifically, future studies should test the religious priming effects on a broader spectrum of samples, including horticulturalists and pastoralists from small-scale societies [ ]. Moreover, we encourage future researchers to independently investigate if the differences observed between our samples replicate. For instance, cross-cultural researchers could attempt to replicate and extend the understanding of the uniquely low cheating rates observed in our Czech sample, as well as the depressed Condition*Religiosity interaction coefficient observed in the Japan model. Additional, experiments could test religious priming effects on cheating behavior across a variety of cheating tasks. Finally, we encourage healthy science practices and invite researchers to improve the generalizability of our findings by iterating on our replication with pre-registered designs. In support of such future endeavors, we have made our study materials and data available for access on the Open Science Framework (https://osf.io/k4dt8).

## Conclusion
In summary, we conceptually replicated findings in the religious priming literature that indicate sacred cues affect individual ethical behavior and support a learned association hypothesis [ ]. Although we did not find evidence for the expected interaction effect between religiosity and musical primes, we did observe an interaction effect between ritual participation and musical prime and between religious affiliation and musical prime. More specifically, sacred auditory cues were found to affect ethical behavior for individuals who attend religious rituals or were affiliated with a religious organization that practices the tradition associated with the relevant musical cues. These indirect priming effects were congruent with Lang and colleagues [ ], even though the current paper extended the research design by utilizing a decision-making task better able to detect cheating (the Dots Game) and by including a non-Western site with greater religious diversity and an orthopraxic religious orientation (Japan).
It is our hope that the current research will inspire others to conduct replications and further examinations of religious priming effects, especially with understudied populations. Indeed, replications have been identified as a solution to the reproducibility crisis in the social sciences and may one day end debates within religious priming research [ , , ].

## Supporting information
S1 File(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 File

## Post-study questionnaire materials, translated from English into Czech and Japanese for the Czech Republic and Japan sites, respectively.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Data(ZIP)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Data(ZIP)
Click here for additional data file.

We would like to thank Dhrumil Patel and Merve Akbas for advising on the Dots Game software. Jan Horský, Monika Bystroňová and František Brázda for being invaluable research assistants, and Eva Kundtová Klocová and HUME Lab Experimental Humanities Laboratory, Faculty of Arts, Masaryk University, for exceptional research support.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0237007.r001Decision Letter 0
van ElkMichielAcademic Editor© 2020 Michiel van Elk2020Michiel van ElkThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
8 Apr 2020

PONE-D-20-04631
Replicating and Extending the Effects of Auditory Religious Cues on Dishonest Behavior
PLOS ONE
Dear Mr. Nichols,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
As you will see, two reviewers have read your manuscript and they are both very positive. I agree with their assessment. This is an interesting study, the findings are straightforward and the reporting is well done! Both reviewers also make some additional suggestions to further improve the manuscript. These include mainly (1) elaborating on the distinction between religiosity / religious & ritual participation in the Introduction, (2) discussing the role of validity of single-item measures, (3) discussing the ecological validity of music priming as an experimental manipulation. As this study was not pre-registered, I think it would also be good if you could include a statement about reporting all measures that were included in the study, in this manuscript. Thanks for submitting your work to this journal and I am looking forward to receiving a revised version, addressing the points made by the reviewers. 
We would appreciate receiving your revised manuscript by May 23 2020 11:59PM. When you are ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter.
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). This letter should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. This file should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. This file should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Manuscript'.

Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Michiel van Elk
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1) Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2) Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information.
3) Please amend either the title on the online submission form (via Edit Submission) or the title in the manuscript so that they are identical.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Summary: The authors attempt to replicate the work of Lang et al. (2016), who investigated the effects of religious instrumental music (vs. secular music or white noise) on ethical behavior (refraining from cheating). The current project is not quite a direct replication of the original work, but it is close: whereas the original research samples participants from the U.S., the Czech Republic, and Mauritius, the current work samples from the U.S., the Czech Republic, and Japan. In addition, the current work adds a no-music control condition, and conducts analyses using OLS rather than beta regression.
Lang et al. (2016) reported an interaction across all three sites between priming condition and participant religiosity, as well as a marginally significant interaction between priming condition and frequency of ritual participation. The current replication effort found no interaction between condition and religiosity, but did observe an interaction between priming condition and frequency of ritual participation, as well as an interaction between priming condition and religious affiliation.
As the field continues to focus on ensuring the robustness of findings, this is a welcome contribution. The experiments are well conducted, the manuscript is well written and well organized, and the work provides increased confidence in the claim that religious contexts and communities can influence normative behavior among participants. Overall, I recommend publication following moderate revisions, as described below.
Perhaps the most major point to be addressed concerns the theoretical connections between religiosity, frequency of ritual participation, and religious affiliation. The Introduction does not clearly delineate “religiosity” from “ritual participation”, nor does it provide a clear model of how all three of these factors are understood to relate one another. Thus, it is not entirely clear from a theoretical point of view why the authors prioritize “religiosity” as the main variable of interest, with ritual participation and religious affiliation as “supplemental” factors (the empirical justification, based on significance tests from Lang et al. [2016] is clear). Because the Introduction does not clearly disentangle the interconnections between religiosity, ritual participation, and religious affiliation, I think readers are left confused as to how they should interpret the fact that the experiments provide evidence supporting a role for the “supplemental” variables but not, apparently, the primary variable—religiosity— that seems to be the focus of the replication.
Given that the authors did not preregister the study or conduct this as a registered report, I certainly respect the way that the Introduction highlights the variable that is ultimately least supported by the data, nor should any revisions engage in HARKing. But the lack of theoretical clarity in the Introduction is a concern, and a revised introduction might elaborate upon—in a clear and more extended fashion—how religiosity is conceptually distinct from ritual participation; what the implications of this might be; and what are the possible ways that religiosity, ritual participation, and religious affiliation relate to one another and potentially interact to influence ethical behavior. This would pave the way for a revised Discussion as well, where the authors could clarify precisely what 3-way interactions they would expect to emerge in future research. Lines 481-483 of the Discussion, for instance, suggest a 3-way interaction among condition, “religiosity,” and religious affiliation. Could, or should, “frequency of ritual participation” be substituted for “religiosity” here?
A second point. The experiments are framed as a “replication.” As the recent surge of meta-science makes clear, there are many ways to define “replication” (Open Science Collaboration, 2015). Here the authors appear to adopt the approach of conducting basically the same significance tests as in the original study. This is of course completely sensible, but the manuscript would benefit from a consideration of other ways to define replication, and some treatment of the extent to which results from the current work could be considered to replicate using at least some other recommended criteria.
Third, the authors make very broad claims about “religious music” in general. At the same time, within each cultural context the studies rely upon a single example of religious music. Although the authors are hardly unusual in generalizing from a very small number of stimuli, there are serious limitations in doing so—and especially in not using statistical methods that treat stimuli as a random factor (Judd, Westfall, and Kenny, 2012). These limitations should be more prominently acknowledged in the Discussion. Doing so would also provide an opportunity to call for future research that samples multiple religious songs for each cultural context. Such a design would be well equipped to use relevant characteristics of the songs (e.g., sacredness, holiness, as well as perhaps others) to explain variation in the strength of the condition x religiosity/ritual participation interaction(s).
Some lesser points:
Abstract: The abstract comes across as too vague. Sample N’s, greater specificity concerning the origin of the participants, and a bit more detail concerning the experimental paradigm (especially control conditions) should be provided. And in discussing results, the abstract does not allude to the presence or absence of cross-cultural differences.
Introduction:
Lines 60-69. It might be worth noting that some large-scale religious priming experiments examining ethical/prosocial behavior have been conducted in the wake of van Elk’s call (e.g., White et al., 2019; Billingsley et al., 2018). Results appear to converge on the view that implicit (anagram-based) primes do not exert significant effects but more explicit (verbal/written) primes seem to exert a small effect. This might provide some useful, additional context in the Discussion as well.
Lines 153-164. Regarding sample size, it is not clear that power calculations determined the sample size. How was the sample size (460) actually determined? It’s rather disappointing that a replication study of this sort was not pre-registered, so that exclusion criteria, stopping rules, and other aspects of the protocol would have been determined ahead of time.
Line 155: Results using all participants should be made available in Supplemental.
Line 215: “They [the religious vs. secular songs] differed in perceived sacredness.” To avoid this coming across as an unjustified claim, I would alert the reader (maybe in a parenthetical insertion) that supporting data is soon to follow.
Line 218: Why does the left anchor of the religiosity scale not mention “spirituality” if the right anchor does? This could be relevant to the Discussion lines 441ff.
More attention should be paid to psychometrics and the limitations of the measures used. Most notable is the single-item measure of religiosity. Although reliability with just a single item may be a concern, I think the deeper issue is the difficulty associated with knowing that religiosity measures are functioning equivalently across cultures (Cohen et al., 2017). So, for instance, to the extent that results in Japan are driving differences between this study and the 2016 results, we can’t be sure that differential functioning of the religiosity measure might not be a contributing factor. The lack of a multi-item scale that has been tested for invariance across the sampled cultures is a limitation that should be acknowledged.
Line 295. In discussing the relatively low level of cheating observed in the Czech Republic, it might be useful to refer to Shariff and Norenzayan’s (2015) discussion of boundary conditions in the context of religious priming and prosocial behavior. The argument would be that if motivation to cheat is (for whatever reason) relatively low in the Czech Republic, the religious prime has relatively little room to operate.
Analyses: Would it make sense to include affiliation and ritual participation in the same model, to see if they predict unique variance? I think the answer depends on how a revised Introduction defines religiosity vs. ritual participation, but in principle this could be an informative analysis.
Discussion:
Lines 402-413 Seems like there should be an acknowledgment here that the “primary” hypothesis, concerning religiosity, was not supported.
Billingsley et al. (2018. Implicit and explicit influences of religious cognition on Dictator Game transfers
Royal Society open science 5 (8), 170238
Cohen et al. (2017). Theorizing and measuring religiosity across cultures. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 43(12), 1724-1736.
Judd, C. M., Westfall, J., & Kenny, D. A. (2012). Treating stimuli as a random factor in social psychology: A
new and comprehensive solution to a pervasive but largely ignored problem. Journal of
personality and social psychology, 103(1), 54.
Open Science Collaboration. (2015). Estimating the reproducibility of psychological science. Science
349(6251), aac4716.
Shariff & Norenzayan (2015). A question of reliability or of boundary conditions? Comment on Gomes
and McCullough (2015). American Psychological Association 144 (6), e105
White et al. (2019). Supernatural norm enforcement: Thinking about karma and God reduces selfishness
among believers. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 84
Reviewer #2: I want to start by saying this is an excellent study and I think it deserves to be published basically as is. I have a few minor comments.
There is a lot of work on priming and religion and a lot that doesn’t find very robust effects, but much of this work is not looking at the nuances of what people believe and how they participant in their religion. Though I can quite confidently say that there are more than enough religious priming studies looking at sentence unscrambling tasks in Christians, there are very few looking across religions and looking at how people whose primary religious practices are based around ritual action, not belief itself. The findings here follow very clearly from the theory.
Thus, my largest criticism is that this is not stated in enough detail in the paper. The theory, and why these results should be expected, is explained in a couple sentences about how the methods differ from previous studies. This is a huge issue within the literature itself and should be addressed more fully in the paper. If we expect things like priming to work at all, it should be related to what people actually practice, rather than some method that assumes American Protestantism represent primary way people are religious. This is an important finding and should be addressed as such.
You should also include a bit more detail as to why cheating is an important measure as well. Research typically used dictator game, or generosity based measures, and the argument is that religion is enforcing norms of fairness. These norms are not consistent across cultures, but norms against cheating are. Thus, cheating is better measure for studies focusing on religious prosociality.
Data analysis is very well done. I particularly appreciate that the regression table include models with and without moderators.
Why do you only have a site by site analysis with religiosity in the supplemental? Why not add tables with ritual frequency and religious affiliation as well? These would be informative here.
Minor comments;
The Shariff et al. meta-analysis also found that religious primes are only effective on religiously affiliated people, might be worth mentioning as it supports your argument.
Relatedly, the van Elk et al. meta-analysis only failed to find an effect in the PET analysis, but did find an effect in the PEESE analysis. PET is a notoriously inaccurate meta-analytic measure (under realistic data conditions, it can fail to find a true effect between 70-90% of the time).
Table 2 is a bit messed up and hard to read in the pdf. This is probably due to rendering, but would be worth checking the original document.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files to be viewed.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Review Replicating & Extending the Effects of Auditory Cues.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0237007.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
21 May 2020

Dear Dr. van Elk,
Thank you for inviting us to revise and resubmit our manuscript, “Replicating and Extending the Effects of Auditory Religious Cues on Dishonest Behavior” (MS PONE-D-20-04631).
We have made several changes to address the feedback provided by you and the reviewers. In particular, we have:
1) Modified our abstract to provide more details about our research methods and results
2) Clarified the key difference between religiosity and religious practice in our Introduction
3) Discussed the validity of dishonesty as a measure of religious priming effects 
4) Expanded the discussion of our research limitations, highlighting potential scale reliability issues and future opportunities to extend the literature on religious priming
5) Added table captions to our manuscript, and tables and figures to our supplement
6) Included several new references 
7) Corrected model 4 coefficients that were slightly off due to clerical errors during coding 
8) Made multiple formatting changes to align our manuscript with PLOS ONE guidelines
On the following pages, we respond in-depth to your feedback and the reviewers’ detailed comments. We think the revisions that were requested strengthen the quality of our submission and its contribution to the literature on religious priming. Please let us know if you have any remaining concerns about this work. 
Finally, in pursuit of good science and complete transparency, we have agreed to share our research materials, data, and analysis code on the Open Science Framework. These resources can be accessed at https://osf.io/k4dt8/?view_only=bb2cbb8b9c774ade984b672a3eddce43. Upon acceptance of our manuscript, these resources will be publicly available at https://osf.io/k4dt8/.
Sincerely,
Aaron D. Nichols
Martin Lang
Christopher Kavanaugh 
Radek Kundt
Junko Yamada
Panagiotis Mitkidis
Dan Ariely 
From the Editor
Dear Mr. Nichols,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
As you will see, two reviewers have read your manuscript and they are both very positive. I agree with their assessment. This is an interesting study, the findings are straightforward and the reporting is well done! Both reviewers also make some additional suggestions to further improve the manuscript. These include mainly (1) elaborating on the distinction between religiosity / religious & ritual participation in the Introduction, (2) discussing the role of validity of single-item measures, (3) discussing the ecological validity of music priming as an experimental manipulation. As this study was not pre-registered, I think it would also be good if you could include a statement about reporting all measures that were included in the study, in this manuscript. Thanks for submitting your work to this journal and I am looking forward to receiving a revised version, addressing the points made by the reviewers. 
Response: We thank the editor for inviting us to revise and resubmit our manuscript. We have revised our manuscript based on the collective feedback from the editor and the two reviewers and we believe this feedback has helped us to substantially enhance our manuscript. Specifically, we have added to the discussion of the nuances between religiosity, religious ritual participation, and affiliation in the Introduction on pages 5-6 (lines 179-229). In the Discussion section (Page 15-18, see also lines 607-612), we now detail how our research could be confounded by reliability issues. Specifically, we cite research (Cohen et al., 2017) indicating that single-item measures are susceptible to inconsistencies between tests, times, and cultures. We have also added to the Introduction (Page 2) to provide another example of auditory religious priming and we have clarified to readers why music priming can be considered an ecologically valid manipulation (Page 5-6, see also lines 194-206; lines 229-231). In our discussion (Pages 15-18, see also lines 599-607), we invite researchers to examine the generalizability of this manipulation by exploring auditory religious priming across a greater variety of culturally-relevant musical tracks. To highlight our commitment to transparency and collaborative science, we have uploaded our materials, analyses, and data to the Open Science Framework: https://osf.io/k4dt8/?view_only=bb2cbb8b9c774ade984b672a3eddce43. We also recommend the pre-registration for future studies examining these effects in our Discussion.
We would appreciate receiving your revised manuscript by May 23 2020 11:59PM. When you are ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter.
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
● A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). This letter should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
● A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. This file should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
● An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. This file should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Manuscript'.
Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Michiel van Elk
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1) Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2) Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information.
3) Please amend either the title on the online submission form (via Edit Submission) or the title in the manuscript so that they are identical.
Response: Thank you for clarifying these submission and formatting requirements. The resources you provided were very helpful to us during the revision of our manuscript. We have reformatted the manuscript to align with PLOS ONE standards, included captions for supporting information at the end of the manuscript, updated in-text citations, and have fixed the title on the online submission form to match the manuscript title. 
Reviewers' comments:
Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Summary: The authors attempt to replicate the work of Lang et al. (2016), who investigated the effects of religious instrumental music (vs. secular music or white noise) on ethical behavior (refraining from cheating). The current project is not quite a direct replication of the original work, but it is close: whereas the original research samples participants from the U.S., the Czech Republic, and Mauritius, the current work samples from the U.S., the Czech Republic, and Japan. In addition, the current work adds a no-music control condition, and conducts analyses using OLS rather than beta regression.
Lang et al. (2016) reported an interaction across all three sites between priming condition and participant religiosity, as well as a marginally significant interaction between priming condition and frequency of ritual participation. The current replication effort found no interaction between condition and religiosity, but did observe an interaction between priming condition and frequency of ritual participation, as well as an interaction between priming condition and religious affiliation.
As the field continues to focus on ensuring the robustness of findings, this is a welcome contribution. The experiments are well conducted, the manuscript is well written and well organized, and the work provides increased confidence in the claim that religious contexts and communities can influence normative behavior among participants. Overall, I recommend publication following moderate revisions, as described below.
Perhaps the most major point to be addressed concerns the theoretical connections between religiosity, frequency of ritual participation, and religious affiliation. The Introduction does not clearly delineate “religiosity” from “ritual participation”, nor does it provide a clear model of how all three of these factors are understood to relate one another. Thus, it is not entirely clear from a theoretical point of view why the authors prioritize “religiosity” as the main variable of interest, with ritual participation and religious affiliation as “supplemental” factors (the empirical justification, based on significance tests from Lang et al. [2016] is clear). Because the Introduction does not clearly disentangle the interconnections between religiosity, ritual participation, and religious affiliation, I think readers are left confused as to how they should interpret the fact that the experiments provide evidence supporting a role for the “supplemental” variables but not, apparently, the primary variable—religiosity— that seems to be the focus of the replication.
Given that the authors did not preregister the study or conduct this as a registered report, I certainly respect the way that the Introduction highlights the variable that is ultimately least supported by the data, nor should any revisions engage in HARKing. But the lack of theoretical clarity in the Introduction is a concern, and a revised introduction might elaborate upon—in a clear and more extended fashion—how religiosity is conceptually distinct from ritual participation; what the implications of this might be; and what are the possible ways that religiosity, ritual participation, and religious affiliation relate to one another and potentially interact to influence ethical behavior. This would pave the way for a revised Discussion as well, where the authors could clarify precisely what 3-way interactions they would expect to emerge in future research. Lines 481-483 of the Discussion, for instance, suggest a 3-way interaction among condition, “religiosity,” and religious affiliation. Could, or should, “frequency of ritual participation” be substituted for “religiosity” here?
Response: Thank you for identifying ways in which our theory, supplemental motivations, and introduction could be made clearer. We have expanded our discussion on the difference between religiosity and ritual participation making clear that is a nuanced issue, yet also one that is very important (Pages 5-6, lines 189-236). We have also made several changes to the Discussion (Pages 15-18), adding suggestions and comments for future research. We have also introduced some discussion of the distinction between orthodoxic and orthopraxic religious traditions which speak to the potential for important distinctions between religious beliefs and ritual practices.
A second point. The experiments are framed as a “replication.” As the recent surge of meta-science makes clear, there are many ways to define “replication” (Open Science Collaboration, 2015). Here the authors appear to adopt the approach of conducting basically the same significance tests as in the original study. This is of course completely sensible, but the manuscript would benefit from a consideration of other ways to define replication, and some treatment of the extent to which results from the current work could be considered to replicate using at least some other recommended criteria.
Response: We have added to our Introduction on page 4 (see lines 105-108) to discuss the ways in which our study is similar or unique from the various conceptualizations of replications. In our Discussion section (Pages 14-17), we also discuss how variations in the experimental context (i.e., changes to musical stimuli, culture/geographic location) could potentially influence the replicability of our results. 
Third, the authors make very broad claims about “religious music” in general. At the same time, within each cultural context the studies rely upon a single example of religious music. Although the authors are hardly unusual in generalizing from a very small number of stimuli, there are serious limitations in doing so—and especially in not using statistical methods that treat stimuli as a random factor (Judd, Westfall, and Kenny, 2012). These limitations should be more prominently acknowledged in the Discussion. Doing so would also provide an opportunity to call for future research that samples multiple religious songs for each cultural context. Such a design would be well equipped to use relevant characteristics of the songs (e.g., sacredness, holiness, as well as perhaps others) to explain variation in the strength of the condition x religiosity/ritual participation interaction(s).
Response: This is a very good point. Of course, the reviewer is right that we utilized a typical approach of priming studies by selecting stimuli that we expected would give the strongest signal at each site. Together with pre-selecting the stimuli at each site and later assessing the musical characteristics of the selected stimuli during the experiment, we aimed to amplify the tested effect. We were worried that we would not be able to isolate religious priming effects if many participants were not familiar with the stimuli. Therefore, we specifically targeted the most paradigmatic stimulus at each site. Thus, we prioritized the strength of our stimuli over generalizability, as we aimed to select the most important/known/frequently used. Of course, this does not fully ameliorate the concern of generalizability of the musical stimuli, but we hope that our pre-selection criteria and analyses, as well as our prioritization of stimuli strength allows for some degree of generalizability. To make these points clearer to the reader, we now discuss the issue of generalizability (on Pages 17; see also lines 602-606) and suggest that future researchers should investigate religious priming effects across a more diverse array of culturally relevant musical tracks (e.g., by selecting the three most salient musical stimuli at each site and randomly vary those stimuli across participants). We have also added the reference that you provided to make our stimuli limitations clearer. 
Some lesser points:
Abstract: The abstract comes across as too vague. Sample N’s, greater specificity concerning the origin of the participants, and a bit more detail concerning the experimental paradigm (especially control conditions) should be provided. And in discussing results, the abstract does not allude to the presence or absence of cross-cultural differences.
Response: We appreciate the reviewer’s suggestions for improving our abstract. We have revised our abstract (Page 2) to give the readers more details about the design and findings of this research. We hope the key details that were added enhance our abstract’s clarity and quality. 
Introduction:
Lines 60-69. It might be worth noting that some large-scale religious priming experiments examining ethical/prosocial behavior have been conducted in the wake of van Elk’s call (e.g., White et al., 2019; Billingsley et al., 2018). Results appear to converge on the view that implicit (anagram-based) primes do not exert significant effects but more explicit (verbal/written) primes seem to exert a small effect. This might provide some useful, additional context in the Discussion as well.
Response: Thank you for bringing our attention to these key references. Indeed, these references were quite helpful in adding context to our Introduction (Pages 2-6) and to our Discussion (Page 15-18). These references helped us further clarify how our research relates to recent contributions in the literature on religious priming.
Lines 153-164. Regarding sample size, it is not clear that power calculations determined the sample size. How was the sample size (460) actually determined? It’s rather disappointing that a replication study of this sort was not pre-registered, so that exclusion criteria, stopping rules, and other aspects of the protocol would have been determined ahead of time.
Response: We appreciate the opportunity to discuss our sample in greater detail. We used G*Power to calculate the estimated power of our sample and the R^2 increase from Model1 to Model2 as reported in Table 2 in Lang et al., 2016. Here is the screenshot of the G*Power setup:
Of course, this approach is a bit imprecise because in the current study, our model includes one more experimental condition. On the other hand, this additional condition should yield higher variance explained by the added predictors and counterbalance the increased number of predictors. Indeed, re-running the same power calculation with the assumed additional predictor, we need the variance explained by special effect to be raised only to 0.025 to have power of 0.85 for our sample size.
Furthermore, we share the reviewer’s disappointment that the study was not pre-registered. Regrettably, we did not utilize pre-registration methods when this study was originally incepted. In hindsight, this would be an obvious thing to do now, but we cannot go back in time. However, in pursuit of transparency and healthy science, we have made our resources, data, and analysis code available. For the sake of transparency, we have added a data availability statement (Page 19) indicating that our measures, analyses, and data have been made publicly available at OSF (https://osf.io/k4dt8/?view_only=bb2cbb8b9c774ade984b672a3eddce43.).
Line 155: Results using all participants should be made available in Supplemental.
Response: Thank you for this suggestion. We now detail results using all participants in a new supplemental file. In our Methods section (Page 7, lines 244-248), we direct readers to view our results on all participants in a supplement (See Table G in S1). We have also made all of our results and materials available at OSF (https://osf.io/k4dt8/?view_only=bb2cbb8b9c774ade984b672a3eddce43).
Line 215: “They [the religious vs. secular songs] differed in perceived sacredness.” To avoid this coming across as an unjustified claim, I would alert the reader (maybe in a parenthetical insertion) that supporting data is soon to follow.
Response: Thank you for sharing this advice. We have now amended this wording (Line 307) to appropriately convey our results to readers. 
Line 218: Why does the left anchor of the religiosity scale not mention “spirituality” if the right anchor does? This could be relevant to the Discussion lines 441ff.
Response: Thank you for alerting us to this scale asymmetry. Indeed, the left anchor of the religiosity scale does not mention spirituality. This asymmetry was likely a mistake that occurred when we were adapting the materials of Lang et. al, 2016. Unfortunately, we missed this clerical error and this version of the scale was implemented in all three sites. In light of this, we now discuss this scale limitation in the Discussion section (Pages 15-18) how the inclusion of spirituality at only the right anchor may have impacted our ability to replicate the religiosity*condition interaction observed in Lang et. al, 2016. Further, we encourage future researchers to extend and improve on our research by explicitly testing the reliability of religiosity scales prior to conducting religious priming research. 
More attention should be paid to psychometrics and the limitations of the measures used. Most notable is the single-item measure of religiosity. Although reliability with just a single item may be a concern, I think the deeper issue is the difficulty associated with knowing that religiosity measures are functioning equivalently across cultures (Cohen et al., 2017). So, for instance, to the extent that results in Japan are driving differences between this study and the 2016 results, we can’t be sure that differential functioning of the religiosity measure might not be a contributing factor. The lack of a multi-item scale that has been tested for invariance across the sampled cultures is a limitation that should be acknowledged.
Response: We appreciate this important point about item-reliability (especially across cultures and languages). In our Discussion section (page 15-18, see also lines 607-619), we now highlight the limitation of single-item scales and how single-item measures are susceptible to reliability issues. In light of these limitations, we now invite future researchers (Page 17) to replicate our results using a scale that has been explicitly tested for reliability across time, tests, and samples. We have also included the references provided to provide the reader more information on issues with cross-cultural item reliability. 
Line 295. In discussing the relatively low level of cheating observed in the Czech Republic, it might be useful to refer to Shariff and Norenzayan’s (2015) discussion of boundary conditions in the context of religious priming and prosocial behavior. The argument would be that if motivation to cheat is (for whatever reason) relatively low in the Czech Republic, the religious prime has relatively little room to operate.
Response: Thank you for sharing this critical insight. On Pages 17 (see also lines 594-599), we now discuss how boundary conditions, citing Shariff and Norenzayan’s commentary (2015), may partly explain the relatively low level of cheating observed in the Czech Republic sample.
Analyses: Would it make sense to include affiliation and ritual participation in the same model, to see if they predict unique variance? I think the answer depends on how a revised Introduction defines religiosity vs. ritual participation, but in principle this could be an informative analysis.
Response: We appreciate the reviewer’s thought-provoking suggestion. Ultimately, we have opted to minimize model noise and to keep affiliation and ritual participants in separate models. We agree that religiosity, religious affiliation, and ritual participation are distinct concepts (see revised Introduction; especially lines 189-236). However, despite the important distinction between affiliation and ritual participation, we also note that they are highly correlated in our sample and that their joint inclusion in a model would cause issues with multicollinearity. Hence, we treat them separately but encourage other researchers to measure and investigate the relationships we report in independent samples.
Discussion:
Lines 402-413 Seems like there should be an acknowledgment here that the “primary” hypothesis, concerning religiosity, was not supported.
Response: Thank you, this is an important suggestion. We have added a line to our Discussion (508-509) to explicitly mention that the primary hypothesis was not supported. 
Billingsley et al. (2018. Implicit and explicit influences of religious cognition on Dictator Game transfers. Royal Society open science 5 (8), 170238
Cohen et al. (2017). Theorizing and measuring religiosity across cultures. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 43(12), 1724-1736.
Judd, C. M., Westfall, J., & Kenny, D. A. (2012). Treating stimuli as a random factor in social psychology: A new and comprehensive solution to a pervasive but largely ignored problem. Journal of personality and social psychology, 103(1), 54.
Open Science Collaboration. (2015). Estimating the reproducibility of psychological science. Science 349(6251), aac4716.
Shariff & Norenzayan (2015). A question of reliability or of boundary conditions? Comment on Gomes and McCullough (2015). American Psychological Association 144 (6), e105
White et al. (2019). Supernatural norm enforcement: Thinking about karma and God reduces selfishness among believers. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 84
Response: Thank you for providing these key resources and citations. We believe their inclusion, as well as addressing the points you raised above, have strengthened our paper. 
Reviewer #2: I want to start by saying this is an excellent study and I think it deserves to be published basically as is. I have a few minor comments.
There is a lot of work on priming and religion and a lot that doesn’t find very robust effects, but much of this work is not looking at the nuances of what people believe and how they participant in their religion. Though I can quite confidently say that there are more than enough religious priming studies looking at sentence unscrambling tasks in Christians, there are very few looking across religions and looking at how people whose primary religious practices are based around ritual action, not belief itself. The findings here follow very clearly from the theory.
Thus, my largest criticism is that this is not stated in enough detail in the paper. The theory, and why these results should be expected, is explained in a couple sentences about how the methods differ from previous studies. This is a huge issue within the literature itself and should be addressed more fully in the paper. If we expect things like priming to work at all, it should be related to what people actually practice, rather than some method that assumes American Protestantism represent primary way people are religious. This is an important finding and should be addressed as such.
Response: Thank you for raising these important points. We have added to our Introduction (Pages 2-6; see also 189-236) to address these points directly. Specifically, we develop our theory, predictions, and establish the importance of our research by discussing the limited scope of religious priming literature. We have added key references, and discuss how the research literature could benefit from investigations that delineate under-explored, yet important, aspects of religious practice such as ritual participation, affiliation to a specific religious organization, and other unmeasured factors that vary across cultures (labeled as the WEIRD people problem). 
You should also include a bit more detail as to why cheating is an important measure as well. Research typically used dictator game, or generosity based measures, and the argument is that religion is enforcing norms of fairness. These norms are not consistent across cultures, but norms against cheating are. Thus, cheating is better measure for studies focusing on religious prosociality.
Response: Thank you for sharing this interesting perspective and for encouraging us to explain our use of cheating measures. We agree with your points and have added to our Introduction (Page 2-6; see Lines 89-92, 128-132) and to our Discussion (page 14-17; see lines 624-626) make these clear to the reader. As part of this added discussion, we include references highlighting the inconsistency of fairness norms (measured by dictator games) across cultures. 
Data analysis is very well done. I particularly appreciate that the regression table include models with and without moderators.
Why do you only have a site by site analysis with religiosity in the supplemental? Why not add tables with ritual frequency and religious affiliation as well? These would be informative here.
Response: Thank you for this suggestion. We opted to replicate tables presented in Lang et al. 2016 so we included the site by site analysis in the supplemental material. To better inform the readers, we now include tables with ritual frequency and religious affiliation in our supplemental material (See Tables B and C in S1). 
Minor comments;
The Shariff et al. meta-analysis also found that religious primes are only effective on religiously affiliated people, might be worth mentioning as it supports your argument.
Relatedly, the van Elk et al. meta-analysis only failed to find an effect in the PET analysis, but did find an effect in the PEESE analysis. PET is a notoriously inaccurate meta-analytic measure (under realistic data conditions, it can fail to find a true effect between 70-90% of the time).
Response: Thank you very much for bringing up these points. We believe the point about the Shariff et al. meta-analysis enhances the context for our supplemental theory and results. We have added a discussion of this point our Introduction (2-6; see lines 75 and 80-87). We have also added the point about PET analyses, with supporting citations (Stanley, 2017; Carter, Schonbrodt, Gervais, & Hilgard, 2019), in our Introduction (Pages 2-6). We hope this point and the van Elk et al. (2015) findings further illustrates the importance of replications. 
Table 2 is a bit messed up and hard to read in the pdf. This is probably due to rendering, but would be worth checking the original document.
Response: Thank you for alerting us to this issue. Unfortunately, we believe this may be a rendering issue. However, this table can now also be accessed on OSF, potentially fixing this problem. (OSF link: https://osf.io/k4dt8/?view_only=bb2cbb8b9c774ade984b672a3eddce43)
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers - PONE-D-20-04631.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0237007.r003Decision Letter 1
van ElkMichielAcademic Editor© 2020 Michiel van Elk2020Michiel van ElkThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
20 Jul 2020

Replicating and Extending the Effects of Auditory Religious Cues on Dishonest Behavior
PONE-D-20-04631R1
Dear Dr. Nichols,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Michiel van Elk
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: In my view, the authors have successfully addressed the comments raised by reviewers, and the result is a strong contribution to our understanding of religious practice in relation to ethical behavior across cultures. Of particular quality were the revisions to the Introduction and Discussion, which considerably clarified the inter-relationships among religiosity, religious attendance, and religious affiliation, and how those factors differentially pertain to the effect of religious cues—especially musical ones—on prosocial behavjor. The additions pertaining to the study’s limitations and directions for future research, as well as more thorough contextualizing of the study with respect to other recent large-scale priming studies, were also well executed. Altogether, the authors have been thorough and conscientious in revising the manuscript in light of prior comments. I certainly feel that the resulting paper is considerably improved. I hope the authors do as well, and I recommend publication.
Reviewer #2: The authors have addressed all my concerns, and I recommend acceptance of this paper. I very much enjoyed reading this.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
10.1371/journal.pone.0237007.r004Acceptance letter
van ElkMichielAcademic Editor© 2020 Michiel van Elk2020Michiel van ElkThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
30 Jul 2020

PONE-D-20-04631R1 
Replicating and Extending the Effects of Auditory Religious Cues on Dishonest Behavior 
Dear Dr. Nichols:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Michiel van Elk 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE