J Contemp HistJ Contemp Hist464sageopen100968656JCHJournal of Contemporary History0022-0094pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleSage ChoicePMC7000851PMC7000851.1700085170008513210383410.1177/002200941882011110.1177_00220094188201111ArticlesScience, Medicine and the Creation of a ‘Healthy’ Soviet
Cinema
ToropovaAnna Sukharebskii's sentiments were echoed by a range of Stalin-era cultural
authorities who similarly professed that socialist realist cinema's optimism and
heroic subject matter, as well as its conformity to classical principles (clarity,
unity, decorum), rendered it a ‘healthy’ and ‘composed’ art form that was free
from ‘hysterics’, ‘nervousness’, ‘convulsions’ and ‘psychological chaos’. 
The discursive conflation of socialist realist cinema and mental and physical
wellbeing cannot solely be attributed to Stalin-era efforts to enforce compliance
to a single aesthetic method. The attainment of a cinema that cultivated a sound
mind and body had been set on the agenda by Soviet educators, medical
professionals and scientific researchers well ahead of Joseph Stalin's ‘revolution
from above’ (1929–32). Sukharebskii, the doctor who championed the ‘prophylactic
cinema’ that filled Soviet screens by the mid-1930s, had, like many other medical
specialists, spent much of the previous decade highlighting the myriad dangers
that the films being screened in Soviet theatres posed to viewers’ health.
Increasingly concerned about the damaging psycho-physiological effects of
commercial cinema, early Soviet experts worked alongside film industry
professionals to uncover ways of ‘making healthy’ both the practices of
cinema-going and the films accessible to Soviet audiences. These collaborative
investigations not only provide a lens through which socialist realism's origins
can be better understood, but the complex lines of interaction between
twentieth-century medicine, politics and culture. Expanding the parameters of the
medicalisation process traced in recent histories of early Soviet Russia, an
account of the post-revolutionary battle for cinema reform brings to light the
role of medical and scientific expertise in establishing the ‘healthy’ aesthetics
of the Stalin era. 
The aim of establishing a film industry that functioned to promote the physical,
mental and moral wellbeing of the population, an objective already targeted by
reformers in late imperial Russia, was certainly not exclusive to the Soviet Union. The harm inflicted by cinema on the health of viewers, particularly
children and young people, became a key source of concern for educators, medical
professionals, members of religious organisations and public authorities across
Europe and the USA during the early twentieth century. Seeking to change the industry practices that had made cinema toxic to
young viewers, reformers in Germany, France, Italy, and the USA initiated
campaigns to transform the medium into a tool of edification. The transnational
reach of efforts to healthify cinema and unlock its edifying power was attested by
the opening of the International Institute of Educational Cinematography in Rome
in 1928. Sponsored by the League of Nations and publishing its finding in five
different languages, the institute sought to combat the influence of films that
contradicted ‘the moral principles and traditions of civilisation’ and to promote
the use of cinema for educational purposes. 
While having roots in pre-revolutionary campaigns, and sharing common features with
initiatives abroad, the early Soviet cinema reform movement was underwritten by a
revolutionary political agenda that endowed it with unique characteristics.
Accounts of the psycho-physiological and moral harmfulness of the
foreign-dominated film repertoire of early Soviet cinemas were inextricably
intertwined with political anxieties about the ideological price of the Soviet
state's sanctioning of small-scale private enterprise during the period of the New
Economic Policy (1921–8). The drive to ‘healthify’ (ozdorovit’)
Soviet cinema, coming into its own as the ‘tide of Westernism’ under NEP gave way
to belligerent attacks on bourgeois culture during the cultural revolution, became
invested with a political significance that pushed the parameters of cinema reform
to encompass a radical restructuring of film industry practices not seen in other countries. 
The cinema's synonymity with modernity, communal experience and technological
advancement made the medium a perfect ally of the Soviet mass enlightenment
project. Party leaders like Leon Trotsky and Nikolai Bukharin waxed lyrical about
the medium's capacity to replace vodka and religion in the lives of the masses and
forge more enlightened and healthy forms of everyday life. By the mid-1920s, however, many Soviet educators, medical professionals and
cultural authorities were concluding that cinema was exercising a ‘poisonous’
influence on its viewers. The vulnerable minds and bodies of children and
teenagers were seen to be particularly at risk from contamination.
As Kara Ritzheimer has noted, heightened societal awareness of the potentially
damaging effects of cinema on children was partly fostered by the early
twentieth-century shift to an understanding of childhood and adolescence as
distinct, pivotal developmental stages ‘during which young people were vulnerable
to misguidance and corruption’ and required state protection. Paralleling trends in Europe and the USA, the study of child development –
epitomized in the new scientific field of ‘pedology’ (or ‘child science’) – began
to blossom in Russia at the beginning of the 1900s. Spanning disciplines including
medicine, education, psychology and anthropology, this hybrid field took on even
greater prominence after the October Revolution. By studying the
psycho-physiological specificities of different stages of childhood, as well as
the influence of different environmental factors on a child's development,
pedology promised to determine the most effective strategies for cultivating a new
generation of Soviet citizens. As part of their efforts to better understand the role of everyday life in
the developmental process, pedologists and other medical professionals began to
take an avid interest in children's leisure-time activities. Numerous studies
conducted throughout the decade on the organization of children's free time left
no doubt about the prominent place occupied by cinema in the lives of the younger generation. 
The results of a 1928 study conducted by the Department of Pedology at the Institute
of Pedagogical Methodology (IMShR) indicated that cinema-going was far from an
occasional treat for many Soviet young people. According to the study, 13 per cent
of 8–17-year-olds in Moscow as well as the provinces frequented the cinema at
least eight times a month, with a small percentage visiting more than 20 times.
Pedologists reported with alarm that there were children in Moscow who practically
spent their entire waking life at the cinema, arriving early in the morning and
managing to sit through three or four screenings in a single visit, day in and day out. 
Noting that the denial of a trip to the cinema was accompanied by withdrawal-like
symptoms of agitation and nervousness, Soviet educators and medical specialists
concluded that cinema-going had become a destructive addiction. ‘Just like the
alcoholic who cannot live without vodka or the drug addict who is dependent on
morphine’, one pedologist mused, ‘film-maniacs are no longer able to live without
the cinema’. Moreover, Soviet experts warned that they were not battling an illness that
had claimed individual victims, but a country-wide epidemic that was ‘spreading by
the hour and contaminating more and more of our Soviet young people’. Although ‘film-mania’ (kinomania) or ‘film-psychosis’
(kinopsikhoz) were not exclusively attributed to children
and adolescents, the new generation of Soviet citizens was typically portrayed as
the demographic group that was most at risk from this affliction. 
A heightened awareness of the dangers posed by film watching emerged in the context
of a broader preoccupation with the health of Soviet youth. Several studies
conducted in the mid-1920s by the Commissariat of Public Health
(Narkomzdrav) – part of the wave of enquiries into the
state of the population's health undertaken during this decade – revealed that
thousands of Soviet school pupils in urban centres suffered from ailments such as
anaemia, headaches, insomnia and spine deformity. Attributing the proliferation of such health complaints to the exhaustion
of Soviet young people, doctors prescribed ‘active’ leisure activities in the open
air and a healthy daily regimen that ensured children received 10-11 hours of
sleep every night. Long cinema showings (increasingly the norm in urban centres), during which
ticket holders sat in overcrowded, unventilated spaces late into the evening,
could not be further from the ‘healthy leisure’ advocated by Soviet doctors.
In addition to bemoaning the ‘unhygienic’ conditions within crowded cinemas,
specialists like Sukharebskii linked excessive film watching to various eye
problems, ranging from mild eye irritation to swollen eyelids and conjunctivitis.
A new film related eye disease was even diagnosed –
‘kinematoftalmiia’, or the deterioration of the iris
attributed to frequent cinema-going. The warnings issued by Soviet specialists about the threat that the
flickering of the screen, startling shifts from darkness to light and accelerated
projection posed to children's eyesight mirrored Western European experts’
concerns about the links between film consumption and visual deterioration. Soviet doctors, however, were more careful to link negative physical
symptoms to commercial practices of film demonstration that saw matters of health
and safety subordinated to the pursuit of profit. With film going culture reviving under the New Economic Policy – conceived
by Vladimir Lenin as a ‘tactical’ compromise with capitalism that would aid the
country's recovery from economic collapse – theatre management was re-established
as a money-making enterprise. Most cinemas during this period were either owned by
film studios or ‘NEP-men’ – the new class of private entrepreneurs who profited
from the relaxations on trade. 
The chief pedologist working on cinema at the IMShR, Abram Gel'mont, bemoaned that
commercial theatres in Moscow had grown accustomed to screening multi-serial films
in single showings that lasted as long as four hours. Such long periods within the auditorium, Soviet doctors warned, caused
acute physical exhaustion:‘the repeated process of physiological stimuli being sent to the visual
cortex (located in the back sections of the cerebral cortex) via the
optic nerve leads to brain fatigue, which commonly manifests in
headaches, eye strain and other types of unspecified heaviness.’ 
The IMShR warned that 42 per cent of 8–9-year-olds complained of
headaches after screenings, while back pain and aching limbs affected 24 per cent. In the context of the epidemic of ‘exhaustion’ already diagnosed among
Soviet youth, the revelation that cinema-going comprised 40 per cent of children's
entire leisure-time activities was alarming indeed. 
Warnings about the damage that cinema-going exerted on the body were coupled with
concerns about its stain on the fragile, developing psyche of children and
adolescents. Based on the results of memory and attention tests, the IMShR
concluded that a 90-minute screening placed more demands on children's mental
alertness than an entire school day. The link between cinema and mental fatigue was particularly troubling given
the perceived increase in nervous exhaustion (or ‘neurasthenia’) in early Soviet
Russia, attributed by Soviet doctors to the great nervous stresses borne by the
revolution, civil war and the demands of building the world's first socialist society. Medical and psychiatric examinations that were conducted at the Moscow
psychiatric hospital and the clinic of nervous illnesses headed by the neurologist
Grigorii Rossolimo found that nearly two thirds of frequent cinema goers were
nervously ill, at the very least being afflicted with heightened levels of
excitability and nervous sensitivity. 
At times Soviet pedologists echoed the concerns of cinema reformers abroad by
pointing to the properties that rendered the cinema as such ill suitable for
children. Cinema's presentation of a ‘condensed portrait of human life’ and its
‘fast tempo’ were some of the medium specificities linked by pedologists to the
overstraining of the viewer's ‘memory, attention, and creative imagination’. It was much more common, however, for Soviet specialists to attribute
‘overstimulation’ specifically to Western productions and more commercially
oriented domestic films. 
The commercial pressure that loomed large over Sovkino during the
NEP period fostered a heavy dependence on foreign imports. Between 1923 and 1925,
the years marking the zenith of the phenomenon contemporary commentators decried
as ‘foreignitis’, over two thirds of the new films screened in Soviet cinemas were
of Western origin. Another sizeable part of the repertoire was made up of domestic films that
strove to compete with Western productions by mimicking their devices, such as the
melodrama The Bear's Wedding (Medvezh'ia
svad'ba, Eggert and Gardin, 1925). Routinely linking this type of
sensationalist production to ‘psychological trauma’, educators and pedologists
warned that the sleep disturbance and deprivation caused by over-stimulation
rendered children apathetic, unparticipative and lethargic at school and reluctant
to help out at home. 
The grave threat posed by overstimulation to a fragile, developing constitution was
vividly brought to life in a 1930 book on cinema and youth written by Vladimir
Pravdoliubov, another prominent pedologist at the IMShR. Impressing the ease with
which a child with no previous history of mental or physical illness could be
transformed into a ‘film-invalid’, Pravdoliubov cited the case of a 14-year-old
Moscow schoolboy whose behaviour at home and at school suddenly became erratic and uncontrollable. Teachers at the teenager's school, Pravdoliubov recounted, were shocked to
find him arriving to class in a highly agitated state, inciting violence towards
his schoolmates and making a habit of sitting under his desk. Several months of
such behaviour culminated in the boy stabbing a fellow pupil. An investigation
exposed the teenager as a ‘film maniac’ who had severed ties with his family and
spent his evenings at the cinema. The youth expressed boredom with his
surroundings, hatred of school, a desire to flee to the USA and intentions to
murder his mother. A psychiatric examination diagnosed an acute case of
neurasthenia and general nervous distress, prescribing urgent admission to a
treatment facility. Pravdoliubov noted that the patient's symptoms improved as
soon as he stopped frequenting the cinema. 
Pravdoliubov's case study makes explicit how ‘film mania’ personified the threat that
NEP-era practices of film distribution and demonstration posed not only to the
mental and physical wellbeing of Soviet young people, but to their moral and
political consciousness. As a number of scholars have shown, the conflation of
physical and mental degradation with political deviation was a common feature of
anxieties about the state of the younger generation's health that burgeoned during
the period of ‘state capitalism’. Symptomatic of what Kenneth Pinnow has recently
framed as a medicopolitics targeted at the elimination of ideological pathology,
early Soviet medical diatribes against the dangers of western cinema framed
disease as both physiological and ideological. 
Cinema's great technological achievements, Gel’mont warned in 1929, were being
transported to the Soviet Union alongside ‘all the filth and degeneration of the
foreign capitalist world’. ‘All the evils of capitalist everyday life’, he
continued ‘are reflected in the film products being sent to us from beyond Soviet borders’. The results of the 1928 IMShR survey of children's film-going habits
revealed that a significant percentage of Soviet young people much preferred films
depicting the lives of wealthy foreigners to those narrating the struggles of
Soviet workers. Pravdoliubov noted that exposure to such films made the younger generation
liable to perceive their everyday existence as ‘grey’ and ‘impoverished’ in
contrast to the ‘wealth’ and ‘luxury’ of the Western world. 
Concerns about the prospect of a country-wide ‘film mania’ epidemic extended far
beyond the domain of pedological expertise. Regional and national newspapers
(including The Workers’ Newspaper and Evening
Moscow) began to cover this worrying trend. The results of studies carried out by the IMShR even made their way onto
the pages of Pravda. Citing Gel’mont's worrying statistics, the
official organ of the Communist Party conjured the frightening image of ‘hundreds
of thousands’ of ‘nervous’ and ‘disorderly’ ‘film maniacs’ residing in urban
centres across the Soviet Union. The many types of morally and politically suspect behaviour blamed by the
popular press on ‘film mania’ ranged from relatively minor deviations from Soviet
ideals – educators bemoaned school children who badgered their parents for cinema
ticket money and teenagers whose performance on the factory floor and dedication
in school had been compromised by daydreams about Hollywood stars – to more
perturbing forms of political disengagement such as attempts to flee abroad in
pursuit of the ‘better life’ depicted onscreen and involvement in criminal activity. Appearing at a time of heightened anxiety about the ideological corruption
of Soviet youth effected by the partial revival of market economy conditions, the
film maniac became a symbol of the dangerous effects of increased exposure to a
non-communist world-view.
The link between excessive film consumption and criminality became a particular
favourite of the NEP-era press. Alongside lamenting children's resort to petty
theft to obtain money to fund a ‘film addiction’, newspapers began to feature
sensationalist accounts of Harry Piel fans who threatened girls with rape if they
did not hand over the price of a cinema ticket and teenage film maniacs who did
not stall at committing murder in pursuit of their poison. One frequently cited case, first reported in Evening
Moscow, featured a 15-year-old youth who funded a late-night binge
of back-to-back screenings at multiple cinemas across the city by strangling a
young boy and stealing his coat. The method of strangulation used by the
‘film-addict’, the paper reported, mimicked one that had featured in a recent film. 
To be sure, press reports of children imitating violent onscreen acts – readers of
one particularly gory account were informed that a trip to watch the Soviet 1924
educational film, Abortion (Abort, Galkin and
Lemberg), resulted in a gang of boys attempting to perform the operation on a cat
– tapped into concerns about cinema's ‘suggestive power’ that were prevalent
across early twentieth-century Europe. The frequency with which press reports lamented young people's proclivity
to deviate from Soviet standards of behaviour due to their ‘overidentification’
with Hollywood protagonists, however, points to a specifically Soviet anxiety
about the contaminating threat of a ‘foreign’ ideological system.
‘American film tricks cultivate Russian hooligans’, pronounced a local newspaper in
December 1927. Blaming spectacular American adventure films like the Douglas
Fairbanks vehicle, The Thief of Bagdad (Walsh, 1924) on an
epidemic of hooliganism and anti-social behaviour among schoolboys, the journalist lamented:After these sorts of American films our young children ‘exercise’
boisterously out on the street, in the garden, at home, and in school.
They practice on their brothers, sisters, comrades and passersby. Just
the other day, for example, a crowd of school-age children on
Sovetskaia street could be seen throwing themselves at fellow children
passing by. As a result of this ‘film-attack’, a pupil split her head
open and an onlooker broke her back. 
Exposure to Western films was similarly attributed to an awakening
curiosity in matters that should have been irrelevant to Soviet young women –
‘gowns, powder, manicures, and painted lips’. As Anne Gorsuch notes, Bolshevik moralists decried the alarming numbers of
young female workers who were squandering their salaries on the imitation of
Western screen idols. The ascetic standards of sexual morality advocated by many educators and
Komsomol activists were also felt to be at risk from Western productions. The
eroticism of foreign films, Soviet experts warned, was liable to arouse an
untimely interest in sexual matters and turn the darkness of the cinema hall into
a sanctuary for deviant sexual practices. Even communist children's organizations felt powerless in the face of this
threat. Concluding that cinema led children to take an interest in sex earlier
than normal, one pedagogue noted that there was not a single screening attended by
her brigade of Young Pioneers where a case of sexual excitement among older boys
was not witnessed. Cinema's impact on the sexual morality of women was a still greater cause
of anxiety. P.I. Liublinskii, a Soviet legal scholar who explored the link between
cinema and criminality in a 1925 book, professed that foreign films had a role to
play in driving Soviet young women to prostitution. A trip to the cinema was not
only liable to awaken a desire for the ‘glamorous and easy life’ depicted in
foreign films, he warned, but also to stir ‘nervous and sexual excitement’ than
could overwhelm ‘female reserve’, leaving Soviet young women vulnerable to
solicitations on exit from the theatre. 
Prostitution, which underwent a steep rise in early Soviet Russia as women workers
disproportionately bore the brunt of unemployment, was not the only NEP-era social
problem that the cinema came to be associated with. Pedagogues also noted that
Soviet cinemas had become a hub for homeless street children
(besprizorniki) – Civil War orphans who became a potent
symbol of the state's struggle to meet social demands during NEP. Commercial film theatres were described as a magnet for gangs of delinquent
youths who crowded the surrounding streets, bummed cigarettes, fought among each
other, attacked passers-by, and led ‘pornographic conversations’. Attendance at commercial cinemas and engagement in practices that, while
due to be eradicated under socialism, still persisted in NEP-era Russia came to be
routinely conflated. Alongside the tavern and the dancehall, the cinema became
synonymous with a seductive NEP urban landscape where non-communist ways of life
were able to continue unabated. A nightmarish place of ‘shoving, screams and
swearing’, the cinema foyer was described as a breeding ground of moral and
physical decay. The young people who crossed this threshold were bombarded with the sight
of sensational posters featuring half naked damsels in the clutches of bestial
kidnappers, the sound of ‘bourgeois’ foxtrots and gypsy ballads, and the heady
smell of cigarette smoke. 
For all their vocal warnings about the damage to children's physical, mental and
moral wellbeing effectuated by unbridled exposure to unsuitable films, Soviet
educators and pedologists never questioned that the cinematic medium held
unrivalled capacities to healthify the body politic. Even state officials like the
Soviet Commissar for Health, Nikolai Semashko, were vociferous in pronouncing
cinema ‘as one of the most powerful means of making the population healthy’. Unlike in Europe and the USA where the cinema reform movement was
characterized by both ‘negative’ and ‘positive’ approaches (the former stressing
censorship and access restrictions and the latter targeting cinema's use for the
purposes of edification), Soviet educators and pedologists almost unanimously took
a pro-cinema line. Soviet specialists were careful not to indict cinema as such, but a
commercially oriented film industry whose pursuit of profit had resulted in lax
censorship, overcrowding and excessively long showings. If the existing system of
film production and film distribution could be transformed, pedologists argued,
cinema's damaging effects could be ‘minimised and even completely eradicated’. 
While specialists in other countries also began to recognize cinema's ‘transformative
possibilities’, Soviet doctors’ unwavering faith in cinema as a means of
prophylaxis reflected Bolshevism's distinctive emphasis on culture's pivotal role
in the revolutionary process. Soviet ideologues and cultural producers were united in seeing cultural
technologies like the cinema as vital tools of instilling a new revolutionary
consciousness and creating a New Soviet Person. The battle for a cinema that would
create a new healthy population paralleled a variety of other cultural initiatives
that targeted the creation of a new ‘higher’ human type, including the
‘life-building’ programmes of the Soviet avant-garde and cultural enlightenment campaigns. 
A variety of measures to ensure cinema's ‘transformation from a factor that
demoralized the child's psyche into a valuable pedagogical tool’ were discussed
and enacted in the 1920s. One ‘antidote’ advocated by educators and pedologists in Soviet Russia, as
by cinema reformers elsewhere, was the restriction of children's access to cinema
and the ‘healthification’ of the existing film repertoire through censorship.
In 1923, the administrations of larger cities within Soviet Russia enacted
‘obligatory orders’ which forbid children under 8 years of age access to film
theatres and limited the admission of under-16s to screenings that were
specifically intended for children. By the mid-1920s, however, it had become apparent that such local decrees
were not being strictly enforced. Complaints were raised that inspections and
checks were periodic even in central areas and did little to curb access to
inappropriate films in second-tier cinemas on the outskirts of the city, where
children continued to make up as much as half of the clientele. While the proprietors of local cinemas were liable to receive a fine for
admitting under-age children, this made only a small dent in their finances.
Moreover, the enforcement of fines was subject to the discretion of individual
police officers, who rarely took the issue seriously. Censorship efforts tightened considerably towards the end of the 1920s. A
special commission for the ‘pedagogical censorship of films’ was established by
the Commissariat of Enlightenment in 1927. The commission required every newly
released film to be issued with a ‘passport’ that specified its appropriateness
for different age ranges. Those film theatres shown to be disregarding these
instructions were to be fined. In 1928, censors began to crack down on films that depicted ‘prostitution’,
‘debauchery’ and ‘criminal activity’ in an uncritical manner. 
Even as legal experts, health professionals and educators called for more rigorous
controls, referencing the restrictions on children's access to cinema enforced by
other Western European countries, they recognized that overly strict laws and bans
would not be conducive to the task of channelling the medium in the service of
cultural enlightenment. Cinema's healthification, they argued, would only be achieved if
restrictions on access were coupled with efforts to offer children attractive alternatives. One important means through which pedologists and educators sought to
transform cinema-going from an anti-social activity to an educational practice
that inculcated healthy habits and customs was the organization of matinée
screenings for children. Held at local cinemas in the morning or early afternoon
under pedagogical supervision, children's screenings facilitated the selection of
age-appropriate films and the censorship of scenes deemed unsuitable by experts.
To distinguish them from evening showings targeted towards adults at commercial
theatres, organizers strove to make these matinées free or, at the very least, not
to charge viewers more than 10 kopeks. They also offered discounted entrance fees
to groups and school collectives as a means to remedy young viewers’ proclivity to
visit the cinema as ‘disorganised’ and isolated consumers. 
Children's screenings presented an opportunity for educators to closely monitor
children's behaviour within the theatre and to eradicate undesirable habits and
behaviours. Under the vigilant gaze of the instructor, viewers entered the
building in orderly pairs and took up their seats according to height. Any ‘force,
shoving or fighting’ was strictly forbidden. Turning the cinema into an instrument
of social integration, educators’ control over seating arrangements checked girls’
and boys’ instincts to divide into same-sex groups and curbed the tendency of
children of different nationalities to sit apart from each other. Silence was
observed during the screening and the consumption of snacks banned. Young viewers entering the new children's cinemas that began to open in
Soviet Russia from 1928 were similarly confronted with a stringent list of
behavioural rules. Smoking, spitting, littering and fighting were prohibited, with
perpetrators risking eviction and bans. 
Children's screenings were also envisaged as a means of ensuring the observance of
‘hygienic norms’ designed to ‘neutralise’ the harmful physiological effects of
cinema visits. Alongside ensuring that the duration of screenings did not exceed
recommended guidelines and that their frequency was limited to weekends and
celebration days to minimize fatigue, organizers sought to comply with a
comprehensive list of preventative health measures drawn up by Soviet doctors. The
building used for film demonstration was to be aired regularly and the number of
children admitted was not to compromise the 1.25 metres of space required for each viewer. Steady projection at a slightly slowed down tempo without flickering was to
ensure that children did not resort to ‘excessive strain’ to understand the film.
The screen was to be large, evenly illuminated and positioned at least 5 meters
away from the front row. Organizers were also to ensure that the screening room
was pitch-black and to avoid stark transitions from darkness to light. 
The organizers of children's screenings transformed the cinema foyer into a calming
space where ‘occasions for excitability and nervousness’ were eradicated. Children's orchestra performances replaced the ‘bourgeois’ music that
resonated through the foyer during evening showings. The sensationalist
advertising that greeted spectators at evening screenings was exchanged for wall
newspapers, children's artwork and new age-appropriate film posters designed to
not only capture the attention of young viewers but to ‘guide’ the viewer's mode
of reading and set out a clear path of interpretation. Demonstrating the attempt to turn a space previously associated with
NEP-era indulgence into a venue of aesthetic education, refinement and cultured
behaviour, children's cinema manuals instructed organizers to furnish theatres
with coatrooms, decorative plants and buffets serving hot drinks. 
Different types of ‘cultural enlightenment work’ conducted before, during, and after
children's matinées targeted the creation of a new, active mode of viewership. Circling the foyer prior to screenings, ‘cultural enlightenment workers’
were tasked with assisting viewers’ comprehension by flagging the upcoming film's
central themes and illuminating its social, economic and political contexts. In
the case that Western films were shown, the cultural enlightenment worker strove
to educate a critical perspective on the narrative by drawing attention to the
social problems and class conflicts evaded on screen. Reflecting the growing cult of physical culture
(fizkul’tura) in early Soviet Russia, some children's film
theatres endeavoured to turn child spectators from ‘passive observers into active
participants’ by premising film screenings with 10–15 minutes of coordinated
physical exercise, games, and rhythmic dance routines. 
Before commencing the film demonstration, the teacher or cultural enlightenment
worker delivered an introduction that briefly familiarized viewers with the film's
subject matter and characters, provided any necessary historical and geographical
context and pre-emptively clarified any difficult moments. The supervisor was also
responsible for reading out subtitles during the screening (a measure that was
seen to have a ‘calming influence’ on the audience) and for explaining any content
that proved difficult for children to grasp. Educators would close the film
demonstration by initiating a public discussion, asking viewers to put the film's
characters on ‘trial’ or chairing a debate on the issues raised by the narrative. 
Articles depicting the work of the first Children's Cinema (Detkino)
in Moscow, which opened in 1928 in the Sukharevskii district of the city, were
effusive in praising its ‘healthifying influence on the organisation of children's leisure’. A 1929 report on a Detkino screening of a revolutionary
film described a radically transformed form of recreational activity; having being
prepared for the screening by explanatory conversations and visuals,
Detkino’s viewers followed the screen as ‘active
participants’. They greeted the toppling of autocracy shown on screen with cheers
and a rousing rendition of the ‘International’. After the screening, young viewers
participated in art circles, registered their impressions from the film in
colourful displays to be put up in the foyer, worked on contributions to the wall
newspaper or read up on Lenin's biography and the history of the revolution in the
library corner. Praising the state expansion of the detkino network in the
early 1930s, Stalin-era officials claimed that these child-friendly spaces had
proved victorious in the battle against hooliganism and delinquency. 
Attempts to transform the cinema into a ‘kino-shkola’
(cinema-school) that increased viewers’ ‘level of culturedness’ and inculcated
‘orderly habits’ through the organization of matinée screenings and the opening of
children's film theatres was part of a broader drive to co-opt cinema for the
purposes of education. A campaign for the ‘cinefication’ of Soviet schools, preceded by the ‘mass
film lessons’ than had been held in Moscow cinemas from the mid-1920s, was in full
swing by the end of the cultural revolution. The state not only began to supply schools with projectors to facilitate
the screening of films in lessons but invested in the creation of educational
films for children, including sponsoring research designed to help directors
ensure the optimal effectiveness of their productions. 
The organizers of children's screenings and ‘cultural enlightenment work’ readily
acknowledged that such attempts were largely interim measures to compensate for
the lack of Soviet films that were suitable for young viewers. The most effective
way to combat ‘film-sickness’, pedologists and educators argued, was to replace
the ‘disorganising’ and ‘demoralising’ films shown in Soviet cinemas with
healthier alternatives. To be sure, a limited number of domestic children's films were approved by
Soviet educators and studied in detail by pedologists. Among the productions most
frequently singled out for acclaim were Golden Honey
(Zolotoi med, Petrov and Beresnev, 1928), a re-education
drama set at a labour commune for juvenile delinquents; Van’ka and
‘Avenger’ (Van’ka i ‘Mstitel’’, Lundin, 1928), a
film narrating the embroilment of a boy and his canine companion in Red Army
assignments; and a 1927 adventure focusing on the exploits of a Civil War orphan,
Ania (Preobrazhenskaia and Pravov). These singular
achievements, however, did little to damper educators’ complaints about the
underdeveloped and sporadic character of Soviet children's film production. 
The imperative of accelerating the creation of home-grown children's films was made
more pressing by the cultural, social and economic upheavals of the late 1920s and
early 1930s. The New Economic Policy's displacement by a frantic drive to ‘build
socialism’ through breakneck industrialization, forced collectivization of
agriculture and cultural revolution under Stalin (1928–32) pushed Soviet film
production to become self-sufficient and to radically curb its dependence on
foreign imports. Soviet health and education experts were not only called upon to cultivate
new practices of film spectatorship but to help create a brand new film repertoire
that could wholly replace ‘damaging’ films.
The production of films that could cultivate citizens healthy in mind and body was a
project that the Soviet film industry was not thought to be capable of
accomplishing alone. Pedologists and psychologists were to play no less of an
important role in this process than the filmmaker. As Pravdoliubov asked in a 1927
article, how would Soviet directors possibly manage to create successful films for
children without any knowledge of young viewers' psycho-physiology, the
characteristics of their thinking, perception, attention, imagination, or their
needs, interests and demands? A range of research cells and laboratories founded in the 1920s began to
address these questions, accumulating medical and scientific knowledge about the
child spectator. Relied upon to provide practical instructions and advice to
Soviet film producers, health professionals took on an unprecedentedly prominent
role in the transformation of film industry practices.
Investigations into the child spectator were part of a broader drive to better
understand the mechanics of film spectatorship with recourse to the expertise of
medicine and the psy-professions. A number of research cells called on the techniques of psychologists,
reflexologists and neurologists to unpack the effects of films on the
psychophysiology of adult viewers. The ‘laboratory for the study of mass behaviour
and mass psychotechnics’ at the Polytechnic Museum in Moscow drew on the ‘latest
research from the field of psychoneurology’ to investigate the effects of Soviet
mass culture on its recipient. Headed by the psychiatrist Pavel Karpov, the
laboratory enlisted Dr Konstantinovskii (a neurologist who had previously worked
alongside Vladimir Bekhterev) to map the types of reactions (‘emotional’, ‘motor’,
‘unconscious’) produced by different forms of mass culture. In 1928, the laboratory appointed the leading film director of the Soviet
avant-garde, Sergei Eisenstein, to head its research into the psycho-physiology of
the viewer. Eisenstein's research programme called for the audience effects of a
variety of film–stimuli to be tested in a laboratory setting by reflexologists. The film commission at the State Institute of Art History in Leningrad
similarly sought to forge ties with centres of reflexological research, including
the Institute for the Study of the Brain, in its quest to understand spectator reactions. 
Initiated at a similar time as the Payne Fund's investigations into the ‘nature and
extent’ of cinema's influence on children in the USA, as well as the International
Institute of Educational Cinematography's enquiries into cinema's ‘moral and
social influence’ on children, research on the child viewer quickly became a
prominent subfield of Soviet psycho-physiological film research. Opening in 1926, the pedological film laboratory at the IMShR quickly
became one of the most prolific centres of child-focused viewer research in Soviet
Russia. The laboratory was staffed by pedologists including Gel’mont and
Pravdoliubov, equipped with a wide-array of psycho-physiological measuring devices
and furnished with a film screening room. Setting itself the task of identifying the types of film form and content
that were the most conducive to exerting a pedagogical influence over the
spectator and facilitating a ‘normal’ process of child development, the laboratory
pursued two main lines of investigation. Firstly, the laboratory's pedologists
sought to identify the different tastes, imaginative capacities, and modes of
spectatorship that pertained to children from different social backgrounds and age
ranges. Through questionnaires, investigators probed into what attracted different
types of children to particular films and what they liked and disliked about the
existing repertoire of Soviet cinemas. Viewer observations as well as
post-screening interviews and psychological tests were used to shed light on the
distinct ways that younger and older children, girls and boys, the offspring of
blue-collar and white-collar parents engaged with films. 
Secondly, at the behest of the Soviet film industry, the laboratory sought to
experimentally test the psycho-physiological effects of cinema on child spectators. Special attention was devoted to the study of emotional impact. While
pedologists identified heightened affective excitability as a major symptom of
‘film-sickness’, they were also cognizant that cinema's capacity to compel intense
forms of emotional engagement formed an integral part of its educational power.
The accumulation of knowledge about the types of emotions cinema elicited, the
strength and depth of these reactions, and their impact on children's
comprehension was thus to help Soviet filmmakers deploy emotion ‘in the correct
way pedagogically’. 
Much like the Payne Fund's research into cinema's impact on children's emotions that
centred on the measurement of heartbeat, blood pressure and galvanic skin
response, Gel’mont's studies understood emotion as primarily a physiological phenomenon. Using biomedical equipment including the pneumograph and sphygmograph, the
IMShR laboratory monitored the precise bodily changes impelled by four different
types of stimuli: a clip from a detective film starring Harry Piel, a
revolutionary film, a documentary and an ‘erotic film’. The laboratory also began
to trial the use of a galvanometer to monitor levels of affective arousal by
measuring alterations in skin conductance. Conflating the mental and the
physiological, the laboratory translated quantitative alterations in breathing
rate, pulse, and rhythmic movement into qualitative emotional changes. Modifications in the viewer's facial expressions, captured during moments
of heightened dramatic tension on photographic film, were similarly taken as
indicators of the child's psychological state. While these methods were indicative of the laboratory's physiological bias,
the research cell was not completely insensitive to the psychological aspect of
the film experience. Comprehension questions as well as a task asking viewers to
sort photographic film stills into narrative order were used to investigate the
impact of emotional arousal on the child's understanding. As a means to uncover
the specific elements of the film that had most vividly captured the child's
imagination, investigators also asked the viewer to write a composition about the
watched material after the screening. 
In addition to the question of emotional excitability, the laboratory was interested
in uncovering cinema's impact on children's mental alertness and work
capabilities. Alongside determining the levels of physical exertion demanded by a
film screening via a handgrip test with a dynamometer, a ‘graphic tremometer’
designed by the US behaviourist Edward Thorndike, and a spirometer to record vital
capacity, the IMShR sought to evaluate the demands that different films placed on
the viewer's mental faculties. The laboratory's investigators deployed a two-part
test for mental exertion (devised by one of the fathers of Russian pedology,
Aleksandr Nechaev) that checked for a lack of coordination between a child's
sensory processing capacities and their fine motor skills. The first task tested
children's levels of attention and memory retention by asking subjects to write
down all the numbers they could remember from a spoken list of 12 double-digit
figures. The corresponding test for motor skills gave subjects 30 seconds to write
down as many possible numbers in numerical order from a random starting point
provided by the investigator. Applying Nechaev's methodology to the study of a film's effect on viewers,
Pravdoliubov diagnosed children whose writing speed was lower than their level of
memory retention as suffering from the nervous disorder of psychasthenia, and
those whose performance in the motor activity task was better than in the sensory
skills assessment as victims of neurasthenia. Expanding Pravdoliubov's initial investigation, the laboratory proceeded to
compare the levels of fatigue that resulted from film watching with those of
school attendance. Testing four different types of films at weekly intervals, the
laboratory's pedologists subjected a group of school pupils to the Benjamin
Bourdon test for attention and mental alertness before and after a school day, and
at three points during the ensuing cinema visit. 
The question of how to bring cinema into line with pedological requirements was
addressed at other research centres, including the Institute of Psychology,
Pedology and Psychotechnics (formerly the Moscow Institute of Experimental
Psychology), the Krupskaia Academy of Communist Education and the Institute of
Extra-Curricular Educational Activities Methodology (IMVR). The cinema commission
at the IMVR became a site of particularly intensive research into the children's
film properties that could best serve ‘the tasks of communist education’. Under the leadership of the pedologist Nikolai Zhinkin, the institute
practiced testing different edits of the same film on select group of viewers as a
means to determine the child-friendliness of different narrative forms and
stylistic devices. Unlike the pedological film laboratory at the IMShR, the IMVR's cinema
commission was primarily interested in the question of psychological effect,
relying on qualitative methods such as audience observations, interviews and
children's compositions. Developing close ties with Soviet film production, the
cinema commission was routinely called to provide expert advice on scenarios,
scripts, completed films and thematic plans for the film studios
Mezhrabpomfil'm and Sovkino (and later,
Soiuzkino). The collaboration between IMVR researchers and
industry professionals also resulted in the production of a manual on how to write
screenplays for children as well as in the creation of short films that were used
to test the success of different narrative and stylistic strategies with young audiences. 
While most Soviet research on child viewers focused on school-age children, cinema's
impact on pre-schoolers was also taken into account. Made up of pedologists,
paediatricians and film technicians, a research collective headed by M. A. Polman
at the Baumanskaia film station in Moscow sought a better understanding of how
under sevens engaged with cinema. The research brigade ran test screenings at 40
local kindergartens in order to identify how filmmakers and exhibitors could
render cinema safe for the youngest Soviet viewers. The effects of different films on children's comprehension, nervous systems
and energy levels were gauged through close observations of individual viewers and
small groups during screenings, as well as during post-screening discussions,
games and drawing exercises. To evaluate the accessibility of various film
excerpts, investigators posed a series of comprehension questions to their
subjects, studied how they had interpreted the screened material in their drawings
and asked children to recount what they had seen a day after the film
demonstration. Eyesight tests and medical examinations performed in the middle of
the screening and at its conclusion checked for signs of physical fatigue. In addition to monitoring select children in their home environment, the
research brigade sought to uncover cinema's impact on children's sleep patterns
through night-time observations. 
The Baumanskaia research project sought to challenge the widespread presumption that
cinema was unsuitable for 7–8 year-olds. Instead of testing the impact of films
intended for adults on pre-schoolers, the investigators used six 20-minute films
that were specially adapted from full-length features. A stringent set of
guidelines was followed to make sure that the film demonstration process accorded
with standards of health and hygiene. Focusing their investigation on age-appropriate films and controlling the
process of demonstration, the Baumanskaia researchers obtained results that
directly contradicted the Payne Fund's findings that children were more restless
than normal after a visit to the cinema. In the majority of cases, the researchers
concluded, cinema had no ill effect on children's sleep patterns or behaviour at home. Showcasing their investment in the project of unravelling cinema's positive
impact on mind and body, the Baumanskaia collective also drew attention to their
preliminary findings that their screenings had a calming effect on children with
behavioural problems. 
In contrast to many of their counterparts abroad who were reluctant to identify with
any objectives beyond the advancement of scientific knowledge about cinema's
effects, Soviet film pedologists saw themselves as active participants in the
project of cultivating mentally, physiologically and ideologically sound citizens. Soviet researchers’ concern to spotlight the healthifying power of cinema
was perhaps best exemplified in the studies of child film viewers conducted at the
Institute of Psychology, Pedology and Psychotechnics in the early 1930s.
Incorporating investigations of deaf mutes and sufferers of neurological disorders
such as aphasia into its study on children's perception and understanding of
different forms of film art and editing, the institute's researchers sought to
harness cinema's potential to transform ‘defective’ children into ‘bona fide
builders of socialism’. 
Many prolific centres of viewer investigation, including the IMVR and the IMShR, were
closed down at the beginning of the 1930s. Studies of child spectatorship survived
the cultural revolution, however, coming to a standstill only when the discipline
of pedology was officially attacked in 1936. The pedologists who had studied viewer responses at the IMVR and IMShR in
the 1920s (Gel’mont, Pravdoliubov and Zhinkin) resumed their investigations at
other institutions in the early 1930s. Taking up a post at the ‘sector for the
study of film perception’ at the Higher State Institute of Cinematography (VGIK),
Zhinkin led an investigation into the ‘effectiveness’ of educational films for
children under the sponsorship of the Soviet educational film trust
Soiuztekhfilm. Using psychological observations and tests,
the scholar studied the impact of thematic content, formal construction and visual
means of presenting information on student comprehension. VGIK also became the site where the IMShR researcher, Pravdoliubov,
continued his work on the psycho-physiological fatigue caused by film watching. 
Gel'mont, in turn, took up a post within the ‘Children's Cinema Workshop’ at the
Central House of Children's Aesthetic Education (TsDKhVD) in the early 1930s. This
research centre employed doctors, pedologists, psychologists and other specialists
to help Soviet film organizations with all questions relating to the production of
children's cinema. With the view of formulating the ‘pedological and pedagogical
standards’ with which Soviet children's films were to comply, Gel'mont's
department investigated cinema's impact on children's eyesight, nervous system and
behaviour in its experimental research laboratory. Acting as a consulting and supervisory body, the Children's Cinema Workshop
helped film organizations to test out their productions on audiences and to assess
the pedagogical-pedological appropriateness of their outputs. The centre's staff
took part in the compilation of film studio thematic plans, organized conferences
of children's film writers and directors, reviewed completed screenplays and
filmed material, and sent out ‘methodological bulletins’ to film organizations. 
Another major way in which the research centre aided Soviet film production was
through educational training. Gel'mont was responsible for running an extended
training course on ‘cinema and pedology’ for Soviet educators and screenwriters.
Introducing students to the tenets of pedology, the course outlined the importance
of taking the psycho-physiological characteristics, and mental and sexual
development of target age groups into consideration when making children's films.
It similarly acquainted film producers with pedological findings on the mental
fatigue caused by cinema and its influence on the nervous systems of different age groups. 
The pedological spectator research that was conducted in the late 1920s and early
1930s began to set out the specific ways in which Soviet filmmakers could ensure
that their films had a positive effect on the young generation's mental and
physical development. These guidelines sought to steer the directors of Soviet
children's films on a path that not only eschewed the sensationalism of bourgeois
productions, but also rejected the experimentation and abstraction of avant-garde
cinema. In an implicit critique of the type of challenging, experimental works
that the pioneers of Soviet montage cinema produced in the 1920s, pedologists
stressed the importance of making concessions to the viewer. Research findings
that clearly connected cinema visits to mental and physical fatigue led many
pedologists to spotlight the importance of easing the demands that filmmakers
placed on the viewer's attention and concentration. Instructing children's film
producers to observe the principles of clarity and accessibility, researchers
stressed the need to guide the viewer's attention through narrative signposting,
clear shot composition and the use of visual aids such as close-ups and subtitles. The use of ‘unusual’ film techniques such as accelerated motion and
expressive framing was not recommended. ‘Unusual and striking camera angles, which
may be effective in and of themselves, should be abandoned for the sake of clarity
and accessibility’, contended Zhinkin. Symbolism was similarly rendered off limits; pedagogues noted that the type
of abstract allegory that featured in films like Eisenstein's
October (Oktiabr’, 1928) led to boredom
and fatigue. 
Specialists unanimously warned that a rapid pace of editing and persistent cross
cutting between different narrative lines was liable to overburden and disorient
young viewers. ‘A rapid change of episodes forces children to constantly shift
their attention, tiring and agitating them greatly’, concluded the Baumanskaia
research brigade. In addition to advocating a measured pace of editing and longer takes,
pedologists pointed to the error of films where fragmentation and disjointedness
prevailed over synthesis and coherence. Only films with logically developed
narrative lines, clear plot markers and easily identifiable protagonists,
pedologists claimed, could maintain the viewer's attention and ensure sound understanding. Pedologists also warned about the perils of overlooking another key factor
in audience comprehension – emotional engagement. A film that exerted a positive
pedagogical influence, Zhinkin noted, was a film that acted on the emotions and
did not ‘leave the viewer cold or indifferent’. Films for children were to be ‘cheerful, life-affirming’ and filled with
‘optimism’, shunning ‘everything that was antisocial, crude or foul’. Finally, pedologists stressed the importance of realism. Films that were
‘realistic’, rather than ‘removed from life’, Pravdoliubov claimed, would help to
cultivate a ‘healthy and lively person’ rather than ‘an unhealthy type of child, a
sick fantasist, a psychopathic drug addict, who is closed off from real life and
lives in a word of images’. 
While it is difficult to gauge the precise extent to which investigations into
children's tastes and capabilities initiated in the 1920s shaped filmmaking
practices, the Soviet film industry's engagement with pedological research is
indisputable. Conceptualized as an integral part of the process of raising the
quality of Soviet children's film production, pedological viewer research strove
to directly influence the work of film organizations. The establishment of sound lines of communication between researchers and
film industry personnel became a top priority, particularly in the early 1930s
when state support for any research venture that could not demonstrate immediate
practical implications began to dwindle. Research cells like the cinema workshop
at TsDKhVD framed maintaining ‘the closest and most frequent correspondence with
the sphere of production’ as the cornerstone of their work and were tasked with
delivering results that could assist the compilation of industry production plans. The effort made to engage industry professionals in the work of research
centres is evident from attempts to disseminate research results beyond the narrow
circle of pedologists and pedagogues at industry conferences and through
publication in film journals and national newspapers. The existence of investigators who were at the same time filmmakers
(including Nikolai Zhinkin) is another vivid indicator of meaningful interchange
between research and production.
If the battle for a healthy cinema was liable to be frustrated by commercial
considerations in NEP-era Russia – much like in the USA where activists failed to
ensure the production of ‘edifying’ films despite the enforcement of more
stringent censorship codes – the transformation of Soviet society and culture that
began in the late 1920s brought Soviet film production into line with the
recommendations of pedologists, psychologists and health professionals. The completion of the First Five-Year Plan and the surrender of profit
making agendas to the imperative of cultivating a new type of citizen imbued the
question of creating a suitable cinema for children with a new urgency. Indeed,
the Soviet state's commitment to this costly undertaking came to be brandished as
a badge of honour that affirmed Soviet culture's distinctiveness from its
bourgeois counterpart. Alongside the establishment of the world's first film studio devoted to the
creation of cinema for children (Soiuzdetfil’m, founded in 1936),
however, the Stalin era saw the reorientation of the entire Soviet film industry
towards a cinematic form that, to use the words of Sukharebskii, ‘instills a new
joyfulness’, ‘extends the horizons of the psyche and enriches the personality’. Prizing accessibility, optimism, emotional appeal and pedagogical
influence, the cinema that emerged after the advent of socialist realism effected
the erosion of strict distinctions between productions for children and adults. The collaboration of pedologists, educators and industry professionals,
while ostensibly targeting the creation of films specifically for children,
contributed to the formation of a wider consensus on the characteristics of a
‘healthy’ cinema. By 1934, Soviet pedologists’ appeals for realism, clarity and
continuity had become a requirement for all Soviet filmmakers.

## Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Wellcome Trust [grant number 203372/Z/16/Z]. I
would like to thank Nick Baron and the participants of the ‘Medical
Histories in Photography and Film’ research seminar series at De Montfort
University for their comments on an earlier draft of this article. I am also
indebted to the anonymous reviewers for their excellent comments and
suggestions.
1L.M. Sukharebskii, Patokinographiia v psikhiatrii i
nevropatologii (Moscow 1936), 85, 193–4.
2A. Piotrovskii, ‘Krest’iane: put’ k narodnoi tragedii’ [1934], in
Teatr. Kino. Zhizn’ (Leningrad 1969), 262–3; S.
Dinamov, ‘Sozdadim iskusstvo strastnoe i mudroe’,
Rot-fil’m (25 September 1934), 1–2.
3Pivotal studies on the growing authority of medicine in Soviet Russia
include: D. Beer, Renovating Russia: The Human Sciences and
the Fate of Liberal Modernity, 1880–1930 (Ithaca, NY
2008); F.L. Bernstein, The Dictatorship of Sex: Lifestyle
Advice for the Soviet Masses (DeKalb, 2007); F.L.
Bernstein, C. Burton and D. Healey, (eds), Soviet Medicine:
Culture, Practice, and Science (DeKalb, IL, 2010), D.
Healey, Bolshevik Sexual Forensics: Diagnosing Disorder in the
Clinic and the Courtroom, 1917–1939 (DeKalb, IL 2009);
D. Healey, Homosexual Desire in Revolutionary Russia: The
Regulation of Sexual and Gender Dissent (Chicago, IL
2001); I. Halfin, Terror in My Soul: Communist Autobiographies
on Trial (Cambridge, MA 2003); D.L. Hoffmann:
Cultivating the Masses: Modern State Practices and
Soviet Socialism, 1914–1939 (Ithaca, NY 2011); K.M.
Pinnow, Lost to the Collective: Suicide and the Promise of
Soviet Socialism, 1921–1929 (Ithaca, NY 2010); S. Gross
Solomon and J.F. Hutchinson (eds), Health and Society in
Revolutionary Russia (Bloomington, IN 1990); T. Starks,
The Body Soviet: Propaganda, Hygiene, and the
Revolutionary State (Madison, WI 2008). On the
cross-fertilization of science and culture during the 1920s, see N.
Krementsov, Revolutionary Experiments: The Quest for
Immortality in Bolshevik Science and Fiction (Oxford
2014); A. Banerjee, We Modern People: Science Fiction and the
Making of Russian Modernity (Middletown, CT 2012).
4For an example of pre-revolutionary calls for the need to transform the
cinema into an instrument of enlightenment, see E. Samuilenko,
Kinematograph i ego prosvetitel'naia rol' (St.
Petersburg 1912).
5International discussions concerning cinema's effects on children can be
found in the journal International Review of Educational
Cinematography (1929–34). Seminal secondary works on
this topic include: A. Killen, Homo Cinematicus: Science,
Motion Pictures, and the Making of Modern Germany
(Philadelphia, PA 2017); K. Ritzheimer, ‘Trash’, Censorship,
and National Identity in Early Twentieth-Century
Germany (Cambridge 2016); S. Curtis, The Shape
of Spectatorship: Art, Science, and Early Cinema in
Germany (New York, NY 2015); C. Ionita, ‘The Educated
Spectator: Cinema and Pedagogy in France’, PhD dissertation, Columbia
University (2013); A. Killen, Berlin Electropolis: Shock,
Nerves, and German Modernity (Berkeley, CA 2006); A.
Killen, ‘The Scene of the Crime: Psychiatric Discourses on the Film
Audience in Early Twentieth-Century Germany’, Harvard Review
of Psychiatry, 14, 1 (2006), 38–43; G. Jowett, I.
Jarvie and K. Fuller, Children and the Movies: Media Influence
and the Payne Fund Controversy (Cambridge 1996); S.
Hake, The Cinema's Third Machine: Writing on Film in Germany,
190–1933 (Lincoln, NE 1993).
6‘Introduction’, International Review of Educational
Cinematography, 1 (1929), 7–11.
7L. Dop, ‘The Role and the Purpose of the International Educational
Cinematographic Institute’, International Review of
Educational Cinematography, 1 (1929), 22.
8K. Clark, Petersburg: Crucible of Cultural Revolution
(Cambridge, MA 1995), 164.
9N. Bukharin, Kommunisticheskoe vospitanie molodezhi
(Moscow 1925), 71–2. L. Trotsky, Problems of Everyday Life:
Creating the Foundations for a New Society in Revolutionary
Russia (New York, NY 1973), 76.
10L. Ritzheimer, ‘Protecting Youth from “Trash”: Anti-Schund Campaigns in
Baden, 1900–1933’, PhD dissertation, State University of New York
(2007), 74. On the ‘explosion of interest in childhood’ in Russia at
the turn of the century, see C.Kelly, Children's World:
Growing Up in Russia, 1890–1991 (New Haven, CT 2007),
25–60.
11E.M. Balashov, Pedologiia v Rossii v pervoi treti XX
veka (St. Petersburg 2012). See also, A. Byford,
‘Parent Diaries and the Child Study Movement in Late Imperial and
Early Soviet Russia’, The Russian Review, 72, 2
(April 2013), 212–41; A. Byford, ‘V. M. Bekhterev in Russian Child
Science, 1900s–1920s: “Objective Psychology”/ “Reflexology” as a
Scientific Movement’, Journal of the History of the Behavioral
Sciences, 52, 2 (Spring 2016), 99–123.
12See, for example: A. Gel’mont, Chem zaniat den’ pionera i
shkol’nika (Moscow 1927) 34; A. Gel’mont ‘Voprosy
organizatsii detskogo dosuga’, in A. Gel’mont and A. Durikin (eds),
Trud i dosug rebenka, (Moscow 1927), 16; Gar
et al., ‘Detskii dosug’, in Trud i dosug rebenka,
32–40.
13V.A. Pravdoliubov, ‘Kino i uchashchiesia’, Na putiakh k novoi
shkole’, 2 (1927), 22; V.A. Pravdoliubov, Kino
i nasha molodezh’: Na osnove dannykh pedologii
(Moscow-Leningrad 1930), 8–9. A.M. Gel’mont, ‘Kino i vospitanie’ in A.
M. Gel’mont (ed.) Kino-deti-shkola (Moscow 1929), 8.
Similar findings were obtained by a 1927 investigation into children's
viewing habits conducted by the Central Cabinet of Pioneers. See
Batashov, ‘Kino-utrenniki’, Vozhatyi, 1 (1927)
25–7.
14Pravdoliubov, Kino i nasha molodezh', 58.
15Ibid., 59.
16A. Zaikov, ‘Kinoopasnost’ i bor’ba s neiu’, Na putiakh k novoi
shkole, 2 (1927), 13–18. Much in the same way,
Brezhnev-era anxieties about ‘telemania’ and ‘television sickness’
also centred on children. See K. Roth-Ey, Moscow Prime Time:
How the Soviet Union Built the Media Empire that Lost the
Cultural Cold War (Ithaca, NY 2011), 206–8.
17Zdanie shkoly, pitanie, odezhda, rezhim truda i otdykha
(Moscow 1926), 60–1. See also N. Semashko et al., ‘Pioner dolzhen byt’
zdorovym!’, in E. P. Solov’eva (ed.),
Pioner dolzhen byt’ zdorovym! (1926), 4–8. On
NEP-era efforts to study the population's health, see Pinnow,
Lost to the Collective, 15–20, 46–9.
18Zdanie shkoly, 69–72; Semashko et al., ‘Pioner dolzhen
byt’ zdorovym!’, 11, 16; E.P. Radin, Pioner, beregi svoe
zdorov’e (Moscow 1925), 6–7; E.P. Radin, ‘Kak dolzhen
podrostok provodit’ vremia otdykha’, in A. Ia. Kedrus (ed.)
Gigiena podrostka (Moscow-Leningrad 1925),
72–7.
19L.M. Sukharebskii, ‘Kino i zdorov’e detei’, in
Kino-deti-shkola, 27. On
kinematoftalmiia, see Pravdoliubov,
Kino i nasha molodezh’, 137. See also S.E.
Sovetov, Uchebnoe kino i zdorov’e uchashchikhsia
(Moscow 1933), 9–12.
20A. Angelucci et al., ‘The Cinema and Eye-Sight: Effects on Children's
Sight’, International Review of Educational
Cinematography, 5 (1930), 583–602.
21A. Latsis and L. Keilina, Deti i kino (Moscow 1928),
12–14.
22D.J. Youngblood, Movies for the Masses: Popular Cinema and Soviet
Society in the 1920s (Cambridge 1992), 14.
23Gel’mont, ‘Kino i vospitanie’, 5–24.
24Sukharebskii, ‘Kino i zdorov’e detei’, 27.
25V. Pravdoliubov, ‘O iunom kinozritele’, Izvestiia (21
August 1933), 4.
26‘Protokoly zasedaniia sektsii pedagogiki massovykh vozdeistvii’, Central
State Archive of the City of Moscow (TsGAM), f. 2194, op. 1, d. 145,
l. 77.
27Pravdoliubov, Kino i nasha molodezh', 128.
28On nervous exhaustion as a characteristically Soviet disease, see
Bernstein, The Dictatorship of Sex, 26 and Pinnow,
Lost to the Collective, 218.
29Pravdoliubov, Kino i nasha molodezh', 77.
30Pravdoliubov, ‘O iunom kinozritele’. For an example of concerns raised
about the dangers inherent to the cinematic medium abroad, see M.
Bernalei, ‘Use and Abuse of the Cinema’, International Review
of Educational Cinematography, 1 (1934), 55–61.
31See, for example, Latsis and Keilina, Deti i kino,
14.
32Youngblood, Movies for the Masses, 19–20, 50.
33B.M. Kheifets, ‘Detskii kino-teatr kak forma vneshkol’nogo vospitaniia’,
in Kino-deti-shkola, 67; Latsis and Keilina,
Deti i kino, 14; Pravdoliubov, Kino i
nasha molodezh’, 74–5, 127–8; Kheifets, ‘Detskii
kinoteatr’, 67–8.
34Pravdoliubov, Kino i nasha molodezh', 72.
35Ibid., 73.
36Pinnow, Lost to the Collective, 190, 228. On NEP-era
laments about the corruption of Soviet young people and their typical
framing of political threats in medical terms, see E. Naiman,
Sex in Public: The Incarnation of Early Soviet
Ideology (Princeton, NJ 1997), 262; Halfin,
Terror In My Soul, 97–103. See also: Starks,
The Body Soviet, 24–6; Bernstein, The
Dictatorship of Sex, 37–8, 142–5. On the origins of
Soviet anxieties about the health of children and youth in the late
imperial period, see S.K. Morrissey, ‘The Economy of Nerves: Health,
Commercial Culture, and the Self in Late Imperial Russia’,
Slavic Review, 69, 3 (Fall 2010), 645–675.
37Gel’mont, ‘Kino i vospitanie’, 5–6.
38This trend is also noted by Latsis and Keilina. See their Deti i
kino, 24.
39Pravdoliubov, Kino i nasha molodezh', 64. ‘Sinking deep
into the minds of our youth’, Pravdoliubov warned, ‘cinema shapes
consciousness according to its own image, transforming the world-view
and entire personality of the film viewer’ (65).
40See the press citations compiled in Latsis and Keilina, Deti i
kino, 16–17, and Iu. Menzhinskaia, ‘O kino dlia detei’,
Narodnoe prosveshchenie, 3 (1928), 114–19.
41M. Beliaev, ‘Deti i kino’, Pravda (6 January 1928),
4.
42Latsis and Keilina, Deti i kino, 20; N.A. Tolstova,
Kino i deti (Moscow 1930), 3.
43N.F. Leisher, ‘O detskoi fil’me’, Iskusstvo v shkole, 5
(1928), 17; A. Zaikov, ‘Kinoopasnost’ i bor’ba s neiu’, Na
putiakh k novoi shkole, 2 (1927), 13–18, 13; Latsis and
Keilina, Deti i kino, 16–17.
44Vecherniaia Moskva, 6 January 1927, cited in Latsis and
Keilina, Deti i kino, 17.
45Latsis and Keilina, Deti i kino, 16. As Scott Curtis
notes, ‘For many physicians and reformers, cinema acted as a
hypnotist, sending impressionable subjects to the streets with
powerful, posthypnotic suggestions to commit crimes of all varieties’.
See his The Shape of Spectatorship, 135.
46Article in Krasnyi put', 4 December 1927, quoted in A.
Latsis and L. Keilina, Deti i kino, 17.
47Kheifets, ‘Detskii kino-teatr’, 67.
48A.E. Gorsuch, Youth in Revolutionary Russia: Enthusiasts,
Bohemians, Delinquents (Bloomington IN 2000), 127.
49P.I. Liublinskii, Kinematograph i deti (Moscow 1925),
18.
50Quoted in V. Vainshtok and D. Iakobzon, Kino i molodezh'
(Moscow-Leningrad 1926), 10.
51Liublinskii, Kinematograph i deti, 20.
52Iu. Menzhinskaia, ‘Blizhaishie zadachi v oblasti kino dlia detei’,
Na putiakh k novoi shkole, 3 (1927), 6–7. See
also, Liublinskii, Kinematograph i deti, 20.
53Batashov, ‘Deti i kino’, Vozhatyi, 16 (1926), 38–40.
54Latsis and Keilina, Deti i kino, 13. On the urban
metropolis as space of capitalist temptation, see Starks, The
Body Soviet, 16–17.
55Tolstova, Kino i deti, 3.
56N. Semashko, ‘Kino i zdravokhranenie’, Kino i kul’tura,
5–6 (1929), 25–6.
57S. Curtis, The Shape of Spectatorship, 153–4.
58Sukharebskii, ‘Kino i zdorov’e detei’, 30.
59On the scientific and medical community's involvement in the
transformation of cinema and its public in Germany, see Killen,
Homo Cinematicus, 87.
60For an overview of the Bolsheviks’ ideas on cultural revolution, see D.L.
Hoffmann, Stalinist Values: The Cultural Norms of Soviet
Modernity, 1917–1941 (Ithaca, NY: 2003), 38-45. On the
Soviet avant-garde's commitment to ‘the production of the new person
by means of art’, see S. Tret’iakov, ‘Otkuda i kuda?: Perspektivy
futurizma’, Lef, 1 (1923), 192–203.
61A.M. Gel’mont, ‘Kino kak faktor vospitaniia’, Vestnik
prosveshcheniia, 5 (1927), 9.
62Liublinskii, Kinematograf i deti, 81; See also Gel’mont,
‘Kino kak faktor vospitaniia’, 10.
63Tearing ‘film-maniacs’ away from the screen was also not an easy task; it
was not uncommon for groups of teenagers to loudly protest their
eviction from the cinema, leading to interrupted showings and police
call outs. See Liublinskii, Kinematograph i deti,
82.
64Ibid., 83.
65Rabochaia gazeta, 28 May 1927, quoted in Iu.
Menzhinskaia, ‘O kino dlia detei”, Narodnoe
prosveshchenie, 3 (1928), 116.
66D. Youngblood, ‘The Fate of Soviet Cinema during the Stalin Revolution’,
The Russian Review, 50, 2 (1991), 157.
67M. Krupenina, ‘Kino i deti’, Na putiakh k novoi shkole,
7–8 (1926), 38–40.
68The Moscow Soviet's July 1928 decree, which ruled that children under 8
were only permitted to matinée screenings for children and that
children under 16 could only attend general screenings before 9
o’clock in the evening was indicative of this approach. See ‘O
poseshchenii det’mi kino-seansov v Moskve i Moskovskoi gubernii’, in
Kino-deti-shkola, 66.
69Iu. I. Menzhinskaia, ‘Massovaia kino-rabota s det’mi v Moskve i metody ee
provedeniia’, in Kino-deti-shkola, 37–57;
‘Instruktsiia ob organizatsii pedagogicheskikh kino-utrennikov dlia
detei v gor. Moskve’, Ezhenedel’nik MONO, 15–16
(1928), 4–6.
70‘Instruktivno-metodicheskie materially po voprosam vneshkol’noi raboty s
det’mi’, Russian Academy of Education Archive (RAO), f. 5, op. 1, d.
193, l. 54.
71G.A. Kister, Detskii kinoteatr (Moscow 1936), 31–2.
72Batashov, ‘O kino-utrennikakh’, Vozhatyi, 19 (1926),
34.
73Sukharebskii, ‘Kino i zdorov’e detei’, 34–5.
74Kheifets, ‘Detskii kino-teatr’, 73.
75L. Nikolaeva and N. Piatnitskaia, Vneshkol’naia kinorabota s
det’mi i podrostkami (Moscow-Leningrad 1931), 10–16;
Kheifets, ‘Detskii kino-teatr’, 73; Menzhinskaia, ‘Massovaia
kino-rabota’, 49–52.
76Kister, Detskii kinoteatr, 13.
77As Kristin Roth-Ey's analysis of the anxieties that the medium of
television sparked during the Brezhnev era has shown, passive
absorption was anathema to the Soviet vision of cultured cultural
consumption. See her Moscow Prime Time, 200–8.
78Menzhinskaia, ‘Massovaia kino-rabota’, 37–57.
79Kister, Detskii kinoteatr, 21–4.
80‘Sezon raboty pervogo detskogo kino-teatra’, in
Kino-deti-shkola, 86–92; ‘Instruktsiia ob
organizatsii’ 4–6; Zadachi, sistema i metody vneshkol’noi
kino-raboty s det’mi (Leningrad 1933), 10–15; RAO, f.
5, op. 1, d. 193, l. 54ob; Kheifets, ‘Detskii kino-teatr’, 70–6.
81‘Sezon raboty’, 97. See also Kheifets, ‘Detskii kino-teatr’, 67–80.
82N. Tolstova, ‘“Oktiabr’” u detei’, Kino-deti-shkola,
113–25.
83‘Stenogramma rasshirennogo vyezdnogo zasedaniia Vneshkol’nogo Soveta
Mosgorono’, TsGAM, f. 528, op. 1, d. 76, l. 11. The network of
children's film theatres in Soviet Russia had expanded to 46 by the
mid–1930s. See Kister, Detskii kinoteatr, 3.
84Pravdoliubov, ‘Kino i uchashchiesia’, 19.
85A.A. Grigor’eva, ‘Kino v shkolakh Moskvy’, in Uchebnoe i nauchnoe
kino (Leningrad 1947), 51; ‘Postanovlenie Sovnarkoma
RSFSR o kinofikatsii massovoi shkoly’ (1932) in Sbornik
ofitsial’nykh postanovlenii i rasporiazhenii po voprosam
khudozhestvennogo vospitaniia detei (Moscow 1933),
8–9.
86‘O kabinete detskogo shkol’nogo uchebnogo kino’, RAO, f. 40, op. 2, d.
1030, ll. 50–56. By the end of the decade, nearly all schools in
Moscow were equipped with film cameras and projectors. See Grigor’eva,
‘Kino v shkolakh Moskvy’, 51–2.
87Gel'mont, ‘Kino kak faktor’, 9.
88Latsis and Keilina, Deti i kino, 36, 41.
89On the impact of the First Five-Year Plan on the Soviet film industry,
see R. Taylor, ‘Ideology as Mass Entertainment: Boris Shumyatsky and
Soviet Cinema in the 1930s’, in R. Taylor and I. Christie (eds),
Inside the Film Factory (London 1991), 195–201;
V. Kepley Jr., ‘The First “Perestroika”: Soviet Cinema under the First
Five-Year Plan’, Cinema Journal, 35, 4 (Summer 1996),
31–53.
90Pravdoliubov, ‘Kino i uchashchiesia’, 20; A. Gel’mont, ‘Kino i zadachi
pedagogiki’, in Detskoe kino (Moscow 1930), 6.
91On Soviet studies of film spectators during the 1920s, see: A. Toropova,
‘Probing the Heart and Mind of the Viewer: Scientific Studies of Film
and Theatre Spectators in the Soviet Union, 1917–1936’, Slavic
Review, 76, 4 (Winter 2017), 931–958; I.U.
Fokht-Babushkin, ‘Izuchenie funktsionirovaniia kino vremen velikogo
nemogo’, in I.U. Fokht-Babushkin (ed.), Publika kino v Rossii:
Sotsiologicheskie svidetel’stva 1910-1930-kh godov
(Moscow 2013), 1–50; M.N. Luk’ianova, ‘Osnovnye etapy
sotsiologicheskoi razrabotki problemy kinoauditorii v Rossii’, in O.B.
Bozhkov (ed.) Sotsiologiia vchera, segodnia, zavtra,
(St. Petersburg 2012), 265–84; A. Olenina, ‘Psychomotor Aesthetics:
Conceptions of Gesture and Affect in Russian and American Modernity,
1910s–1920s’, PhD dissertation, Harvard University, (2012); V.
Bohlinger, ‘Engrossing! Exciting! Incomprehensible? Boring! Audience
Survey Responses to Eisenstein's October’,
Studies in Russian and Soviet Cinema, 5, 1
(2011), 5–27; A. Nesbet, Savage Junctures: Sergei Eisenstein
and the Shape of Thinking (London 2007); N. Khrenov, ‘K
probleme sotsiologii i psikhologii kino 20-x godov’, Voprosy
kinoiskusstva, vyp. 17 (Moscow 1976), 163–84.
92‘Protokoly zasedanii kinokomiteta’, Central State Archive of the
Literature and Art of St. Petersburg (TsGALI SPb), f. 82, op. 3, d.
20, ll. 103–4.
93‘Spravka, vydannaia Laboratoriei po izucheniiu mass’, Russian State
Archive of Literature and Art (RGALI), f. 1923, op. 1, d. 2405, l.
1.
94TsGALI SPb, f. 82, op. 3, d. 20, l. 97.
95W.W. Charters, Motion Pictures and Youth (New York, NY
1933), vi; ‘Introduction’, International Review of Educational
Cinematography, 1 (1929), 7.
96Gel'mont, ‘Kino i zadachi pedagogiki’, 6–8.
97‘Protokoly zasedanii sektsii “pedagogika massovogo vozdeistviia” pri
IMShR’, TsGAM, f. 2194, op. 1, d. 146, ll. 3-4; Pravdoliubov,
Kino i nasha molodezh', 18–53; E.
Stanchinskaia-Rozenberg, ‘Vliianie kino na shkol’nika’,
Vestnik prosveshcheniia, 2 (1927), 8–25; A.M.
Gel’mont, ‘Izuchenie vliania kino na detei (problema i metody)’,
Kul’tura i kino, 4 (1929), 38–46.
98‘Materialy o rabote otdelov instituta, 1926–1928’, TsGAM, f. 2194, op. 1,
d. 68, l. 33.
99Gel’mont, ‘Izuchenie vliania kino’, 41.
100Charters, Motion Pictures and Youth, 25.
101‘Otchet o rabote pedologicheskogo otdela za 1928/29gg’, TsGAM, f. 2194,
op. 1, d. 116, l. 12; Gel’mont, ‘Izuchenie vliania kino’, 38–46.
102Pravdoliubov, ‘O iunom kinozritele’; Gel’mont, ‘Izuchenie vliania kino na
detei’, 45.
103Gel’mont, ‘Izuchenie vliania kino na detei’, 44.
104According to Nechaev, a lack of synchronicity between the results of the
sensory and motor skills tasks signalled a child's exhaustion. See
A.P. Nechaev, Psikhologiia fizicheskoi kul'tury
(Moscow-Leningrad 1930), 73–80.
105Pravdoliubov, Kino i nasha molodezh', 127.
106The 5-minute test required students to cross out specified numbers from a
sheet of random figures. ‘Protokoly zasedaniia sektsii pedagogiki
massovykh vozdeistvii’, TsGAM, f. 2194, op. 1, d. 145, l. 77.
107‘Otchetnye materialy instituta za 1927-1931’, RAO, f. 5, op. 1, d. 9, l.
128.
108N.I. Zhinkin, “K voprosu o metodike postroeniia uchebnoi fil'my”, in
Detskoe kino, 16.
109‘Materialy po organizatsionnym voprosam’, RAO, f. 5, op. 1, d. 3, l. 6;
‘Proizvodstvennyi plan kino-komissii na 1929-1930’, RAO, f. 5, op. 1,
d. 9, ll. 306–7.
110‘M.A. Polman, “Doshkol’niki i kino, tom 1”’, RGALI, f. 2900, op. 1, d.
220, ll. 1, 7-7ob; ‘M. A. Polman, “Doshkol’niki i kino, tom 2”’,
RGALI, f. 2900, op. 1, d. 221, ll. 1–10.
111RGALI, f. 2900, op. 1, d. 220, ll. 3-5; RGALI, f. 2900, op. 1, d. 221,
l.61.
112The parents of those children who did not stay at the kindergarten
overnight were asked to fill out a report on their son's or daughter's
behaviour, activities, appetite and sleep patterns following the film
showing. RGALI, f. 2900, op. 1, d. 220, l. 43; RGALI, f. 2900, op. 1,
d. 221, l. 41, 43–5, 49. The Payne Fund researchers also led
investigations into cinema's impact on sleep patterns. See Chambers,
Motion Pictures and Youth, 31–5.
113RGALI, f. 2900, op. 1, d. 220, l. 2. RGALI, f. 2900, op. 1, d. 221, ll.
1, 9–10.
114For a summary of the Payne Fund's findings, see Chambers, Motion
Pictures and Youth, 35.
115RGALI, f. 2900, op. 1, d. 221, l. 50.
116Despite the fact that the initiator of the Payne Fund project sought to
produce irrefutable ‘scientific proof’ of cinema's negative impact on
children and instigate tighter censorship laws, the researchers
conducting the project were not activists for cinema reform. See
Jowett et al., 8–9.
117A. Shein, ‘Problema vospriiatiia i osmyshleniia kinofil’my det’mi’,
Tezisy dokladov k soveshchaniiu po voprosam massovogo
vozdeistviia na VII mezhdunarodnoi psikhotekhnicheskoi
konferentsii (Moscow-Leningrad 1931), 22–4. So staunch
was Soviet researchers’ commitment to the task of unleashing cinema's
prophylactic power that those individuals whose findings cast doubt on
the viability of this enterprise risked denunciation as ‘cinema
pessimists’. The leader of the IMShR's research project on fatigue and
film watching, Pravdoliubov, was ultimately replaced by a new
investigator who pursued a different methodology and obtained results
that were more favourable to cinema. To be sure, Pravdoliubov's
findings were not withheld from publication. They were, however,
fiercely criticized by other pedologists who argued that his line of
work was harmful to the cause of establishing a healthy cinema for
children. See, ‘Stenogramma zasedaniia sektsii uchebnogo kino NIS po
obsuzhdeniiu raboty V. A. Pravdoliubova’, RGALI, f. 2900, op. 1, d.
118, ll. 1–7.
118The 1936 decree against ‘pedological distortions’ decried
‘pseudo-scientific experiments’, ‘senseless and harmful
questionnaires’ and ‘tests’. See R. Bauer, The New Man in
Soviet Psychology (Cambridge, MA 1952), 123–4.
119‘Nauchno-issledovatel'skaia rabota N. Zhinkina i S. P. Vinogradova
“Issledovanie effektivnosti shkol’no-uchebnogo fil’ma”’, RGALI, f.
2900, op. 1, d. 193. Sections of Zhinkin's work at VGIK were
published: ‘Izuchenie zritelia i problemy postroeniia uchebnoi
fil’my’, Uchebnoe kino, 6 (1934), 14–25; ‘Elementy
siuzhetnosti v uchebnom fil’me’, Uchebnoe kino, 1
(1936), 7–20; ‘Neudachnye mesta shkol’no-uchebnykh fil’mov’,
Uchebnoe kino, 3 (1936), 26–36.
120RGALI, f. 2900, op. 1, d. 118.
121‘O kabinete detskogo shkol’nogo uchebnogo kino’, RAO, f. 40, op. 2, d.
1030, l. 2.
122RAO, f. 40, op. 2, d. 1030, ll. 2–4, 42–4, 45–8, 69–72; ‘Plan raboty
TsDKhVD na 1932’, RAO, f. 40, op. 1, d. 5, ll. 2-2ob; ‘Protokoly
zasedaniia direktsii TsDKhVD’, RAO, f. 40, op. 1, d. 1, ll. 89–94.
‘Establishing hygienic film demonstration’ and combating ‘the
anti-pedagogical influence of the existing cinema repertoire’ were
also part of its duties. See RAO, f. 40, op. 2, d. 1030, l. 2.
123RAO, f. 40, op. 2, d. 1030, ll. 73–5.
124RGALI, f. 2900, op. 1, d. 221, ll. 6–7; N. Arnol’d, T. Kiselev and M.
Polonskii, ‘Ispol’zovanie kino v nachal’noi shkole’, in B. S. Peres
(ed.) Shkol’no-uchebnyi fil’m (Moscow 1935), 48–9; I.
Menzhinskaia, ‘Kogo vospityvaet sovetskaia kinematografiia’, in
Detskoe kino, 32.
125Zhinkin, ‘K voprosu o metodike postroeniia uchebnoi fil’my’, 16. See also
T. Kiselev, ‘Kak shkol’nik vosprinimaet fil’m’, Uchebnoe
kino, 5 (1936), 23–4, 28.
126Tolstova, ‘“Oktiabr’” u detei’, 122–123.
127RGALI, f. 2900, op. 1, d. 221, l. 7. See also Arnol’d, Kiselev and
Polonskii, ‘Ispol’zovanie kino’, 47–8.
128‘The action should develop logically’, Pravdoliubov noted, ‘without any
startling jumps, without shifts from one place to the other and any
muddling of the chief dramatic line by parallel plots. The entire
picture must be unified and developed to the end’. See his
Kino i nasha molodezh’, 92. See also: N.I.
Zhinkin, ‘Izuchenie detskogo otnosheniia k kinematograficheskoi
kartine’, Pedologiia, 4 (1930), 505–18; Zhinkin, ‘K
voprosu o metodike’, 16; Zhinkin, ‘Elementy siuzhetnosti’; Zhinkin,
‘Neudachnye mesta’. As Evgeny Steiner has shown, 1920s reader studies
similarly uncovered a dislike of fragmentation and abstraction among
young Soviet readers. See his Stories for Little Comrades:
Revolutionary Artists and the Making of Early Soviet Children's
Books (Seattle, WA and London 1999), 46.
129Zhinkin, ‘K voprosu o metodike’, 11.
130Pravdoliubov, Kino i nasha molodezh', 92–3.
131Ibid., 129.
132‘Proizvodstvennyi plan kino-kabineta na 31/32 god’, RAO, f. 40, op. 3, d.
1030, l. 89.
133‘Tipovoe polozhenie’, RAO, f. 40, op. 3, d. 1030, ll. 1; RAO, f. 40, op.
3, d. 1030, l. 89. See also ‘Sviaz’ IMVR s drugimi uchrezhdeniiami i
organizatsiiami’, RAO, f. 5. Op. 1, d. 3, ll. 1–10.
134‘Proizvodstvennyi plan kino-kabineta na 31/32 god’, l. 93. Institutes
like the IMVR even sought to circulate their findings abroad, making
contact with the American Society of Cinematographers. See RAO, f. 5,
op. 1, d. 2, l. 90.
135Reluctant to attribute the enforcement of the Motion Picture Production
Code in 1934 on the dissemination of the Payne Fund studies, Jowett,
Jarvie and Fuller argue that the ‘cleanup’ of the US film industry
after 1934 was ‘more superficial than real’. See their
Children and the Movies, 109.
136N. Riabchikova, ‘Children's Cinema in the 1920s’, Studies in
Russian and Soviet Cinema, 3, 2 (2009), 231–5. ‘Soviet
cinema is the first in the history of world cinema to implement the
organisation of the production of films for children’, boasted the
industry head, Boris Shumiatskii in 1934. ‘The cinema of capitalist
countries’, he continued, ‘completely dismisses the production of
films for children as unprofitable’. See ‘Report from B.Z. Shumiatskii
to CC RCP (b) on the Work of GUKF in the Area of Children's Cinema’,
14 September 1935, Studies in Russian and Soviet
Cinema, 3, 2 (2009), 250–3, 251.
137Sukharebskii, Patokinographiia v psikhiatrii i
nevropatologii, 194. On the development of
Soiuzdetfil’m, see Jeremy Hicks, ‘Soiuzdetfilm:
The Birth of Soviet Children's Film and the Child Actor’, in B.
Beumers (ed.), A Companion to Russian Cinema
(Chichester 2016), 141–61.
138Many films produced by Soiuzdetfil’m, including
Iakov Sverdlov (Iutkevich 1940),
Zoia (Arnshtam 1944) and The Village
School Teacher (Sel’skaia
uchitel’nitsa, Donskoi, 1947) came to be regarded as
classics of socialist realism rather than films for children. For a
similar argument in reference to socialist realist literature, see L.
Heller, ‘A World of Prettiness: Socialist Realism and its Aesthetic
Categories’, in T. Lahusen and E. Dobrenko (eds), Socialist
Realism Without Shores (Durham, N.C 1997), 65–6.
Anna Toropova is a Wellcome Trust Research Fellow at the
University of Nottingham. Her current project explores the intersection of
medical knowledge, cinematic technology, and revolutionary agendas of
mind-body transformation in early Soviet Russia. She is also finishing a
monograph (under contract with Oxford University Press) on film as a
technology of emotional and affective education during the Stalin era. Her
work on Soviet cinema has been published in Slavic Review, The
Russian Review and Studies in Russian and Soviet
Cinema.