440plosonePLoS ONEPLoS OnePLOSPMC7755179775517977551793335184510.1371/journal.pone.0244407A science impact framework to measure impact beyond journal metrics
AriMary DConceptualization, Data curation, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Validation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing IskanderJohnConceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Writing – review & editing AraujoJohnConceptualization, Data curation, Methodology, Writing – review & editing CaseyChristineConceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Writing – review & editing KoolsJohnValidation, Writing – review & editing ChenBinValidation, Writing – review & editing SwainRobertData curation, Writing – review & editing KellyMiriamValidation, Writing – review & editing PopovicTanjaConceptualization, Methodology, Supervision, Writing – review & editing StimpsonJim PEditor 1Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America2Drexel University School of Public Health, UNITED STATESCompeting Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.
¤Current address: Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of Justice, Arlington, Virginia, United States of America
✉* E-mail: Mkb9@cdc.gov
221220201512e0244407e0244407512021This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.

## Abstract
Measuring the impact of public health science or research is important especially when it comes to health outcomes. Achieving the desired health outcomes take time and may be influenced by several contributors, making attribution of credit to any one entity or effort problematic. Here we offer a science impact framework (SIF) for tracing and linking public health science to events and/or actions with recognized impact beyond journal metrics. The SIF was modeled on the Institute of Medicine’s (IOM) Degrees of Impact Thermometer, but differs in that SIF is not incremental, not chronological, and has expanded scope. The SIF recognizes five domains of influence: disseminating science, creating awareness, catalyzing action, effecting change and shaping the future (scope differs from IOM). For public health, the goal is to achieve one or more specific health outcomes. What is unique about this framework is that the focus is not just on the projected impact or outcome but rather the effects that are occurring in real time with the recognition that the measurement field is complex, and it takes time for the ultimate outcome to occur. The SIF is flexible and can be tailored to measure the impact of any scientific effort: from complex initiatives to individual publications. The SIF may be used to measure impact prospectively of an ongoing or new body of work (e.g., research, guidelines and recommendations, or technology) and retrospectively of completed and disseminated work, through linking of events using indicators that are known and have been used for measuring impact. Additionally, linking events offers an approach to both tell our story and also acknowledge other players in the chain of events. The value added by science can easily be relayed to the scientific community, policy makers and the public.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2020 Aug 13; Accepted 2020 Dec 8; Collection date 2020.

## Introduction
Many frameworks have been used to measure programs, research, and other aspects of science and technology advancements [ – ]. Commonly used measures of science and research impact often are based on publication metrics [ ]. There has been heavy dependence on quantitative measures by the scientific community, driving the value of journal metrics, with various indices having been developed to credit publication contributions to knowledge [ , ]. This is not unusual as scientific, peer-reviewed publications are recognized as one of the most important formal outputs or deliverables of a research project that can be used to infer the quality and impact of the underpinning science. In addition, journal metrics, such as citations and impact factor are relatively easy to collect, and they are valuable indicators of the reach of the research in terms of how widely it is disseminated and its uptake. But they do not characterize the influence created such as resulting actions or changes or the way in which the research knowledge is used.
Funders continue to grapple with how to assign measurable criteria of a more practical value to research under review in research proposals and awards [ – ] or said another way, the impact of science and research efforts beyond just the publication of findings [ , ], because using a metrics-only approach will not suffice to capture broader societal impacts on economic, technologic and innovative advancements [ ]. While this idea is welcomed by some, others express reservation driven by the concern that innovative research may be stifled this way [ , ]. How and when to use these measures is a subject of intense debate [ , , ].
While CDC has a framework for program evaluation in public health that is widely being used for public health programs [ ], this evaluation framework has not been conducive for assessing the impact of science and research efforts. Other frameworks used for evaluation of public health interventions are mostly very specific and narrow in scope, limiting broad applicability [ – ]. For example, a framework such as Reach, Effectiveness, Adoption, Implementation and Maintenance (RE-AIM), is narrowly focused on evaluating behavior change in health interventions, it does so effectively, and has been adapted for use in evaluating built environment strategies [ ]. However, it is only flexible enough to be applied to the evaluation of similar applications within the scope of its design. Instead, we are turning our attention to a broader assessment of how to describe the role of science in contributing to the improvement of public health, for which we developed the Science Impact Framework.

## Materials and methods

## Developing the science impact framework (SIF)
To develop this framework, a literature review was undertaken to identify frameworks previously developed or used [ – , ]. Next, we considered those elements of the frameworks identified that would best demonstrate the impact of CDC science. One example of this is the Payback Framework which has been in existence since the 90’s and is applied to medical and health services. Several other frameworks developed later are based on the Payback Framework [ , ]. The Research Excellence Framework (REF) and the Research Quality Framework (RQF) emerged recently. The existing frameworks we studied are mostly research or health services frameworks. In order to capture other science efforts, such as developing guidelines and recommendations that contribute to health outcome, we defined science more broadly than research. We embraced some of the concepts we highlighted from these frameworks ( ). But as our primary model, we adapted the Institute of Medicine (IOM) “Degrees of Impact” Thermometer [ ]. The key attraction of the IOM model was the focus on influences. However, we needed to extend and expand these concepts because IOM serves in an advisory role so, the scope of their work is in the realm of knowledge diffusion (user- pull end of spectrum), while CDC has a broader scope; diffusion of knowledge, applied research, technology creation, capacity building, and program/initiative implementation. And the IOM model suggests an incremental progression of processes and actions, our model fundamentally differs in this aspect as well.
 

## Description of the science impact framework
The Science Impact Framework (SIF) consists of five domains of impact each with key indicators for the specific domain ( ).
 The resulting SIF is a collection of logically related or associated elements (influence). Influence in this case is the term used to describe the evidence of impact within each domain of the SIF as described by the key indicators. Description of the domains of impact are as follows:
1. DISSEMINATING SCIENCE: This represents producer push and may include the publication of findings in peer reviewed journals or other reports, presentations at conferences or through other media channels.
2. CREATING AWARENESS: This represents user pull and may include awards, general awareness, or acceptance of a concept or findings by scientific community or policy makers, generating new discussion based on shared science.
3. CATALYZING ACTION: This represents actions taken as a result of the science and may include partnerships and collaborations, technology creation, new funding, congressional hearings or bills, or introduction in practice.
4. EFFECTING CHANGE: This represents changes that occur as a result of the science or the actions taken, and may include building public health capacity, legal/policy change, cultural/social/behavior change, or economic change.
5. SHAPING THE FUTURE: This represents additional considerations (scope beyond IOM “Degrees of Impact” Thermometer) that affect the future direction, drive further progress in understanding of the science, or implementation in practice, and may include new hypothesis or strategies, implementation of new programs/initiatives, or quality improvement.
 : The Science Impact Framework, illustrates the SIF with five domains of scientific impact that express the scope and type of influence generated by the scientific undertaking. The degree of impact is not necessarily a linear sequence of progression through the five domains; therefore, events captured may not be reflected in every domain and may not occur chronologically. The model also portrays the complexity of the measurement environment with other influences beyond the ones described by the domains of the SIF. For example, there may be other influences that may or may not work synergistically with the desired influence for the work under consideration. Thus, impacting the ability to achieve desired outcome positively or negatively. Our model uses both quantitative and qualitative measures. The types of impact of interest transcend from the impact on the field, to broader societal impacts, including policy and practice impact and for CDC, the goal is health outcomes.
 For the purpose of applying the SIF, we define CDC science broadly to include 1. basic and applied epidemiology, 2. laboratory studies, 3. Surveillance, and 4. other scientific outputs such as models, methods, meta-analyses and guidelines and recommendations developed to improve prevention and control or improve the practice of public health. The tracing and linking of actual instances of scientific influence through the framework involves either identifying points of impact and tracing backward events related to the science or research impact or going back to original scientific work (which may include synergistic efforts) and tracing forward events that have link to that work [ ]. The latter approach ensures clear linkages can be made, and it is feasible to identify effects within 2–5 years of dissemination since these effects may be formative and do not have to be the ultimate outcome. The SIF relies on user judgment as expert opinion, which could be supported by peer reviews, or interviews, to identify credible links that can be traced through the framework. This is how it works:
The reviewer identifies a point of scientific significance and places it within one of the SIF five domains of influence based on alignment with key indicators for that domain. The reviewer using the framework further:
Identifies forward and/or backward events or activities that link or can be associated (logically or empirically) with the point of scientific significance,
Validates the links with peer review (which could be internal or involve external partners) or expert opinion,
Assigns or reassigns the linked events to one of the five domains of influence.
Because the SIF can be used to track the impact retrospectively or monitor it prospectively, it is a culture change from focusing on outputs or journal metrics. It allows the investigating of what changes occurred or are occurring because of the work. Ultimately, the impact can be tracked to an individual, groups or entire society.

## Validating the framework using case studies
Once the SIF was developed it was evaluated for functional utility using publications of research and findings that cover various areas of public health: basic research, laboratory science, epidemiology, guidelines and recommendations, surveillance, infectious diseases, non-communicable diseases, meta-analyses, and evaluation ( ). These topical areas were selected from a) Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) published by the CDC, b) papers competing for CDC’s Charles C. Shepard Science Award (https://www.cdc.gov/od/science/aboutus/shepard/) [ ], and c) topics from CDC’s Public Health Grand Rounds (PHGR), monthly webcasts that addresses key public-health challenges [ ]. The data for tracing of influence in each domain using identified key indicators included citation analysis and subject matter experts’ opinions ( ), a combination of these sources was used to establish effects and linkages. In addition, current journal metrics in use for measuring impact such as number of citations, impact factor, were also assessed for each of the original manuscripts of our case studies to compare with influences and impact identified by the SIF model.
 In addition, a case study approach was used to test the SIF, a total of 11 case studies were conducted ( ). The starting point for each case study was a publication describing the findings or output of interest. Three of the eleven case studies consisted of more than one relevant publication as starting point. Specifically, the tuberculosis (TB) and Group B streptococcal (GBS) case studies had three, and the pediatric cough and cold medication (CCM) had two relevant publications respectively, ( ). Findings from these publications worked in synergy with each other to produce the documented impact. Citations of the original publications were identified, and each reviewed to assess and understand the way the disseminated knowledge or output was used in the citing publication. In the 11 case studies that were used, the time frame assessed was from time of dissemination of scientific knowledge and tracing it forward to 2011 ( ). This is like systematic review; in this case, qualitative analysis was undertaken to investigate evidence of importance of the original published work. Identified effects or influences were placed under the relevant domain of influence as described by the SIF. When tracing the events, it was important to research in more detail the role/influence of the original CDC manuscript(s) in these events to establish documented links between the manuscript(s) and these events and identify a link to the that domain of influence based on alignment with key indicators for the domain. Not all domains of influence are utilized, and the link does not have to be to the immediate domain as listed in the SIF model. Appropriateness of links and placement of events under each domain is validated through expert opinions.

## Results and discussion

## Summary of key findings from case studies
A summary of key findings using SIF are presented in . Bibliometric analysis was done on the original manuscript(s) to show the number of primary and secondary citations. Naturally, the number of citing sources was minimal when an original paper was recently published and when the topic may only be of professional interest to a narrow audience. A few of the case studies have been presented at the CDC PHGR [ ] https://www.cdc.gov/grand-rounds/pp/2014/20140121-science-impact.html and at the Office of Science web page https://www.cdc.gov/od/science/impact/testing.html.

## Further considerations based on the case studies
It is important to disseminate findings through publications, but that does not represent the end-product of research, rather the beginning of further influence. Impact beyond publications could be in form of products and technology; however, we recognize that ultimately information about these products, programs, initiatives and advancements can be provided in the form of publications, thus dissemination of science was used as one of the domains of influence in the SIF. Publication metrics such as number of citations would likely underestimate the impact of the work. A careful review of citations data for our case studies suggest the community of users drives the number of citations. For example, a comparison of publications from two of our case studies ( ): The publication on cochlear implant had 97 citations, 761 2nd generation citation, 5-year impact factor of 52.36, and 9.70 average cites per year, versus the publication on pneumococcal vaccine, which had 1,035 citations, 23,415 2nd generation citations, 5-year impact factor 52.36, and 103.6 average citations per year. These were published in the same journal, the same year, and consequently have the same impact factor; yet, there is a significant difference in both the primary citation and second-generation citations. Hence, impact factor of the journal does not seem to be the driving factor. The size of the community that needs the science or information can vary significantly and therefore can influence the number of citations. For example, the cochlear implant publication will be of interest predominantly to manufacturers of the device, physicians, and patients who use them, and as a result, the numbers are small compared to infectious disease such as pneumococcal pneumonia that affect significantly larger number of people. Merely counting citations does not reveal the way the science was used e.g. as background information or foundational to the steps or actions taken. Furthermore, just because an article is cited does not mean it is for a positive reason, sometimes articles are cited as examples of bad or flawed science [ , ]. There is ample evidence that even publications that have been retracted as bad science or due to scientific misconduct continue to get cited [ ]. Newer measures, such as Altmetric have similarly been found not to reflect broad societal impacts [ ] but can provide data on the reach of publications and be a good resource in using the SIF. The main reason all the afore mentioned indicators are attractive is that they are quantitative and readily available. Perceptions of participants in a recent evaluation suggest that the incentivizing of publications may be at the expense of generation of broader impacts [ ]. Scientific work is generally not linked to dollar investment or time to produce results. However, assessment using the SIF would prompt the question—Was the investment of dollars, time and efforts worth it? Just because a publication is infrequently cited does not discount the potential magnitude of contribution. For example, in the West Nile case studies ( ), the bibliometrics of this publication [ ] showed 193 citations. However, the findings were instrumental to development of animal vaccine and subsequently human vaccine [ ] (https://www.cdc.gov/grand-rounds/pp/2014/20140121-science-impact.html).
The body of work with impact on practice and policy especially, is rarely captured in peer reviewed publications. Currently, there is no easy way to get to these types of information. Most of the citations are peer reviewed journals with a few books and conference proceedings. Hence, impact on practice and policy is rarely captured. The CDC scope of work as the United States premier public health agency, leads to technology creation such as laboratory methods, analytical methods and in addition, the knowledge generated from research informs further actions such as policy, practice and future research. In our search for information related to key indicators that define each domain of influence in the SIF, we found that the peer review literature was not necessarily the best venue for the information we sought. It took a combination of discussions with subject matter expects and internet searches for progress in the topical area to identify non-quantitative measures. Indicators that are qualitative in nature are more difficult to find without a deliberate effort and having a system in place that captures such information. Examples include policy changes, ongoing dialogue, and changes in practice.
It is important to measure the broader impact of CDC science on research, technology, practice and ultimately health outcome. Interest in evaluating science and research arises as both an interesting problem in scholarship and for public value. The challenge of scholarship lies in the complex environment of the science and research enterprise as well as how knowledge is accumulated and disseminated. Making these relationship even more complicated is an agency’s portfolio of science and research in which more than one project yields results that are commingled into a single output without clear specification or linkage of how to attribute the contribution of the various lines of science and research into the combined output [ ].

## Applicability of the science impact framework
The issue of how to measure impact of science or research is not simple and is even more complex for public health science. Measurement, especially when it comes to health outcomes, is complex because, it could take years, multiple actions may be involved, multiple players may be involved, which raises the issue of where to assign the credit. Because impact is frequently the result of synergy of many factors, it is important to not overestimate a single contributor; highlighting importance of collaborators can lead to stronger partnerships; professional networks have been shown to be effective in promoting uptake of research findings [ ]. Because there are other players, other strategies and approaches as well, that may or may not be synergistic, the SIF allows a view of positive or negative effects.
Finally, decision on what to measure that will provide the most value, and the venue to obtain data for such measurement is a challenge. Systems with the capacity to capture all interactions including outputs and interim impact have been suggested as a possible approach since those provide a network of data [ ]. The clear delineation of potential domains of science influence inherent in the SIF provides a useful construct. It helps science initiatives to be viewed through the lens of practice, and as a result, ask and answer similar kinds of questions as more traditional implementation efforts regarding what impact can be made or is being made and what changes will produce bigger or yield most distal outcomes. Therefore, the SIF complements and strengthens traditional evaluation [ ]. The SIF serves both planning and evaluation functions; it helps us think about the myriad of outcomes that result from science and research efforts and that singly or jointly allow our efforts to contribute in the longer-term to improve health outcomes. The SIF provides a very useful description of the sequence of potential outcomes for a science effort without assuming that the same sequence will hold for all science efforts or that all science efforts will affect the most distal health outcomes in the framework. As such, it allows for constructive discussions with stakeholders and skeptics alike who wonder about the extent of our accomplishments where the direct relationship to health outcomes is difficult to demonstrate. Likewise, by laying out an expected sequence of outcomes for an effort, it is possible to look for those low-hanging fruits so that if expected outcomes are not being achieved, there is room to stop and examine in real-time, how to make the efforts more powerful or re-calibrate to stay on the right trajectory. Furthermore, the variety of outcomes allows us to compare successful science efforts side by side, to determine if there are any patterns in influences through the SIF that most quickly or powerfully affect health outcomes. The SIF provides for an iterative process that continues to give; the assessment of the work can be on a continuum into the future. Thus, a retrospective assessment can be continued as a prospective monitoring for the foreseeable future. Perhaps some of our cases by now would have registered further impacts beyond what we found at the time we conducted these case studies and the respective programs can build on our findings to continue to monitor progress. New technologies such as machine learning and artificial intelligence can make the SIF assessments faster and easier, but human input will still be required to understand what the output means [ ] and as other technologies become available, they can be leveraged as well. Several programs within CDC are beginning to use the SIF to measure program and public health impact. SIF was used by a CDC cooperative agreement recipient in assessing the uptake of CDC good laboratory practice recommendations in biochemical genetic testing and newborn screening communities and developing plans to advance the impact [ ]. In addition, a few findings using SIF have been published in peer-reviewed journals [ – ].

## Conclusion
In this paper, we present an approach to measuring science impact that goes beyond journal metrics. The initial development of the SIF and the case studies were based on CDC science, but has application beyond CDC. The SIF has flexibility that makes it feasible to assess retrospectively or monitor prospectively different efforts, those of established scientific programs, projects and research, specific scientific documents, such as publications and guidelines, and even individual scientist’s body of work. The focus of public health is reducing morbidity and mortality with the goal of improving quality of life and wellbeing. The whole essence of the CDC science is to create what is actionable that would produce positive impact to keep people safe and healthy. It is important to know if what we think has potential of making an impact produces the anticipated impact. The SIF can serve as a framework for focusing and monitoring broader impact of science, beyond the impact of individual publications and products. With the SIF, a choice can be made as to what to monitor to show the broader impact of the science. What is unique about this is that the focus is not just on the projected impact or outcome rather on the effects that are occurring in real time with the recognition that the measurement field is complex. It can promote a culture change from assessing the impact of science primarily through journal metrics, to a more robust approach that captures qualitative data that measure the changes occurring because of science. Currently, it is rare to find a single source for evidence data. That may be more feasible for prospective monitoring as data sources can be determined in the planning stages of work, such as what systems to leverage to obtain data that substantiate impact. Moreover, it is for this reason that prospective monitoring using the SIF is considered easier than retrospective. However, once a retrospective assessment is done, future impacts can be tracked prospectively for that work, essentially SIF is evergreen in nature. Information generated from these assessments can be used to produce annual reports or other communication products to relay value added by science to the scientific community, policy makers and the public. The framework is broad enough and adaptable to address many areas of science. Almost anyone can tailor it to the work they do all that is needed is to define relevant key indicators for each of the domains of influence. Using the SIF will allow the translation of the value of science/research to the public in a simplified manner that is more likely to be of interest to them than peer-reviewed publication.
We are interested in the further dissemination and use of the SIF within the public health community or other venues.

## Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Tom Chapel for his perspective on how this framework complements the traditional CDC evaluation framework, Dr. Gerardo Garcia-Lerma for input in creating the Science Impact Framework figure and Dr. Betty Wong for review and comments on the case studies.

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the manuscript in Tables and .

## Funding Statement
The author(s) received no specific funding for this work.

## References
 

PLoS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0244407.r001Decision Letter 0
StimpsonJim PAcademic Editor© 2020 Jim P StimpsonThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
8 Oct 2020

PONE-D-20-25382
A Science Impact Framework to Measure Impact Beyond Journal Metrics
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Ari,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Nov 22 2020 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Jim P Stimpson, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: N/A
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The authors' work is technically sound and literature review relatively thorough. The authors do not provide any quantitative study which is well justified in the paper. The qualitatitave study provided is clear and well presented.
Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?
As the authors do not provide any quantitative study, this is not applicable.
Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The authors do not provide any numerical data but the data in the qualitative study is clearly labelled and cited as appropriate.
Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
The manuscript is very clear and well written.
- Overall a well argued, clear paper and a novel contribution to scientometrics.
- The authors provide a clear motivation and introduction for SIF.
- Although the authors briefly mention altmetrics later on in their discussion (ln 215) but may wish to briefly comment on them and their compatibility or their incompatibility with the SIF) in the intro/motivation for clarity.
- link to citation 21 appears to be broken (404 error).
- The 5 components of SIF and how different types of impact fit within the framework are well explained and illustrated.
- Agree that there is significant complexity and influences outside SIF to factor. However, sentence "For example, there may be other influences that may or may not work synergistically with the desired influence for the work under consideration" (lines 113-114) particularly difficult to read and parse. Could the authors rework or provide a more concrete example?
- Presumably "events or activities" (lns 132-133) can imply any measurable indicator from the framework including citations of synergistic and foundational work? Although the authors clarify this later (lns 166-167) it may help to reiterate this point earlier.
- lns 226-227 - Do the authors have a view on other US Federal works that have previously tried to capture some or all aspects of this information e.g. STAR Metrics (now Federal Reporter)?
- The authors' conclusion that a move away from simplistic "assessment of impact primarily through journal metrics" is fair and well substantiated by illustration. The view is shared by cited literature.
- A criticism of Research Excellence Framework is that collection and analysis of case studies is a very manual process which is incompatible with the growing volumes of scientific output requiring assessment (see Ravenscroft et al 2017. https://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0173152). SIF also heavily relies upon case studies and therefore may suffer similar criticism. With the concession that measurement of scientific impact is a complex and multi-faceted issue and that quantification of impact remains problematic, how do the authors respond to this criticism?
- The authors' concluding paragraphs and discussion of practical use of SIF are interesting and inspiring. However, it is clear that a lot of manual effort is likely to be involved in the creation, collection and evaluation of SIF case studies. Do the authors have a view on how modern Artificial Intelligence and Natural Language Processing approaches could help with these manual processes? A good relevant example could be McKeown et al. (2016) - https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.23612 who propose an automated approach for assignment of credit for development of scientific terms and tools over time by assessing appearance of technical terms in citation networks.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: James Ravenscroft
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
PLoS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0244407.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
221220201512e0244407e0244407Collection date 2020.

20 Nov 2020

- Although the authors briefly mention altmetrics later on in their discussion (ln 215) but may wish to briefly comment on them and their compatibility or their incompatibility with the SIF) in the intro/motivation for clarity.
The reason altimetric was mentioned in the discussion rather than the introduction is because we became aware of it after the development of the framework. The introduction discussed in details the frameworks we have reviewed during the development of our framework. MMWR and the CDC Library started collecting Altmetric data in 2014, that is when altimetric came to our attention. Altmetrics measures the volume of attention particular research has generated ONLINE. This data is mainly useful for identifying short term “reach” of specific publications. We see altimetric as serving as further resource that unearths attention to the publication being assessed. In a way we are already using altmetrics (information from media, policies, etc) but not in a formal way buy doing the professional altmetrics search way via Altmetric explorer or PlumX. It can be used for gathering data on the reach of a publication and allows a view of different venues where mention of the work appear and those can be analyzed for any evidence of impact. New tools like Altmetrics will continue to be discovered and used and they can be incorporated into the SIF as they mature. SIF is not a stagnant way of measuring science impact, but an umbrella that is broad and evolving
We have added statement in the paper indicating altimetric can serve as resource pointing to uptake of a publication. Lines 216 -218 - “but can provide data on the reach of publications and be a good resource in using the SIF.”
- link to citation 21 appears to be broken (404 error). 
We have obtained a new link. 
https://vdocuments.mx/reader/full/the-institute-of-medicine-what-makes-it-great-mediafilesabout-the-iom
- The 5 components of SIF and how different types of impact fit within the framework are well explained and illustrated.
- Agree that there is significant complexity and influences outside SIF to factor. However, sentence "For example, there may be other influences that may or may not work synergistically with the desired influence for the work under consideration" (lines 113-114) particularly difficult to read and parse. Could the authors rework or provide a more concrete example?
We added this text “Thus impacting the ability to achieve desired outcome positively or negatively.” At the heart of the sentence in lines 113-114 is the fact that we may not always get to the desired outcome, thus the need to track. This paper https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/article?id=10.1371/journal.pbio.3000860 shows By paying attention to public perceptions of their publications, scientists can learn whether their research is stimulating positive scholarly and public thought. They can also become aware of potentially negative patterns of interest from groups that misinterpret their work in harmful ways, either willfully or unintentionally, and devise strategies for altering their messaging to mitigate these impacts. These impacts can go beyond messaging to actions.
- Presumably "events or activities" (lns 132-133) can imply any measurable indicator from the framework including citations of synergistic and foundational work? Although the authors clarify this later (lns 166-167) it may help to reiterate this point earlier.
Lines 129-130 indicated the significant events are based on the key indicators. The subsequent bullets describe how to make the linkages. We have added text that indicate synergistic work may be included. We are careful in highlighting this where we are describing identification of events and linkage as it may create the impression that one must always find synergy.
- lns 226-227 - Do the authors have a view on other US Federal works that have previously tried to capture some or all aspects of this information e.g. STAR Metrics (now Federal Reporter)?
Our understanding of Federal reporter is that it is a searchable database that captures research awards by federal agencies. It keeps counts by location as well as funding. It does not show the impact of the funded work, something we do using SIF.
- The authors' conclusion that a move away from simplistic "assessment of impact primarily through journal metrics" is fair and well substantiated by illustration. The view is shared by cited literature.
- A criticism of Research Excellence Framework is that collection and analysis of case studies is a very manual process which is incompatible with the growing volumes of scientific output requiring assessment (see Ravenscroft et al 2017. https://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0173152). SIF also heavily relies upon case studies and therefore may suffer similar criticism. With the concession that measurement of scientific impact is a complex and multi-faceted issue and that quantification of impact remains problematic, how do the authors respond to this criticism?
SIF, because it is a combination of quantitative and qualitative measures, is more labor intensive, but I think this is a reasonable tradeoff as we are seeking more than just numbers. It is fundamentally different and provides a richer basis for evaluation. SIF is not dependent on case studies as indicated by the reviewer, we used case studies for proof of concept. If you look at the published papers based on use of the SIF that we referenced lines 302-303, those are specific assessments not case studies. Case studies will be helpful for retrospective assessment of a large body of work covering several years, but as indicated in the paper future tracking is feasible precluding the need for case studies. Even though it is labor intensive now, as described in the paper, the review using SIF is akin to systematic review and if that has stood the test of time, we believe SIF will. Moreover, as indicated in our revision, as new ideas and technology become available, that will help make it more automated. See also Lines 84 to 86 “This is an abbreviated list of data sources; other resources as they become available may be used as needed.” We will continue to pay attention to evolving technologies, tools and resources that will minimize burden
- The authors' concluding paragraphs and discussion of practical use of SIF are interesting and inspiring. However, it is clear that a lot of manual effort is likely to be involved in the creation, collection and evaluation of SIF case studies. Do the authors have a view on how modern Artificial Intelligence and Natural Language Processing approaches could help with these manual processes? A good relevant example could be McKeown et al. (2016) - https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.23612 who propose an automated approach for assignment of credit for development of scientific terms and tools over time by assessing appearance of technical terms in citation networks.
Yes, it is labor intensive now, but as described in the paper, the review using SIF is akin to systematic review and if that has stood the test of time, we believe SIF will. Moreover, as indicated in our revision, as new ideas and technology become available, that will help make it more automated. See also Lines 84 to 86 “This is an abbreviated list of data sources; other resources as they become available may be used as needed.” We also added text to lines 296-298.
There is a concept called “human in the loop” AI systems, which basically means that no output from an AI or machine learning can stand as final without review by one or several subject matter experts. We have added text and this reference https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/artificial-unintelligence .So we think that AI could be part of the SIF “frontend”, but at the backend you need inputs from the program to understand what the output means.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
PLoS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0244407.r003Decision Letter 1
StimpsonJim PAcademic Editor© 2020 Jim P StimpsonThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
9 Dec 2020

A Science Impact Framework to Measure Impact Beyond Journal Metrics
PONE-D-20-25382R1
Dear Dr. Ari,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Jim P Stimpson, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
PLoS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0244407.r004Acceptance letter
StimpsonJim PAcademic Editor© 2020 Jim P StimpsonThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
11 Dec 2020

PONE-D-20-25382R1 
A Science Impact Framework to Measure Impact Beyond Journal Metrics 
Dear Dr. Ari:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Jim P Stimpson 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.

## Data Availability Statement
All relevant data are within the manuscript in Tables and .