Nordisk Alkohol NarkNordisk Alkohol Nark3921nad100937320NADNordisk alkohol- & narkotikatidskrift : NAT1455-07251458-6126Nordic Welfare CentrePMC7434121PMC7434121.1743412174341213293455610.1177/145507251982940710.1177_14550725198294071Research ReportsGamblers’ (mis-)interpretations of Problem Gambling Severity Index
items: Ambiguities in qualitative accounts from the Swedish Longitudinal
Gambling Study
SamuelssonEvaStockholm University, Sweden ) is one of the most frequently used instruments to identify and quantify
risk and problem gambling. The PGSI was developed specifically to measure problem
gambling in the general rather than in a clinical population ( ). It comprises a subset of
nine of the 18 items from the Canadian Problem Gambling Inventory (CPGI), and the
construction was guided by a theoretical rather than an empirical approach ( ). In
terms of internal consistency and factor structure, the PGSI appears to perform well
(e.g., ). The PGSI items seem to constitute a single
underlying factor for problem gamblers ( ); however, the test seems to
be multidimensional for low or moderate-risk gambling subgroups.
Tests that perform well with respect to reliability and validity can still be biased in
other ways (cf. ). For instance, individuals or groups with similar scores on a test can
have different levels of the measured trait or condition. People tend to interpret
abstract phenomena differently, and words such as “lying” or “problems” have different
connotations and levels of severity between individuals and across subgroups, leading to
both false positives and false negatives. The PGSI has been shown to perform differently
in different subgroups ( ). Further, previous research has shown that about
half of the people labelled as problem gamblers (using a 3+ criterion) were not
classified as problem gamblers by clinical raters ( ). Similarly, in a
study comparing clinical assessments with assessments based on the PGSI ( ), 88% of individuals classified as probable
pathological gamblers were not classified as pathological gamblers in the interviews. Of
the at-risk gamblers, 72% did not receive this classification in the clinical interview.
One reason may be misunderstood items. A previous study has found that none of the
adults understood all items correctly ( ). On average, 26% of all
the items were misunderstood (equally among non-problem and probable pathological
gamblers). To prevent misclassifications, it has been suggested that a higher scoring
threshold on the PGSI (5+) should be used for defining problem gamblers, rather than
setting the threshold at 3+ as is often done today ( ; ).
Further, argue that the PGSI fails to capture the notion of harm. They argue
that several items measure behaviours rather than problems. Chasing losses for example,
they say, is not a problem – losing money is. Further, they argue that being criticised
may be a result of regular gambling, while feeling guilt may reflect the acceptance
level of gambling in different cultures or among different value systems. In line with
this thinking is the notion that the concept of losing time depends on what is valued;
non-problem poker players were scored as problem gamblers on the PGSI because they
gambled for long times and with large bets ( ).
This article adds to the discussion on the use of standardised instruments to measure
gambling harm, which is of particular concern in the Nordic context with much ongoing
debate on the gambling issue. For example, in Sweden, following the legislative changes
of the Social Services Act and the Health and Medical Services Act, where gambling
problems have been given the same status as alcohol and drugs since 1 January 2018
( ), more
attention is oriented towards detecting and screening for gambling problems in primary
care and social services settings. Knowledge of gamblers’ own perceptions of gambling
harm is therefore highly relevant, as is knowledge of reasons for potential bias in
using screening instruments. Also, the necessity of measuring gambling harm in the
Swedish population is topical in light of the forthcoming reform of the gambling policy.
While other Nordic countries such as Finland and Norway have decided to retain or
strengthen their monopolies, Sweden is following a trend among other European countries
to open up markets to new operators ( ). A comprehensive reform of the
regulation of the gambling sector will take place, where all operators in the Swedish
gambling market should have a licence ( ).
The accessibility of gambling is likely to increase, while the licence system is supposed
to ensure a high level of consumer protection to limit negative consequences of
gambling. It is thus important to be able to accurately measure the changes in
prevalence of harm in the population.
The response alternatives in the PGSI are normally never (0), sometimes (1), most of the
time (2) and almost always (3). The total score is calculated indicating non-problem
gambling (0), low-risk gambling (1–2), moderate-risk gambling (3–7), or problem gambling
(8+). In Sweden, 4.2% of the population are categorised as low-risk gamblers (322,000
individuals), 1.3% as moderate-risk gamblers (103,100 individuals), and 0.4% as severe
problem gamblers (31,200 individuals) ( ). In
Swedish public health reports of gambling problems and research, moderate-risk gamblers
and severe problem gamblers are somewhat confusingly often merged into one category of
“problem gamblers” (PGSI 3+) (e.g., ). The categorisation of moderate-risk
gambling is thus relevant for policy and research.
As the PGSI is one of the most frequently used measures in problem gambling prevalence
studies, there is a need for a better understanding of the instrument’s potential
biases. While previous research primarily has been focused on quantitative validation of
gambling screening instruments, the same attention has not been given to the meanings
attributed by gamblers to the questions asked. The aim of this study was to explore
possible reasons for misclassifications in problem gambling level by analysing
previously classified moderate-risk gamblers’ answers to the PGSI items, in relation to
their own current and past gambling behaviours.

## Methods

## Data collection and recruitment procedure
The Swedish Longitudinal Gambling Study (Swelogs) is a population study of
prevalence and incidence of gambling problems over time ( ).
It comprises an epidemiological track (EP) with four waves from 2008 to 2014 and
an in-depth track (ID) where a subsample from the EP track is followed focusing
on consequences and risk and protective factors (see for an overview of the data
collection schedule of Swelogs). To further explore the fluctuations and
contexts of individual gambling behaviours, the qualitative component ID3 was
conducted.
 Within ID3, semi-structured telephone interviews were held with 40 individuals
who had previously participated in Swelogs and agreed to further participation.
To capture variations in gambling habits and problems, the inclusion criteria
consisted of having reported monthly gambling during the last 12 months at any
previous measure point, and a minimum of a three-point difference in the PGSI
score between any two data collection occasions in the EP track. A three-point
difference has previously been found to indicate a fairly reliable change in
problem gambling severity ( ). Subsequently, the sample included Swelogs
respondents who had reported at least a level of moderate-risk gambling. An
advance letter was sent out that described the purpose of the study, and
respondents were contacted by telephone to schedule an interview appointment. In
total, 45 respondents were reached by telephone and out of these 40 were
interviewed. One reason for declining to participate was perceived lack of
changes in gambling habits.

## Interviews
Ethical approval to conduct the study was obtained from the Regional Ethical
Review Board in Sweden (ref. 2015-456-32O). The interview guide was
semi-structured, covering current and previous gambling habits and life
situation, negative consequences, and reasons for changes in gambling habits and
problems. Prior to the interviews, four pilot interviews were conducted which
resulted in minor revisions of the interview guide. The telephone interviews
lasted for, on average, 30 minutes (10 to 50 minutes), took place in 2016, and
were audio recorded. A gift certificate equivalent to EUR 25 was given as
compensation for the time offered. The interviewers did not have access to data
collected in previous tracks to avoid being influenced in the interview
situation. Open-ended and follow-up questions were posed which facilitated the
interviewees’ own narratives of their gambling habits and life situations.
All interviewees were asked whether they had experienced any negative
consequences from their gambling during the preceding eight years. If the answer
was affirmative, the interviewer proceeded by asking more detailed questions of
the nature of and possible shifts in problems over the years. The results from
this are described elsewhere ( ). To our surprise a large proportion of the interviewees,
despite previously scoring at least PGSI 3+, could not recall any negative
consequences from gambling. We wanted to explore these discrepancies further,
and added a focus of interpretations of the PGSI items that might explain
possible misclassifications in problem level. Hence, if the answer was negative
– no recollection of any negative consequences from gambling – the interviewer
posed the nine PGSI questions but used the last eight years as the time frame
(2008–2016; “Thinking about the past eight years have you ever…”) to cover the
period of participation in Swelogs. If the interviewee endorsed any of the
items, the interviewer asked follow-up questions about the frequency and nature
of possible consequences, to get a sense of the severity of the consequences and
the interviewees’ perception of whether this was problematic, as well as of how
they interpreted the question. Of the 40 interviewees, 19 did not report any
negative consequences from gambling and were consequently given the PGSI
questions, the answers of which constitute the focus of the qualitative analysis
of our study. Further, to identify possible reasons for misclassification, we
asked the participants at the end of the interview whether it could be possible
that they had answered differently to the PGSI questions in past surveys.
Notably, initial comparisons were made between the 19 who did not report any
negative consequences from gambling in the interviews with the 21 who did. We
found that the 21 had significantly higher PGSI scores in the previous EP track.
Those reporting higher levels of problem gambling in the EP track thus had more
consistent perceptions of their gambling behaviour over time. This difference
could not be explained by completion modality in the EP track (postal
questionnaire vs. telephone interview) nor whether participants’ highest PGSI
score was obtained earlier (EP1–EP2) or later (EP3–EP4) in the study period.
Considering the phenomenon of recall bias, we had expected that inconsistent
answers would be more common for participants who had their highest PGSI score
earlier in the Swelogs, but that was not the case.

## Analysis
The interview material was systematically handled according to the framework
approach ( ). First, the interviews were
transcribed verbatim, repeatedly read, and listened to. After each interview,
the interviewers (the first and the third authors) wrote analytical memos to
construct a complex coding tree. The coding trees were continuously updated
during the listening and reading process. The problem level of each case was
discussed and categorised based on the interviewers’ assessments and the
interviewee’s reports of occurrence of negative consequences from gambling at
any time in the past eight years. The accounts have been treated as narratives,
by which the participants in the interview situation make sense of their
gambling behaviours to structure their experiences and present themselves in a
certain way in front of others ( ; ). Coding was carried out
in the qualitative coding platform NVivo ( ). To
increase the coherence of the process, five interviews were coded by the first
and third authors simultaneously. All codes concerning answers to PGSI questions
and interviewees’ perceptions of possible negative consequences from their
gambling behaviours were extracted, resulting in a text of around 30,000 words.
Answers to endorsed items were charted in a matrix to get an analytic overview
(cf. ). Interviewee accounts
containing ambiguous or misinterpreted PGSI answers, as well as the
participants’ own reasoning about negative consequences and possible reasons for
discrepancies in current and previous PGSI endorsements, were treated as units
of analysis and subject to content analysis ( ).

## Participants
Of the 19 participants in this study, 13 were women and six were men. A majority
(63%) were employed at the time of the interview and a majority were single
(58%). The mean age was 41 years (SD = 15). For a description
of the study participants and their pseudonyms, see . The reported forms of gambling
during the past eight years among the participants irrespective of setting
(land-based or internet) were lotteries (reported by 17 of 19), number games and
sports betting (7), electronic gaming machines (EGMs, 6), horse racing, casino
games, bingo (5), and card games (2). The participants were asked in the
interview about their motives for gambling, and all described several motives.
The most commonly reported reasons were gambling for excitement and social
rewards (reported by 12 of 19 participants each), followed by the chance of
winning (hitting the jackpot) (9), and gambling as a habit or tradition (7).
Gambling for enjoyment or pleasure (4) and to contribute to charity (3) were
also reported. Only one participant reported gambling to escape everyday
troubles as a motive, a reason that, in research, is often associated with
problem gambling ( ).
 In the previous EP track of Swelogs, the 19 participants had maximum PGSI scores
of between 3 and 12 points (M = 6; SD = 2)
over the study period of eight years and four measure points (EP1–EP4). They had
thus been categorised as moderate-risk gamblers. In ID3, 10 of the 19
participants did not report any negative consequences from gambling in the
interview, including in their answers to the PGSI questions. The other nine
participants described occasional marginal consequences, such as having gambled
more than intended.

## Results: (Mis-)interpretations of PGSI items in the qualitative accounts
The PGSI consists of nine items, four of which are intended to assess problem
gambling behaviours and five that are intended to assess adverse consequences of
gambling ( ) (see for a display of the PGSI questions and their dimensions). The most
commonly endorsed items in the interviews were Item 2, on having had the need to
gamble with larger amounts of money to get the same feeling of excitement (endorsed
by five participants), and Item 9, about having felt guilty about gambling (endorsed
by four participants). Several answers had ambiguous characteristics, which also
applied to Item 7 about receiving critique for gambling, and items measuring
problematic behaviours (loss of control, chasing, borrowing). In the following
sections we will first present the interviewees’ accounts containing ambiguous or
misinterpreted elements when answering items concerning adverse consequences of
gambling (Items 7 and 9), and, second, present accounts concerning problematic
gambling behaviours (Items 1, 2, 3, and 4).
 

## Ambiguous answers related to adverse consequences from gambling

## Interpretations of critique for gambling: Item 7
A recurring feature among the interviewees was mild interpretation of
significant others’ critique of their gambling (Item 7). In the quotation
below, Olivia, a younger woman occasionally buying lottery tickets,
confirmed having experienced critique from her friends. However, when she
continued to explain, it became clear that her friends rather made fun of
her than criticised her habit.
Interviewer:Thinking about the last eight years, has anyone criticised your betting
or told you that you had a gambling problem, regardless of whether or
not you thought it was true?
Olivia:Yes. Definitely! Not out of concern but more laughing about it, that I’ve
bought a lottery ticket…/…/ Not being criticised more than that, my
friends think that I’m comical. (IP15)
This was also the case for Brenda (IP2), a middle-aged woman who only
endorsed Item 7 and denied having experienced any other drawbacks from her
gambling. She described being ridiculed by her husband over buying lottery
tickets as a continuous habit, acknowledging that this might have resulted
in an affirmative answer to this item in the previous EP track, but
concluded that this was not critique but rather teasing. Another
interviewee, Carl (IP3), first answered this question negatively, but then
claimed that a friend might have commented on his gambling by calling him
boring or laughing at him. Similarly, Paula (IP16) first answered “no” to
the question of critique, and then continued to describe how her childhood
friends could react negatively to her new circle of gambling friends.
Paula:No, not that I gambled too much. Well, I moved away from my childhood
friends. They thought I was hanging out too much with my [gamblers]. And
that was boring. /…/ They said that they never saw me and that I was
always tired when I met my friends. Well, that I wasn’t as fun to be
with any longer.
Interviewer:Did they relate that to your gambling?
Paula:No, I don’t think so. I think they just related it to my new friends.
(IP16)
Irrespective of whether they answered the question negatively or
affirmatively, the participants’ elaborations of their answers to Item 7
could thus include similar mild interpretations of critique, such as being
ridiculed for buying lottery tickets or getting comments from friends for
being boring, but not indicating any substantial concern about their
gambling behaviour.

## Interpretations of feeling guilty: Item 9
The other item intended to measure adverse consequences from gambling which
created ambiguous answers was Item 9, concerning feeling guilty about one’s
own gambling behaviour. Quynh, a middle-aged woman occasionally playing
casino games and buying lottery tickets, endorsed this item.
Interviewer:Thinking about the past eight years, have you felt guilty about the way
you gamble or what happens when you gamble?
Quynh:Yes, sometimes when I’ve bought a lottery ticket I can feel that it
has…well, I’ve felt that it was stupid, because I could’ve used that
money for something else. /…/ I don’t buy lottery tickets because it’s
fun, but it’s really for…What’s that slogan again – “suddenly it
happens”. It’s the feeling when I’m gambling, that I might hold in my
hand the ticket to another life. Most often it feels like “it was
stupid”. (IP17)
Quynh described in the account above that her lottery ticket purchases could
make her feel guilty because of the stupidity of believing for a moment in
the dream of hitting the jackpot. The slogan she referred to – “suddenly it
happens” – is a well-known Swedish advertising campaign for lottery tickets,
conveying the possibility of winning a large sum of money that enables a
different lifestyle without the hardships of everyday life. For Quynh the
motive of gambling was not the excitement or social rewards, but rather the
dream of winning and being able to transform her life, to become free of
economic troubles, which might increase her self-recrimination. Similarly to
what has been described by , gamblers can thus experience a sense of guilt or
irritation about spending money on what they perceive in hindsight as
unconstructive matters.
Jasmine, an older woman (IP10) who claimed to buy lottery tickets as a habit
for a monthly sum of EUR 10, answered the question about guilt in the
following way:
Jasmine:Sometimes, yes. I feel guilty for doing it when I don’t win. I didn’t win
so I tell myself “No, I shouldn’t have. I’ve done wrong…” I feel that
what I’ve done is wrong. (IP10)
This account contained feelings of self-recrimination, where Jasmine
described regretting buying lottery tickets against her better judgement.
Instead of enjoying a moment of excitement that does not cause her any
negative consequences, she instead blames herself for pointless
spending.
Gabriel (IP7), a middle-aged man, said that he occasionally had bought
lottery tickets and gambled on EGMs. He confirmed having felt guilty after
losing EUR 40–50 on EGMs in a few minutes on four occasions. This experience
of losing control for a moment scared him and caused him anxiety afterwards.
Despite lack of economic or social consequences, his emotional reaction made
him refrain from future gambling on EGMs. As expressed by , gambling losses can evoke negative self-conscious
emotions even among low-risk gamblers, where some people might be more prone
towards remorse and regret than others.
David (IP4), a younger man betting on sports events, first answered this
question negatively and then elaborated:
David:No. No. Well, like this, maybe it has happened. That’s directly after
losing, but not that…/…/ Immediately in the moment maybe. If you’ve
placed a bet for EUR 20 and then two hours later they’re gone. Then it
feels like a waste of money. /…/ No, I’ve accounted for that money, so
no guilt. (IP4)
David thus considered having had feelings of regret in the moment directly
after losing, but concluded that it was not guilt, but rather feelings of
irritation over wasting money. Similarly, Nicolas (IP14), a middle-aged man,
claimed at first that his gambling had not been associated with feelings of
guilt, but then continued:
Nicolas:No. Well of course you always…it doesn’t matter. If I go and buy a
lottery ticket or if I go and buy five lottery tickets and don’t win,
I’m always as irritated with myself every time. And feel that “no, that
was a waste of money”. (IP14)
When Sofia (IP19), a middle-aged woman, answered the question about guilt,
she acknowledged having felt bad after gambling, thinking “what am I doing?”
These experiences, however, appeared in relation to gambling behaviour that
took place in her youth, before the eight-year time frame of Swelogs.
The participants above who answered affirmatively on the question of guilt –
Quynh, Jasmine, and Gabriel – described low-frequency gambling activities
for small sums of money. Regardless of lack of negative consequences, their
perceptions of their gambling involved a dimension of self-accusation for
activities not perceived as constructive. David and Nicolas at first
answered negatively to the question of guilt, but both acknowledged the
irritation of wasting money on gambling. Thus, answers to Item 9 also
provoked similar reasoning among the participants irrespective of whether
they initially answered yes to the question or not.
Low-frequency gambling was perceived as something pointless, in comparison
with, for example, buying groceries that was comprehended as meaningful. In
contrast, others could describe gambling as an activity that gives pleasure
just as any consumption.
Lena:I see it as a fun thing to do. I might as well use those EUR 5 on
[gambling] instead of buying a bottle of wine or whatever. It’s not the
money. It’s the participation that is enjoyable. (IP12)
Answers to the question about guilt revealed feelings of frustration and
self-recrimination over spending money or time on gambling, feeling stupid
and lured by the appeal of the game and the dream of winning despite the
odds. The gambling was then comprehended as an activity that did not match
the person’s own morals (cf. )
despite the low sums spent and lack of economic consequences. The
experiences could more appropriately be described as regretful rather than
feelings of guilt. Item 9 can thus generate affirmative answers depending on
the person’s own moral attitude towards gambling per se, even if the person
gambles infrequently without negative consequences (cf., e.g., ).

## Ambiguous answers related to problematic gambling behaviours
Behavioural indicators of problem gambling in the PGSI also caused ambiguous
answers in the interviews. A recurring phenomenon was that the participants
answered only one part of the question rather than taking the whole question
into account.

## Interpretations of loss of control: Item 1
The first item on the PGSI concerning the experience of having bet more than
one could really afford to lose generated answers to only one part of the
question. For example, Sofia (IP19) acknowledged having gambled previously
in her life more than she intended, but not more than she could afford to
lose. In other cases, participants endorsed this item but elaborated on
their answers by claiming that the gambling did not cause any negative
consequences. For example, Carl (IP3), a younger man, answered yes to the
question related to his casino and card gambling in younger years. He,
however, denied that his gambling expenses had caused any negative
consequences apart from having to cut down on other expenses. Similarly,
Michael (IP13), an older man who was about to sell his house after retiring,
confirmed the experience of having bet more than he could afford to lose. He
said that this had not happened often and had not resulted in any
consequences beyond having to deprioritise non-gambling expenditures.
Interviewer:If you had not gambled, what would have been the difference,
economically?
Michael:If I hadn’t gambled at all, I could’ve kept my house.
Interviewer:OK, would you have wanted that?
Michael:Well, I could’ve kept it but not live as I wanted. I would’ve had to look
for special prices and eat pea soup three days in a row and so forth.
(IP13)
This quotation illustrates one of the key difficulties in assessing what
actually constitutes negative consequences from gambling based on
self-reports. Clearly, gambling has been a central activity in Michael’s
life, to the extent that he had chosen to sell his house after retiring. He
did not frame this as a negative consequence from gambling but as a choice
on how to lead his life. That would not indicate loss of control, but rather
a rational consideration giving priority to gambling over other
expenditures. This could be seen as downplaying the negative aspects of
gambling, as a way to present oneself to the interviewer in a positive
manner (social desirability bias).

## Interpretations of increased tolerance: Item 2
Another example of a participant answering only one part of the question
rather than taking the whole question into account concerns Item 2 on
increased tolerance. Quynh (IP17) answered this question affirmatively but
in her explanation it became clear that the she had only answered the first
part of the question (having gambled with larger amounts of money).
Interviewer:Thinking about the past eight years, have you needed to gamble with
larger amounts of money to get the same feeling of excitement?
Quynh:…Maybe during the same evening I’ve said “I’m going to the table” and I
want to bet EUR 10. And it lasted for two, three minutes and it was
over. And then I have to turn back almost as quick as I came. And then
maybe I’ll go back to my friends sitting there drinking and if we’re
there for a while longer I might feel that I want to go back because I
like standing there. /…/ I’m spending more money than I first planned
because I go back there with EUR 10 and I get to gamble for 15 minutes
and then I’m happy. (IP17)
Quynh’s answer concerned having bet more money than intended in order to
gamble a bit longer but had nothing to do with achieving the same feeling of
excitement. In contrast, David (IP4) acknowledged having gambled to
experience feelings of excitement, but denied having raised the bets to
achieve this feeling.
Interviewer:Thinking about the past eight years, have you needed to gamble with
larger amounts of money to get the same feeling of excitement?
David:Well yes, that would be in football betting. The more you can win the
more it tickles you. But /…/ no, I almost always bet the same sum of
money. (IP4)

## Interpretations of chasing: Item 3
A participant who endorsed the chasing question (Item 3) provided the
following rationale for his answer:
Interviewer:Thinking about the last eight years, has it happened that you went back
another day to win back the money you lost?
Nicolas:No. Yes. I have to say yes to that one. If I buy a lottery ticket today,
well I didn’t win anything today, but tomorrow when I walk home from
work or whatever, I’ll buy another because it’s easier to win that day.
(IP14)
This answer did not really reflect chasing losses, but rather the gambler’s
fallacy of expecting a win to be more likely after having experienced a loss
(cf. ). When David (IP4) was asked the question about chasing
losses he first answered no, and then continued:
David:Well it might’ve happened during a period when I first started to go out
on bars that I tried those EGMs. But very rarely. I can imagine that it
happened occasionally that I felt like that. /…/ I tried it, put in a
EUR 5 note or a EUR 10 note occasionally. But I noticed that it didn’t
give me anything, so I quit doing it rather quickly. (IP4)
Jasmine’s (IP10) account about chasing losses rather reflected
misinterpretation of the question, which could be related to language
skills.
Interviewer:Thinking about the last eight years, has it happened that you went back
another day to win back the money you lost?
Jasmine:Yes, sometimes I win EUR 3 that comes back to me. Once I won EUR 7–7.5.
Well that’s the largest sum I’ve won.
Interviewer:Did you buy new tickets for your wins?
Jasmine:No, no. When I get that, I don’t buy new tickets directly, no, no.
(IP10)
Ambiguous answers were thus given in response to Item 3, reflecting mistaken
beliefs of the chance of winning and misinterpretation of the question.
While David’s (IP4) account did reflect occasional chasing of losses, he did
so only after some consideration when he had first answered negatively to
the question.

## Interpretations of borrowing: Item 4
Another item generating answers not covering the intention of the question
was Item 4 about having borrowed money to gamble. Quynh (IP17) answered:
Interviewer:Thinking about the last eight year, have you borrowed money or sold
anything to get money to gamble?
Quynh:Yes. It has happened that I’ve borrowed EUR 10 maybe to go to the
gambling table or if one of my friends has chips I get one or two, and
instead I buy the next round of beer. It has happened /…/ if I don’t
have the money in my pocket. (IP17)
Similarly, Carl (IP3) acknowledged having borrowed EUR 10 from friends at the
gambling venue without having had any financial problems. Sofia (IP19)
talked about borrowing for gambling previously in life as follows:
Sofia:I may have borrowed EUR 50 off someone if it was too much to go to the
ATM. But not because I couldn’t afford it. (IP19)
As the accounts show, this item could yield answers reflecting practical
issues of friends sharing cash, chips, and rounds, rather than constituting
a key indicator of problem gambling as intended ( ).

## Participants’ own reasoning about potential misclassifications
At the end of the interview, the interviewers clarified that the participants had
been selected for this study based on previous results from the EP track
endorsing at least one of the PGSI items. Further, the participants were asked
whether they thought it was possible that they could have given different
answers in the past.
Lena (IP12), a middle-aged woman with sporadic gambling habits, did not endorse
any of the items in the interview. When asked whether it was possible that she
could have endorsed any of the PGSI items in the past, she stated that she could
have been referring to the gambling behaviour of a close relative:
Interviewer:Could you have answered yes to any of these questions previously?
Lena:No, well I know that in one of the first rounds of these surveys we got
questions about close relatives too. If you had anybody close who gambled a
lot. There I have answered “yes” a few years ago, but never anything about
my own gambling, no. /…/ It was a close relative who was I a muddle in a
way. But that has straightened out now, thankfully. /…/ I haven’t been able
to contribute that much concerning my own, but I know like I said when there
were surveys about gambling and questions about someone else, then I’ve said
yes. (IP12)
Another interviewee, Anna (IP1), answered negatively to all PGSI questions. When
asked about other possible downsides of gambling she said that her gambling was
under control and did not involve any larger sums of money. She doubted ever
having endorsed any of the items despite a PGSI score of six during EP1. In the
interview she reasoned about the possibility of having forgotten:
Interviewer:Could you have answered yes to any of these questions previously?
Anna:Well, it could be. But I don’t think so. Maybe I have. You could feel bad
about different things in different periods in life, but that’s nothing that
I feel that I’ve ever had any problems with. /…/ Sure I could’ve forgotten,
but it doesn’t feel like I had answered differently then and now. (IP1)
Fiona (IP6) was surprised to hear that she had previously endorsed at least one
of the items and reasoned about the possibility that her memory could be
selective:
Interviewer:What are your thoughts on that, could you have answered yes to any of these
questions previously?
Fiona:Well, that could be the case yes. Maybe it’s easy to forget things that
weren’t that pleasant. And when you’re in the middle of it…You can easily
forget the things that are not so nice or good. Probably, as I’ve said yes
to one of them before. That was quite interesting /…/ it makes you think now
at least. (IP6)
Nicolas (IP14) stated that he could have experienced the situation differently at
the time, revealing the subjectivity in the moment:
Interviewer:Do you think you have answered yes to any of those questions previously?
Nicolas:Yes, I’m sure. If you call me in a month’s time from now – when I’ve started
working again and everything is shit…if you call me in a month and something
has happened, I’ll say yes to that question…(IP14)
The interviewees’ own reflections on the possibility of differing answers to the
PGSI in previous data collections of Swelogs thus contained both affirmations
and negations. Explanations included possible confusion with the excessive
gambling behaviour of a significant other, the possible impact of selective
memory, reasoning about the subjective and contextual characteristics of
self-reports, as well as recall bias.
Recall bias is likely to be an issue when there is a time difference between the
measure point and the behaviour in question. This is an important factor to
consider when using lifetime measures or long timeframes. Sofia (IP19), who
answered all of the PGSI questions negatively in the interview despite endorsing
several items in the previous EP track, claimed that her excessive gambling
behaviour took place further back in time than eight years ago. In this case,
misinterpretation of the time frame could have caused the discrepancy. Likewise,
Harriet (IP8), an elderly woman, did not answer any of the PGSI questions in the
interview affirmatively, despite scoring 7 in the EP2 survey. She did, however,
acknowledge having impaired memory, which might be an explanation. Another
explanation for discrepancies in PGSI answers in the qualitative interviews
compared to previous EP surveys could be language skills, as it was not always
clear whether the participant entirely understood the questions posed (Gabriel,
IP7 and Jasmine, IP10).

## Discussion
With the overall aim of exploring possible reasons for misclassifications in problem
gambling level, we used semi-structured interviews and qualitative methods to
analyse gamblers’ answers to the PGSI and to study various interpretations and
biases in the interviewee accounts. The 19 interviewees had previously participated
in Swelogs, a longitudinal survey with continuous measure points from 2008 to 2014.
They reported at least a three-point difference in problem gambling severity between
any two data collections, and were thereby categorised as moderate-risk gamblers.
When asked about their experiences of negative consequences from gambling, the
participants did not report any such problems. To be able to explore the meanings
attributed to the PGSI questions, we subsequently asked the participants to consider
the nine questions with respect to an eight-year frame to cover the period of
Swelogs (2008 to 2016). Several answers to PGSI items contained ambiguities and
misinterpretations. Of the items intended to measure adverse consequences from
gambling, Items 9 (guilt) and 7 (critique) in particular produced obscure accounts.
The question about feelings of guilt generated accounts rather reflecting
self-recrimination over wasting money or regretting gambling as a meaningless or
immoral activity. The participants had time to develop and reflect on their answers,
which revealed that their “yeses” to the question about guilt were often lenient
self-reproach. This is in line with the thinking of that endorsement
of the guilt item will vary according to the moral acceptance of gambling within the
culture. Elaborations of answers to the item on critique included mild
interpretations such as being ridiculed for buying lottery tickets or getting
comments from friends for being boring. This tendency of interpreting the question
of critique broadly has previously been noted by . In our
study, similar accounts and reasoning were expressed by the participants
irrespective of initial endorsement of the item, making it difficult to assess to
what extent their answers actually indicated any problematic gambling over time.
Items 7 and 9 were derived from the South Oaks Gambling Screen (SOGS; ),
which has been subject to substantial critique (e.g., ). First of all,
SOGS was validated using a clinical sample, which means that the items might not be
suitable for the general population. Further, it might not be possible to
differentiate problem gamblers from non-problem gamblers due to feelings of guilt
and criticism from close ones, as these can occur in respect to gambling per se.
Gambling has historically been viewed as a moral vice in some societies (cf., e.g.,
 ) and
is increasingly comprehended as a public health concern that can cause harm ( ).
Perceptions of gambling and problem gambling are influenced not only by cultural
aspects ( ) but also how individuals interpret and comprehend their behaviour
in relation to subjective attitudes, norms, and perceived control ( ). As found by
 , gamblers’ perceptions of risks associated with gambling involve
idiosyncratic motivations and expectations. Perceptions of what constitutes guilt
can thus be related to moral attitudes towards gambling activities. Some people may
feel guilty about their gambling habit irrespective of the amount of time and money
spent, and in the absence of negative consequences ( ). Similarly,
despite lack of negative consequences, significant others might be prone to
criticise due to their persuasion of the immoral connotations of gambling. Even
though problematic gambling can cause severe relational problems and distress for
family members, argue that “criticism” is too vague, could vary according
to the moral acceptance of gambling, and does not directly indicate harm. Overall,
our findings suggest that gamblers’ views of their gambling habits over time involve
an awareness of the potential negative consequences of gambling, but also include
reports of experiences of self-recrimination for engagement in an activity perceived
as meaningless or stupid, rather than harmful.
Potential negative consequences from gambling can manifest in various ways.
Experiences of feeling guilty about gambling, receiving comments from significant
others, or having gambled more than intended could be indications of initial
problematic gambling behaviours ( ). However, the PGSI questions about guilt, criticism,
or alleged loss of control can generate answers of being made fun of for buying
lottery tickets, feelings of self-recrimination for believing in the dream of
hitting the jackpot, or placing another bet to be able to gamble a little bit
longer. This is not harm, but interpersonal friction and learning from experience,
which are unavoidable consequences of virtually any human activity ( ).
And sometimes it is merely a choice of lifestyle.
Answers to items intended to measure problematic gambling behaviours such as betting
more than one can afford to lose (indicating loss of control, Item 1), raising bets
to get the same feeling of excitement (indicating tolerance, Item 2), trying to win
back lost money (chasing, Item 3), and borrowing money (Item 4) also contained
ambiguities and misinterpretations. It was not always clear whether the participants
endorsed the item or not. Saying initially yes or no to a question could involve
similar reasoning with participants introducing their own interpretations of the
question that were unrelated to the intent of the item. The difficulties with
assessing gambling problems were especially obvious when the participants only
focused on one part of the question. For example, having increased gambling amounts
could be confirmed, but not causing negative consequences for the economy. Also,
having the need to gamble with larger amounts of money to get the same feeling of
excitement could be answered affirmatively but not related to larger bets. As
questions containing ambiguous conditions decrease a gambler’s ability to give an
accurate response, they may increase the likelihood of respondents answering only
one part of the question ( ). This emerged repeatedly in our
study.
The 19 participants, a majority of whom were occasional buyers of lottery tickets for
excitement or social rewards, reported no or only mild negative consequences from
gambling during the past eight years. The changeable characteristics of gambling
patterns and problems, where many people tend to go into and out of problem gambling
over the course of a year ( ) due to life events and changing
circumstances ( ) may influence gamblers’ perceptions of their past
experiences.
Problems with comprehending items in instruments designed to measure gambling
problems have been found in previous studies. A five-year study following the
gambling careers of a cohort of 50 gamblers ( ) found that the
interviewees had problems comprehending the items of NODS (NORC DSM-IV Screen for
Gambling Problems; ) due to misinterpretations of the time frame (current
perceptions overshadowing previous gambling problems) and the meaning of the
wordings. The authors suggested that cognitive guidelines should be developed to
clarify the intent of the items ( ). In the study by 
concerning SOGS, the number of participants categorised as problem gamblers was
reduced when the meaning of the misunderstood items was clarified.
A recent study by exploring the congruence between self-reported PGSI scores and
qualitative accounts, concluded that gambling fallacies, mental health issues, and
dissonant feelings about gambling were more frequent among those with incongruent
perceptions. It may, however, be argued based on our findings that
(mis)interpretations of the PGSI items could be an additional explanation of
incongruent reports of problem gambling severity.
The interviewees’ own reflections on the possibility of differing answers to the PGSI
in previous data collections of Swelogs thus contained both affirmations and
negations. Explanations included possible confusion with the excessive gambling
behaviour of a significant other, the possible influence of selective memory,
reasoning about the subjective and contextual characteristics of self-reports, and
impaired memory and recall bias. Any of these could have reduced the ability of
participants to remember how their gambling had affected them previously. Another
explanation could be a reluctance to talk about negative consequences of gambling in
an interview with open-ended questions that can be more difficult to answer compared
to direct questions, as was the case in the earlier EP track. Yet another factor
could be that the participants misunderstood the time frame in the earlier EP track
and answered the questions based on experiences from previous periods in life. In
support of this, several of the participants talked about problematic gambling
habits before 2008 when Swelogs measurements started. Other reasons for bias appear
to include language skills problems, social desirability bias, and gambling
fallacies.
Our findings illustrate the difficulties in measuring negative consequences from
gambling. The PGSI has a dual character in covering both problematic behaviours
(chasing losses, increased tolerance, borrowing money, etc.) and harmful
consequences (economic, relational and health-related, etc.), which complicates the
conceptual discussion. The fact that it is possible to be categorised as a problem
gambler based on behavioural items only, and that items are frequently
(mis-)interpreted, calls for awareness in the study of the phenomena of problem
gambling based on such a group. argues that supposedly objective gambling screening
instruments rely on a range of “socially relative and deeply subjective” criteria
( , p. 48).
Identification of problem gambling is based on individuals’ own judgements of
experiencing, for example, excitement, loss of control, or various negative
emotions, rather than what Reith describes as both the medium and the signifier of
gambling and problem gambling: money. Thus, anyone can experience problems,
irrespective of economic consequences, as the definition of problem gambling rests
on one’s own subjective feelings about wins and losses ( ). Respondents in survey
research make sense of the questions asked, relate them to their own perceptions and
experiences, and answer in accordance with what they feel is expected from and
convenient for them in the interview situation (cf., e.g., ). It is thus delicate to draw
any definitive conclusions based on the PGSI concerning “risk gamblers”, and
important to consider the context in which the reports were made. Considering the
insecurity in categorisation, and the fluid and subjective characteristics of
gambling problems ( ), reports of lower levels of harm in the population should be
interpreted with caution.
Validation of gambling instruments tends to lean heavily on validating self-report
instruments against other self-report instruments. Without a gold standard as the
outcome, it can be difficult to ascertain which self-report instrument performs
better. Consequently, alternative validation approaches are warranted to further
improve instruments such as the PGSI. A limitation specific to our study concerns
the risk of recall bias among the participants, particularly in cases where gambling
has not been a central part of the person’s life. Gamblers tend to overestimate
positive outcomes and underestimate negative ones ( ). It is possible
that our interviewees have forgotten or chosen to under-report previous gambling
problems, considering their task of recalling experiences and behaviours over the
course of an eight-year period. The risk of recall bias is in this case unavoidable.
The accuracy of participants’ perceptions of the extent to which gambling was
problematic to them previously is difficult to assess. As time passes, a variety of
influences can change people’s normative beliefs, perceptions of control, and
subjective attitudes towards previous events and behaviours. The large majority of
the interviewees, however, described in detail various life events and changes in
their gambling behaviour, which indicates that the narratives were at least not
intentionally inadequate. It would have been preferable to perform the qualitative
interviews sooner after the EP track, and also to have asked the PGSI questions of
all 40 participants (not only the 19 participants with no accounts of problematic
gambling). One of the advantages of qualitative research is that interviewees are
given the opportunity to reflect on and reason about different aspects, which has
deepened our understanding of possible ambiguities involved in PGSI answers. In this
study, the participants generously shared detailed information about their
experiences and perceptions of gambling. It was clear that gamblers who previously
had been categorised as moderate-risk gamblers applied different meanings to their
answers of PGSI questions. That said, we believe that it is important to
qualitatively evaluate and validate the PGSI items and by doing so add some results
to the literature that cannot be found using a more traditional psychometric
approach.

## Conclusion
Previous studies have shown that the PGSI performs well in relation to identifying
the most severe problem gamblers. However, the limitations of the PGSI illustrated
in our study point out that the instrument can generate a range of ambiguous answers
and (mis-)interpretations, at least among gamblers with lower levels of risk for
problems. While problem gambling is a very concrete problem for many individuals,
measurement of this construct relies on quite abstract items that are open to
interpretation and misunderstanding. This study has increased our understanding of
how PGSI items can be interpreted and various reasons for potential bias. Gamblers’
answers to items not only rely on their interpretation of the meaning of the
question based on their specific experiences, but could also be influenced by
contextual aspects in the moment of the interview or screening depending on social
desirability bias and aspects of the gamblers’ current life situations. The results
of our study give some support to the approach of being cautious in the
interpretations of meaning of the lower levels of moderate risk gamblers, and
perhaps using a higher cut-off than three on the PGSI (e.g., ; ). Screening instruments
should be designed to lower the risk of misinterpretation by, for example, not using
questions containing ambiguous conditions, and by including additional guidelines
about the intention of the item. In clinical settings it is important to combine use
of screening instruments with interviews, to be able to better understand gamblers’
perceptions of their gambling behaviour and its negative consequences.

Declaration of conflicting interests: The authors declared the following potential conflicts of interest with respect
to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: While Kristina
Sundqvist has no current or past direct affiliations with the gambling industry,
her present postdoctoral research is funded by a grant from the Svenska Spel
independent research council.
Funding: The authors disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: This work was
supported by the Public Health Agency of Sweden under grant 04178-201 and
conducted within the frame of the research programme REGAPS (Responding to and
Reducing Gambling Problems Studies). The REGAPS programme is supported by the
Swedish Research Council for Health, Working life and Welfare (Forte) under
grant 2016-07091 and the Svenska Spel research council under grant
FO2016-0017.