3815pheelsevierThe Lancet. Gastroenterology & HepatologyLancet Gastroenterol HepatolPMC7906656790665679066563358175910.1016/S2468-1253(21)00029-7COVID-19 hits viral hepatitis care for vulnerable populations
SamarasekeraUdani1122021631661662622021© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoIssue date 2021 Mar.

On Jan 6, 2021, the UK Department of Health and Social Care in England (DHSC) and Public Health England (PHE) released updated guidance for commissioners and providers of services for people who use drugs or alcohol, calling for the reinstatement of testing and treatment for hepatitis C virus (HCV), which might have been curtailed by the COVID-19 pandemic.
When the first wave of the COVID-19 pandemic hit the UK in March, 2020, it led to reduced HCV testing and treatment for injecting drug users. Speaking about the national situation, Graham Foster, professor of hepatology at Queen Mary University of London and the clinical lead at Barts Health Operational Delivery Network for hepatitis C care, London, UK, says: “When COVID struck, there was a dramatic reduction in testing in drug services; people were reluctant to go and the drug services didn't have PPE [personal protective equipment]…It meant testing for hepatitis C disappeared.”
However, Foster notes that some service delivery was made possible through the increased use of peers, people with lived experience of hepatitis C, from The Hepatitis C Trust, a UK charity. “For drug services, we mitigated the marked reduction in testing and treatment in the first wave of the pandemic with the peer programme. We would encourage peers to find people, take them medication, and bring them into hospital appointments in COVID-safe environments. We used them to reach out into the community and they rose to the challenge in spectacular fashion”, Foster explains.
Rachel Halford, CEO of The Hepatitis Trust, says that the first wave of the pandemic brought in new models of service delivery. She notes that one of the largest substance misuse providers started using postal test kits, so people could do their own HCV test, and telemedicine was used to replace face-to-face meetings both in the community and prisons, so some people were still being assessed and treated.
However, now the UK is experiencing the second wave of the pandemic, Halford thinks the updated DHSC and PHE guidance might be unrealistic for some drug services: “Even though they are saying it has to happen and we need to keep testing to reach elimination, the reality of drug services is that they need a staff team to test and, with such a high prevalence of COVID, whether it's nurses or drug services, people struggle because they get unwell or they need to self-isolate. It's just a really complex land that we are in at the minute.”
Foster believes the guidance is still “a very important statement of intent and prioritisation”. He says that by only reaching some substance users in drug services with HCV testing and harm reduction, there is “a real risk that all those who you have cured will be reinfected by those you haven't got to”.
For the UK's homeless population, a new government scheme provided an opportunity for HCV testing and treatment during the first wave of the pandemic. The policy, known as the Everyone In scheme, aimed to house people sleeping rough in temporary accommodation, including hostels and hotels, to prevent the spread of COVID-19. On Dec 17, 2020, the London Joint Working Group on Substance Use and Hepatitis C (LJWG) released a report highlighting a partnership, including health professionals, drug service workers, and peers, that came together in London to offer blood-borne virus testing and treatment (for HCV, hepatitis B virus, and HIV) to homeless people housed by the Everyone In scheme.
Between March and August, 2020, 72 (7%) of 1054 homeless clients tested were found to be HCV RNA positive, indicating current infection, and 43 (60%) of those had commenced treatment by November, 2020. Dee Cuniffe, Policy Strategy facilitator for the LJWG, who co-authored the report, says: “What happened was just a great achievement. People had to work together and collaborate together…We now have an adaptable model for how whole-venue testing can happen when the opportunity comes up.”
On Jan 15, 2021, PHE published a report on the effect of the intervention outside of London, which showed similar successes. Between March and September, 2020, 133 (11%) of 1263 homeless people tested were found to be HCV RNA positive, 92 (69%) of those had been offered treatment, of whom 83 (90%) had started on treatment by the time of data submission.
For the prison population, the assessment of viral hepatitis service provision is more mixed. “Generally speaking, we have had a dip in prison testing during COVID”, Foster comments. “There have been a couple of good examples where it was easier to get into prisons because lockdown meant everyone was in their cells and you could go round and test. By and large, governors have, with good reason, said that we can't have a dozen new people coming in to test. Sadly, I think that's probably the right response”, he says.
Halford says that it is too early to tell what might happen to HCV testing and treatment for vulnerable populations during the second wave of the pandemic. However, she notes that “already in London, we've seen a lot of the hepatitis C teams in hospitals being redeployed to COVID”.

For the DHSC and PHE updated guidance see https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/covid-19-guidance-for-commissioners-and-providers-of-services-for-people-who-use-drugs-or-alcohol

For the LJWG report see http://ljwg.org.uk/london-comes-together-to-treat-hepatitis-c-during-lockdown/

For the PHE report see https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/951416/Evaluation_of_initiatives_to_test_and_treat_the_housed_homeless_2020_report.pdf