PLoS OnePLoS ONE440plosone101285081plosPLoS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC7390603PMC7390603.1739060373906033272680410.1371/journal.pone.0236513PONE-D-20-058521Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaPlantsAlgaePhytoplanktonDiatomsBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaAnimalsInvertebratesPlanktonPhytoplanktonDiatomsBiology and Life SciencesZoologyAnimalsInvertebratesPlanktonPhytoplanktonDiatomsBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaAnimalsVertebratesAmniotesReptilesTestudinesTurtlesBiology and Life SciencesZoologyAnimalsVertebratesAmniotesReptilesTestudinesTurtlesPeople and placesGeographical locationsNorth AmericaUnited StatesFloridaPeople and placesGeographical locationsEuropeEuropean UnionGreecePeople and placesGeographical locationsAfricaSouth AfricaBiology and Life SciencesBiogeographyEcology and Environmental SciencesBiogeographyEarth SciencesGeographyBiogeographyBiology and Life SciencesMarine BiologyEarth SciencesMarine and Aquatic SciencesMarine BiologyPeople and placesGeographical locationsEuropeEuropean UnionCroatiaGeographical variation in the diatom communities associated with loggerhead sea turtles (Caretta caretta)
Diatoms associated with loggerheadsVan de VijverBartConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing RobertKätheData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyVisualizationWriting – original draft http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2681-4304MajewskaRoksanaConceptualizationData curationMethodologyResourcesSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing FrankovichThomas A.Data curationMethodologyResourcesSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing PanagopoulouAlikiResourcesValidationWriting – review & editing http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4604-2324BosakSunčicaConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Meise Botanic Garden, Research Department, Meise, Belgium2
Department of Biology—ECOBE, University of Antwerp, Antwerpen, Belgium3
Unit for Environmental Sciences and Management, School of Biological Sciences, North-West University, Potchefstroom, South Africa4
South African Institute for Aquatic Biodiversity (SAIAB), Grahamstown, South Africa5
Institute of Environment, Florida International University, Miami, Florida, United States of America6
ARCHELON, The Sea Turtle Protection Society of Greece, Athens, Greece7
Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, CroatiaMéléderVonaEditor ]. Of these, around 55 000 are estimated to exist in marine habitats. To date, however, less than 5 000 of marine diatoms have been described [ ]. Diatoms occur wherever water is available, including terrestrial, freshwater and marine habitats. They are part of the phytobenthos attached to humid or submerged surfaces or thrive as free-floating phytoplankton in open water bodies [ ]. Attached diatom communities can be classified by the substratum they live on. For instance, epipsammic diatoms are attached to sand grains, epilithic diatoms grow on rocks, epiphytic diatoms live on plants and epizoic diatoms grow on animals, the latter two categories commonly called epibionts [ ].
The external surfaces of large marine vertebrates, such as whales, sea turtles and manatees, provide suitable hard substrata for the development of rich microbial biofilms. In these biofilms, composed of, among others, bacteria, fungi, cyanobacteria, and micro- and macroalgae, diatoms are often one of the main components, with densities sometimes exceeding those known from other marine substrata [ ].
Several presumably exclusively epizoic diatom genera including Bennettella, Epipellis, Epiphalaina, Plumosigma, and Tursiocola have been described from the skin of cetaceans [ – ]. More recently, epizoic diatoms, including novel species, were described from freshwater turtles in the Rio Negro, Brazil [ – ]. Since 2015, there is a growing literature on epizoic diatoms observed on the carapaces and skin of all known sea turtle species [ – ].
Exclusive epibiosis is still debated as a lot of diatom taxa can be found on both animal and non-animal surfaces, and occur only haphazardly on marine turtles as a result of the physical contact with a variety of immersed substrata during the animal feeding and grooming activities [ ]. However, currently, several sea turtle-associated genera are considered strictly epizoic. Chelonicola and Poulinea have so far been found on the carapaces of olive ridleys (Lepidochelys olivacea) [ , ], and later on, green turtles (Chelonia mydas) [ – ], flatbacks (Natator depressus) [ ], hawksbills (Eretmochelys imbricata) [ ], loggerheads (Caretta caretta) [ ], and Kemp’s ridleys (Lepidochelys kempii) [ , ], whereas Medlinella is known only from the skin of loggerheads [ ]. Additionally, several new species belonging to non-strictly epizoic genera were described in the recent past from the carapaces of sea turtles. Examples include Achnanthes elongata Majewska & Van de Vijver and A. squaliformis Majewska & Van de Vijver, found on the carapaces of olive ridleys [ ], Kemp’s ridleys, loggerheads, and green turtles [ ], Labellicula lecohuiana Majewska & Van de Vijver, living on the carapaces of green turtles [ , ], and five species of Proschkinia, found associated with different sea turtle species [ ].
The present research was conducted on loggerhead sea turtles, named after their large head and jaws. These middle-sized sea turtles (60–200 kg) are characterized in having a yellow coloured plastron and a dark brown carapace. Loggerheads are widely distributed in the subtropical and temperate regions of the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea [ ]. They can occur in both deeper areas and shallow river estuaries [ ] and are highly migratory. Wallace et al. [ ] proposed to subdivide the world loggerhead population into several Regional Management Units (RMUs) that enables the identification of important geographic areas for different subpopulations in terms of their presence, density and richness, including for example Northeast Atlantic, Northwest Atlantic, Mediterranean and Southwest Indian RMU. The present study reports on the diatom communities growing on loggerhead sea turtles from four distinct geographical localities (Adriatic Sea, Ionian Sea (both Mediterranean population), South Africa (Southwest Indian population) and Florida Bay (Northwest Atlantic population) with the objective to provide the baseline data on their diversity, species composition, and biogeography. Additionally, differences between communities living on the various sea turtle body parts (skin versus carapace) are explored.

## Material and methods

## Study area
Samples used in this study were collected from loggerheads found in four different localities: northeastern Adriatic Sea (Croatia), Amvrakikos Gulf (Greece), Kosi Bay (South Africa) and Florida Bay (USA) ( ).
 The Adriatic Sea, connected to the Mediterranean Sea via the Otranto Strait, is one of the most important foraging areas for juvenile and adult loggerhead turtles in the Mediterranean Basin [ ]. Samples from Adriatic Sea loggerheads were obtained from animals brought into the Marine Turtle Rescue Centre in Aquarium Pula (Croatia) for rehabilitation in 2016 and 2017. A second Mediterranean loggerhead turtle population was sampled in Amvrakikos Gulf (Ionian Sea, Greece), an important foraging area with a very high density of loggerheads [ ]. Diatom samples were collected in 2018 in the framework of the research and conservation activities conducted by ARCHELON in Amvrakikos Gulf by capturing them with the rodeo technique [ ]. The rodeo technique was also used to capture and sample loggerheads in 2015 during an annual survey of sea turtle populations in Florida Bay, a shallow lagoon. The South African turtle population was sampled from the beaches in Kosi Bay (northeastern South Africa), an important nesting area for Indian Ocean loggerheads and leatherbacks. Samples were taken in 2018 from nesting loggerheads.

## Sample collection and processing
From each subpopulation, five loggerheads were arbitrarily selected for diatom sampling. Basic information about each turtle, such as carapace length and weight, was also collected at the time of sampling ( ). The material collection was performed by researchers licenced for animal handling and well-informed volunteers following institutional guidelines for the care and use of animals. All the procedures involved respecting the ethical standards in the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in 2013, as well as the applicable national laws. All sampling activities performed in the iSimangaliso Wetland Park (South Africa) were carried out under research permits issued by the South African Department of Environmental Affairs (RES2017/73). Sampling activities in Croatia were done in accordance with the authorization of the Marine Turtle Rescue Centre by the Ministry of Environment and Energy of the Republic of Croatia. Sampling activities in Greece were carried out with permission from the Hellenic Ministry of Agriculture and Environment.
 The sampling method differed between sampling events. Carapace samples from Greece and South Africa were collected by scrubbing the carapace with a single-use toothbrush on at least three arbitrarily chosen areas of the carapace, ensuring a scraped surface of at least 60 cm2. Samples were stored in plastic vials filled with at least 70% ethanol for fixation. Carapace samples from Croatia were scraped off with a curette and stored in plastic vials (100 mL) filled with seawater and fixed with formaldehyde at a final concentration of 4%. Samples from the carapaces of Florida loggerheads were collected using cotton-tipped applicators to rub diatoms from the carapace and onto the cotton tips. The cotton tips were removed from the applicators and stored in sealed plastic bags on ice until further processing. Additionally, diatoms from the skin of loggerheads from Greece were collected by gently scrubbing the dorsal area of the neck and/or the upper side of the flippers with a single-use toothbrush, and then rinsing the toothbrush head into a 50 ml Falcon tube filled with 96% ethanol. In total, we collected 25 samples of which 20 from loggerhead carapace and for five of these animals we were also able to simultaneously sample their skin.
Samples were processed following the methods described by Hasle and Syvertsen [ ] for South African samples and van der Werff [ ]. In most cases, portions of the biofilm were cleaned by adding 37% H2O2 and heating to 80°C for about 1h. The reaction was completed by the addition of KMnO4 [ ]. South African samples were digested with boiling concentrated acids (HNO3 and H2SO4) [ ]. Following digestion and centrifugation (three times 10 minutes at 3 500 rpm, Phoenix Instruments, Clinical Centrifuge CD-0412), cleaned material was diluted with distilled water to avoid excessive concentrations of diatom valves on the slides. Samples from Florida were prepared by removing in the laboratory the cotton tips of the applicators using a razor blade and then oxidizing the tips for diatom examination by boiling the cotton fibers of the applicator tip and epizoic organic material in 100 ml of 30% nitric acid followed by addition of potassium dichromate when 50 ml of acid remained. Cleaned diatoms were settled from the mixture for a minimum of 6 h and the remaining acid solution decanted. Settled diatoms were rinsed with deionized water. The rinsing/settling/decanting process was repeated six times until the solution reached a neutral pH. All slides were prepared using Naphrax mounting medium and analyzed using an Olympus BX53 microscope equipped with differential interference contrast (Nomarski) optics and the Olympus UC30 Imaging System. For scanning electron microscope (SEM) analyses, parts of the oxidized suspensions were filtered through a 2 μm Isopore™ polycarbonate membrane filter (Merck Millipore). The filters were mounted on stubs and sputter-coated with 10 nm of platinum or 20 nm of gold-palladium. The stubs were analyzed at Meise Botanic Garden using a JSM-7100F Jeol Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope at 2 kV and with a working distance of 4 mm. For a more detailed analysis of very finely structured species, some samples were studied using a ZEISS Ultra Scanning Electron Microscope at 3 kV in the Natural History Museum London, UK. Samples and slides are stored at the BR collection (Meise Botanic Garden, Belgium).
In each slide, 400 diatom valves were counted and identified in random transects to estimate the species richness and composition in the samples. After counting, a complete slide was examined to record all occurring taxa in a sample. Extensive literature including both monographs [ – ] and other taxonomic publications were used to identify the observed taxa listed in .

## Data analyses
To make the pair-wise comparison between geographic localities we used the Sørenson similarity index [ ]. This index uses presence/absence data, and the following formula 2c/(a + b + 2c), where a and b are the numbers of taxa exclusively observed in each of the two populations and c is the number of taxa shared by these populations. The Shannon-Wiener diversity index (ln-based) was calculated using the Multivariate Statistical Package (MVSP) [ ]. Abundance data were square-root transformed to downweight dominant taxa. Only taxa with a total abundance of at least 2% in one sample were included in all further statistical analyses to avoid excessive noise in the dataset. Two-dimensional non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) was used based on Bray-Curtis similarity matrix to reveal the patterns in taxa composition between different localities and turtle body parts. Analysis of similarity percentages (SIMPER) was performed to detect taxa that were responsible for most of the dissimilarity observed between different loggerhead localities and body parts [ ]. Two sampling designs, one using four distinct loggerhead subpopulations and the second using two body parts (skin and carapace) were used to perform distance-based permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) [ ]. The PERMANOVA pairwise test was performed on the matrix of square root transformed data calculated on Bray Curtis similarity, using Type III Sums of Squares (i.e. partial sums of squares), with fixed effects and unrestricted permutation of raw data (9999 permutations). All multivariate analyses were performed using the software packages PRIMER v6 and v7 [ ], including the add-on package v6 PERMANOVA+.

## Results

## Taxonomic composition and diversity
A total of 183 diatom taxa (including species, varieties and forms) belonging to 56 genera were identified during the counts. One carapace sample from Florida (sample FLO-U8) did not contain a sufficient number of diatom valves and was therefore removed from further analyses. An additional 214 taxa were observed outside the count procedures, bringing the total number of recorded taxa to 397 ( ). Several common diatoms found on both carapace and skin of loggerheads from all four investigated localities are illustrated in . Only 41% (166 taxa) of all taxa could be identified to the species level. An additional 14% (56) were given provisional names as ‘cf.’. In the Florida and Greek samples, more taxa were identified at the species level (57% and 52%, respectively) compared to the Croatian and South African samples (40% and 37%, respectively).
 The most taxon-rich genera found in all samples included Mastogloia (42 taxa), Navicula (32 taxa), Amphora (30 taxa) and Nitzschia (30 taxa) ( ). Diatom genus composition differed among the carapace samples from different locations. The carapace flora on loggerheads sampled in Croatia contained mostly Nitzschia (13 taxa) and Mastogloia (11 taxa) whereas in Greek samples Navicula (13 taxa) and Mastogloia (12 taxa), in Florida samples Mastogloia (26 taxa) and the South African samples Cocconeis (16 taxa) and Licmophora (15 taxa) were the most species-rich genera.
 Diatom counts indicated that the most frequently occurring species in all (carapace + skin) samples were Nitzschia CRO sp.2 (present 83.3% of all samples), Amphora crenulata Wachn. & E.E.Gaiser (70.8%), Cocconeis lineata Ehrenb. (70.8%), Nitzschia cf. inconspicua (62.5%) and Poulinea CRO sp.1 (54.2%). Of all counted valves, N. cf. inconspicua contributed to 16.6%, Hyalosynedra laevigata (Grunow) D.M.Williams & Round to 13.1%, Nitzschia CRO sp.2 (12.2%), Chelonicola SA sp.1 (9.9%), and Poulinea CRO sp.1 (4.4%). Altogether, only ten taxa contributed more than 71% of all counted valves, whereas 17 taxa together account for 1% of the total number of valves.
Although most taxa occurred in only one investigated locality, the Greek and Croatian samples shared 45 taxa, a relatively large number ( , ). Several taxa, such as Nitzschia cf. inconspicua and Nitzschia CRO sp. 2, appeared abundantly in almost all groups except the Florida samples. In the Florida samples, taxa such as Hyalosynedra laevigata, Synedra bacillaris (Grunow) Hust. and Toxarium hennedyanum (W.Greg.) Pelletan reached the highest relative abundances ( ). All South African samples were dominated by Chelonicola SA sp.1, whereas those collected from the Meditteranean region (the Croatian-Greek group) by Poulinea CRO sp.1 and sp. 2., Amphora crenulata, Berkeleya fennica Juhl.-Dannf., Cocconeis lineata, and Navicula cf. perminuta Grunow ( ). One-fifth of all counted valves belonged to the presumed exclusively-epizoic taxa such as Achnanthes elongata Majewska & Van de Vijver, Medlinella amphoroidea Frankovich et al., Poulinea spp., and Chelonicola sp. ( ). The total relative abundance of these species varied strongly among the populations ( ), with the lowest values (0.3%) recorded from the Florida samples and highest from the South African ones (49.1%). Moreover, a significant difference was observed between the carapace and skin samples from Greece, where the relative abundance of the presumably epizoic taxa reached 25.7% and 5.3%, respectively.
 Species number in a single sample varied between 11 and 111 taxa (including taxa observed outside the counts) ( ), and the median from the same area was generally lower in the skin samples (26) than in the carapace samples (51). Among carapace samples, the South African samples were the most taxa-abundant, whereas the lowest number of taxa characterized Florida and some of the Croatian samples ( ). Likewise, the number of genera differed among the populations ( ), being highest for the South African material. The carapace samples from Greece showed the highest diversity (median value 2,38) and evenness (0.61), while the samples from Florida had the lowest diversity (1,21) and evenness (0,32) ( ).
 

## Comparative analyses
The Sørenson similarity index showed that the Croatian and Greek samples were the most similar both at infrageneric (species level and below) and genus level, 35% and 62%, respectively. The lowest similarity on infrageneric level (almost 16%) is noted between the Florida and South Africa samples and on genus level between Florida and Greece (42.5%; ).
 According to the SIMPER analysis, Croatian samples had the lowest within-site similarity (average similarity 21,1%), followed by South African and Greek samples (49,3% and 57,8%, respectively), whereas Florida samples were the most homogenous ones (60,4%; ).
In general, the most abundant taxa in each sample group were also the ones contributing the most to the within-group similarity such as Poulinea CRO sp.1 and sp.2 for Croatia, Nitzschia cf. insconspicua and Nitzschia CRO sp.2 for Greece, Chelonicola SA sp.1. for South Africa and Hyalosynedra laevigata for Florida ( ). SIMPER dissimilarity analysis ( ) showed that ten taxa contributed approx. 50% to the total differences observed between Greek and Croatian samples, with Nitzschia cf. inconspicua and Cocconeis lineata having the highest contributions. Samples from Florida differed from those from other locations mainly due to Hyalosynedra laevigata with 20.6%, 18.3%, and 21.7% contributions to the total dissimilarity observed between Florida and Croatia, Florida and Greece, and Florida and South Africa, respectively. South African samples were characterized by high abundances of Chelonicola SA sp. 1 that contributed 15.86%, 17,34%, and 15.67% to the total dissimilarity between South Africa and Croatia, South Africa and Florida, and South Africa and Greece. Medlinella amphoroides, Nitzschia cf. inconspicua, Navicula GRE sp. 2, and Proschkinia CRO sp. 2 were responsible for most of the differences between the skin and carapace diatom communities from Greece ( ).
 Non-metric multidimensional scaling based on carapace diatom abundance data separated samples into five distinct groups ( ). The Florida cluster was the most distant from all remaining groups, while the South African, Greek, and Croatian samples were placed closer to each other, but in general, maintaining a good separation among the different localities. Croatian samples showed the lowest group homogeneity, with the main group of three samples and a single group comprised of one sample(CRO-13) and one sample placed in a different cluster (CRO 19). An additional nMDS analysis performed only on the Greek carapace and skin samples showed good separation of the two groups ( ).
 The PERMANOVA pair-wise test confirmed the significant effect of both the location (p<0,01) and the sea turtle body part (p = 0.008) on the associated diatoms ( ).
 

## Discussion
Loggerheads from the analyzed populations harbour a very diverse diatom flora with almost 400 taxa belonging to more than 100 genera. This number is most likely an underestimation of the exact taxon richness as a sampling of a limited number of turtle individuals may limit the number of diatom taxa found. Additionally, several taxa mostly belonging to the genera Amphora, Navicula and Nitzschia were grouped under a common name and detailed SEM and molecular analysis would be necessary to clarify their correct taxonomic identity. That would most likely result in the increase of the true taxon diversity. A clear example is Nitzschia cf. inconspicua, most likely representing a group of taxa difficult to disentangle rather than one single species. In the past, the N. frustulum-inconspicua group has been the subject of several taxonomic and molecular revisions resulting in the description of several new species and a better characterization of others such as N. frustulum (Kütz.) Grunow [ , ] based on small morphological differences. Nitzschia cf. inconspicua was found in other epibiont diatom communities, for instance living predominantly on olive ridley turtles in Costa Rica [ ]. Rivera et al. [ ] applied both molecular and microscopic analyses of carapace samples from green turtles in the Marine Nature Park of Mayotte (Indian Ocean) and found N. inconspicua to be one of the most abundant taxa observed with a homogenous morphology across all seven investigated sea turtles. DNA analysis, on the contrary, indicated the presence of tens of OTU’s (Operational Taxonomical Units), resulting in four groups implying a high (pseudo)cryptic diversity in N. inconspicua.
The observed taxon richness is clearly higher than currently observed from any other sea turtle species sampled so far. Majewska et al. [ ] recorded only 21 taxa in 38 carapace samples from olive ridley sea turtles in Costa Rica whereas, in another study, Majewska et al. [ ] reported 26 taxa belonging to 20 genera in 76 carapace samples from green turtles in Costa Rica and Iran. It is possible that the applied sampling technique in the latter two studies (i.e. use of razor blade or scalpel on a limited surface of the carapace) in contrast with the application of a toothbrush brushing off a larger surface influenced the observed taxon richness. Rivera et al. [ ] used the toothbrush method to sample seven juvenile green turtles from Mayotte and observed 57 taxa. Our results also indicate a certain influence of the sampling technique. The Florida samples, collected with a cotton-tipped applicator, were the least diverse of all carapace samples. This method may have been too gentle to remove firmly attached, adnate diatom taxa, such as taxa from the genera Cocconeis and Amphora from the carapace, compared to the toothbrush and/or curette methods applied to sample the other populations. The dominating genera in the Florida samples, Hyalosynedra, Synedra and Toxarium, are all large, erect diatom genera [ , ], only attached by their apices to the surface and therefore more easily removed when using a cotton-tipped applicator. Brushing the surface with a hard toothbrush removes more efficiently the well-attached, adnate diatom taxa from the hard carapaces. Recently this method was designated as the standard sampling method for epizoic diatom communities [ ].
Despite the high taxon richness, the percentage of the presumably truly epizoic taxa is rather low, although, we cannot be certain of an exact number of taxa that belong to that group. Several taxa were recently described from loggerhead samples from this dataset such as Catenula exigua K.Robert et al., Planothidium kaetherobertianum Van de Vijver & Bosak, and Lucanicum ashworthianum Majewska et al [ , , ]. These taxa have not yet been found in epizoic samples from other localities and substrata. Similarly, the newly described Proschkinia species such as P. vergostriata Frankovich et al. and P. sulcata Majewska et al. have so far only been found on turtle carapaces and skin [ ]. Thus, more sampling and analyses of marine benthic diatom communities from both biotic (including marine animals) and abiotic substrata will be necessary to determine the exact habitat preferences of these diatoms.
For turtles sampled in Greece, we sampled both skin and carapace. Interestingly, a large difference in the relative abundance of the presumably strictly epizoic taxa was observed. Skin communities were dominated by Medlinella amphoroidea, Poulinea spp, and Achnanthes elongata, all currently known only from sea turtles [ , , ] whereas taxa belonging to common epiphytic and epipelic diatom genera, such as Amphora, Halamphora, Berkeleya, and Cocconeis, were more abundant in carapace samples. Skin sample GRE-04 and the matching carapace sample GRE-03 were collected from the same turtle. The high abundances of Nitzschia cf. inconspicua and Navicula sp.7 ( ) present in the above-mentioned skin sample resulted in its grouping with carapace samples.
Many of the observed diatom taxa are probably ‘ecological hitchhikers’ using the animal surface as yet another hard substratum suitable for their development [ – ]. On the other hand, some species in common benthic genera may as well be the obligately epizoic taxa. This seems to be true for the two Achnanthes species that are regularly found in high abundances on various sea turtles from different oceans [16, 17, 20, pers.observations]. Moreover, several Proschkinia and Craspedostauros species described from the sea turtle carapaces and skin occur frequently on the animal substratum and, so far, have never been recorded from a non-animal habitat [19, 20, pers. observations].
The current results indicate that sea turtle skin is likely a much more specific substratum for diatom growth than the carapace, the latter sharing more similarities with other biotic (e.g. shells of snails and molluscs, barnacles) or abiotic surfaces (e.g. rocks). Strictly epizoic diatom taxa develop well on the physiologically active substratum, whereas opportunistic benthic species, lacking some vital adaptations, may attach to the skin only temporarily when the external conditions are favourable. One of the striking examples is Medlinella amphoroidea, described from the skin of loggerheads in Florida [ ]. In the present study, Medlinella was almost exclusively found in several skin samples but almost entirely absent from the carapace samples (only 10 valves found on the carapaces). Numerous opportunistic diatom taxa may end up on the carapaces of the loggerheads due to the foraging behavior of this turtle species [ , ]. Other sea turtle species such as olive ridley and green turtle show a different feeding behavior and have a different diet [ ], which may influence the epizoic diatom species composition. Robinson et al. [ ] observed that the macro-epibiont diversity of nesting sea turtles is partially linked to the diversity of their foraging habitats. Thus, sea turtle species with more diverse foraging areas should have more diverse epibiont communities. Fuller et al. [ ] reported that loggerheads host more macro-epibiotic species, such as barnacles, than green turtles. The authors of this study also suggest that the differences in epibiont communities between the two sea turtle species could be attributed to the difference in feeding behavior and diet, as adult loggerheads are benthic foragers, feeding by infaunal mining [ ] and green turtles are herbivores, grazing on seagrass with little sediment disturbance [ ]. Loggerheads often develop a rich macro-algal flora composed of a large number of filamentous algal taxa such as Polysiphonia carettia Hollenberg [ ] or Ectocarpus fasciculatus Harvey. Epiphytic diatoms on these macroalgae, such as various species of Cocconeis or Amphora, although not directly attached to the animal body, may therefore further enrich the sea turtle-associated diatom community composition. As biofilm accumulates, the available and uncolonized substratum surface on the carapace decreases and so there will be also a decline in the relative abundance of strictly epizoic diatom taxa [ ].
Thus, the behavior of the turtles and its impact on the attached diatom flora may explain why clear bioregionalism was found in the present study. Loggerhead samples from the Mediterranean localities (i.e. neighbouring Adriatic Sea and Amvrakikos Gulf), were found to be the most similar and distinct from both Southwest Indian (South Africa) and Northwest Atlantic (Florida) samples. Amvrakikos Gulf (Greek samples) is connected with the Adriatic Sea (Croatian samples) via the Ionian Sea. Satellite tracking has revealed that loggerhead turtles in Amvrakikos Gulf generally remain resident in this area but do occasionally venture to the northern Adriatic to forage l [ ]. Sample CRO-13 differed significantly from other Croatian diatom communities, as indicated by the nMDS plot. The sample was taken eight months after the injured turtle arrived in the rescue center and after it was cleaned from its original epizoic biofilm due to standard procedures applied at the facility. The observed diatom flora showed a remarkable similarity to the diatom flora that was growing on the walls of the plastic housing tank in which the turtle was undergoing rehabilitation for several months (Bosak, pers. observation). This may reflect a rather easy transfer of diatom taxa present on the objects within the enclosure to the carapace surface of captive turtles, especially if the new environment restrains the animal from exhibiting its natural behaviour (e.g. feeding by diving, fast-swimming). As already proposed by Holmes et al. [ ], and later by Wetzel et al. [ ] and Majewska et al. [ ], transfer of surface-associated diatoms between different animals occurs likely through body-to-body contact. It is plausible that physical contact will also be required for a diatom transfer between the animal host and inanimate objects.
A considerable part of the observed diatom taxa in the samples from Croatia and Greece was illustrated previously in the monograph of Álvarez-Blanco & Blanco [ ] on the benthic diatom flora of the Mediterranean coasts. On the other hand, the dominating genera in the samples from Florida include Hyalosynedra, Synedra, Toxarium and Mastogloia, the latter present with a fairly large number of species, are often reported from the Florida Bay region [ , ]. These observations seem to support the previously suggested hypothesis [ ] that diatom composition may serve as a biogeographical indicator of the whereabouts of sea turtles, especially loggerheads that host particularly diverse diatom communities. By comparing the diatom flora on the sea turtle with known marine benthic diatom floras worldwide, it may be possible to detect where the loggerhead has been residing. Studies on epiphytic diatoms show that the epibiotic diatom communities may vary greatly depending on geographical locality and external environmental conditions [ , ]. A follow-up study should explore both the epibiotic loggerhead flora and the local benthic (including diverse abiotic substrata and hard-surfaced animals) diatom communities. Additionally, a study combining the analysis of the epibiotic diatom flora and satellite tracking may be an interesting research venue.

## Conclusion
The diatom flora on the carapaces and skin of loggerhead sea turtles from geographically distinct locations shows a remarkable diversity and a generally low similarity. Loggerheads from the same location share a common pool of diatoms, showing clear bioregionalism, and diatom communities on sea turtles from more distant regions show less similarity between each other than those from neighbouring areas.
In many cases, the presumably truly epizoic species were outnumbered by the local benthic taxa and had only a minor contribution to the sea turtle-associated diatom floras. This may be partially explained by the frequent physical contact with a variety of substrata occurring during the specific foraging activities of loggerheads. Although species-rich diatom communities are found on both the sea turtle carapace and skin, those associated with the latter appear to be less diverse with a higher abundance of the presumably exclusively epizoic taxa.
Loggerheads serve as reservoirs and probable vectors for diverse and often unique diatom communities. This ecological role of sea turtles is still poorly understood and rarely discussed, and future studies are required to throw more light on the sea turtle contribution to the benthic diatom dispersal and their modern biogeography.

## Supporting information
S1 Table

## List of taxonomic publications used for identification of diatom taxa on loggerhead sea turtles.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Table

## List of 397 taxa observed in the carapace and skin samples of the four sampling localities.
Presumably exclusively epizoic taxa are indicated in bold.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Table

## Similarity analysis of loggerhead epizoic diatom assemblages within each sampling locality–typical species.
SIMPER analysis was based on Bray-Curtis similarity, 70% cut off, taxa cumulatively contributing to the similarity over 70% are shown. Croatia (CRO), Greece (GRE), South Africa (SA), Florida (FLO).
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.

Ronel Nel and Diane Z. M. Le Gouvello du Timat (Nelson Mandela University, South Africa) are thanked for their help during the material collection in South Africa and obtaining the necessary sampling permits. We thank Brian Stacy of the US National Marine Fisheries Service for the collection of diatom samples and Allen Foley of the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission and Jennifer Keene of the University Of Florida College of Veterinary Medicine for allowing us to receive samples from captured loggerhead turtles during the annual Florida Bay sea turtle survey. For the Croatian samples, we are thankful to Milena Mičić and Karin Gobić Medica as well the rest of the staff from Marine Turtle Rescue Centre, Aquarium Pula. ARCHELON volunteers are thanked for their help during Amvrakikos Gulf sampling activities. Mrs Myriam de Haan is thanked for preparing the samples for LM and SEM analysis.This is a contribution 188 from the Division of Coastlines and Oceans of the Institute of Environment at Florida International University.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0236513.r001Decision Letter 0
MéléderVonaAcademic Editor© 2020 Vona Méléder2020Vona MéléderThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
16 Apr 2020

PONE-D-20-05852
Diversity of diatom communities associated with loggerhead sea turtles (Carreta carreta)
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Bosak,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
We would appreciate receiving your revised manuscript by May 31 2020 11:59PM. When you are ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter.
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). This letter should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. This file should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. This file should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Manuscript'.

Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Vona Méléder, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements:
1.    Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at http://www.plosone.org/attachments/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and http://www.plosone.org/attachments/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2. Please include a copy of Table 5 which you refer to in your text on page 17.
3. We note that Figure 1 in your submission contain map images which may be copyrighted. All PLOS content is published under the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY 4.0), which means that the manuscript, images, and Supporting Information files will be freely available online, and any third party is permitted to access, download, copy, distribute, and use these materials in any way, even commercially, with proper attribution. For these reasons, we cannot publish previously copyrighted maps or satellite images created using proprietary data, such as Google software (Google Maps, Street View, and Earth). For more information, see our copyright guidelines: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/licenses-and-copyright.
We require you to either (1) present written permission from the copyright holder to publish these figures specifically under the CC BY 4.0 license, or (2) remove the figures from your submission:
1.    You may seek permission from the original copyright holder of Figure 1 to publish the content specifically under the CC BY 4.0 license. 
We recommend that you contact the original copyright holder with the Content Permission Form (http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=7c09/content-permission-form.pdf) and the following text:
“I request permission for the open-access journal PLOS ONE to publish XXX under the Creative Commons Attribution License (CCAL) CC BY 4.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). Please be aware that this license allows unrestricted use and distribution, even commercially, by third parties. Please reply and provide explicit written permission to publish XXX under a CC BY license and complete the attached form.”
Please upload the completed Content Permission Form or other proof of granted permissions as an "Other" file with your submission.
In the figure caption of the copyrighted figure, please include the following text: “Reprinted from [ref] under a CC BY license, with permission from [name of publisher], original copyright [original copyright year].”
2.    If you are unable to obtain permission from the original copyright holder to publish these figures under the CC BY 4.0 license or if the copyright holder’s requirements are incompatible with the CC BY 4.0 license, please either i) remove the figure or ii) supply a replacement figure that complies with the CC BY 4.0 license. Please check copyright information on all replacement figures and update the figure caption with source information. If applicable, please specify in the figure caption text when a figure is similar but not identical to the original image and is therefore for illustrative purposes only.
The following resources for replacing copyrighted map figures may be helpful:
USGS National Map Viewer (public domain): http://viewer.nationalmap.gov/viewer/
The Gateway to Astronaut Photography of Earth (public domain): http://eol.jsc.nasa.gov/sseop/clickmap/
Maps at the CIA (public domain): https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/index.html and https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/cia-maps-publications/index.html
NASA Earth Observatory (public domain): http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/
Landsat: http://landsat.visibleearth.nasa.gov/
USGS EROS (Earth Resources Observatory and Science (EROS) Center) (public domain): http://eros.usgs.gov/#
Natural Earth (public domain): http://www.naturalearthdata.com/
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Review of:
Diversity of diatom communities associated with loggerhead sea turtles (Carreta carreta)
Van de Vijver et al. present a well-written, interesting, and valuable study. My only major comment is that I believe that at the end of the discussion, I think the paper would benefit from having some more discussion about how the findings of this study could applied. The authors do a great job of explaining the why they think that diatom community structures differ between turtles from different regions; however, they do not really expand on the bigger picture implications of this. I think a rather simple fix would be to acknowledge that as diatom communities may reflect foraging patterns of these turtles, then diatom communities could be used as behavioral indicators for these species.
All other comments are relatively minor and are listed below:
Line 25: “Epizoic diatoms form an important part of micro-epibiota on marine vertebrates” should be “Epizoic diatoms form an important part of the micro-epibiota of marine vertebrates”.
Line 29 - 30: “Almost 400 diatom taxa belonging to more than 100 genera have been observed.” Because this sentence is written in the passive tense, it is not clear whether you are referring to only the diatom taxa observed in this study or all the taxa reported in all the published literature on this subject. I would switch this sentence to the active tense. I.e. “ We observed almost 400 diatom taxa belonging to more than 100 genera.” There are also several other examples in the document where it would be clearer to use the active tense instead of the passive tense. Please change throughout.
Line 31: “Diatom communities from Greece and Croatia showed the highest similarity, clearly differing from the communities observed in the samples from South Africa and Florida.” should be “Diatom communities from Greece and Croatia showed the highest similarity and were statistically different to those recorded from South Africa and Florida.”
Line 32: “Part of the difference in diversity and composition may be attributed to different sampling techniques.” I think this could be rephrased as, at present, it largely undermined the entire study. How about “While sampling technique different between locations, and this may affect some of various we observed between localities, we believe that geography played a larger role”.
Line 38: The abstract would strongly benefit from a concluding sentence that explains what are the implications of your findings.
Line 46: “everywhere where” should be “wherever”.
Line 416: “Has” should be “have”.
Line 429: The authors appear to have cited the wrong study here. The authors state “Robinson et al. [14] observed that the macro-epibiont diversity of nesting sea turtles is partially linked to the diversity of their foraging habitats.” However, they cite another study by this author that looks at diatom and noi macro-epibiont diversity. I believe the authors were aiming to cite this study instead “Robinson NJ, Lazo-Wasem EA, Paladino FV, Zardus JD, Pinou T (2017) Assortative epibiosis of leatherback, olive ridley and green sea turtles in the Eastern Tropical Pacific. Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom 97(6):1233-40.”.
Reviewer #2: The manuscript is very well written and the graphs are all very clear. Great effort was taken to identify the taxa and the number of taxa found is quite impressive! The abstract provides a nice description of the manuscript.
The title could be a bit more descriptive – something like ‘Geographical variation in the diverse diatom communities associated …’.
The goals of the study are simply are simply to document the diatom communities on the turtles and see whether different areas of the turtles have different diatom composition. The manuscript would be greatly improved with a hypothesis to test. For example, although a previous study demonstrated that turtles of different species in the same area have similar diatom epibionts, but you might anticipate differences among turtles from different areas, if these turtles are truly geographically separated. Also, why might you expect skin and carapace areas to have different diatom populations?
In the Discussion, there seems to be an ‘all or none’ sort of definition to epizoic taxa -as if they should never be found on non-animal surfaces. Benthic and even attached diatoms often become ‘planktonic’ – at least until they settle on a surface. If epizoic species thereby end up on non-animal sources and survive, this may not mean that they are not epizoic. Especially as the processing method does not allow distinguishing between empty frustules and live diatoms that are not thriving. Similarly, I would expect many benthic diatoms to do well on the carapace (which is relatively inert). The skin is more interesting, as I suspect there is more sloughing and secretions from the turtle – and so it is not surprising that more presumed epizoic taxa were found on the skin samples.
Line 64. ‘accidently’ is probably the wrong word. Maybe ‘haphazardly’ might be a better choice.
Lines 64-65. I suspect that true planktonic and tychoplanktonic species may also settle on turtles (no contact with solid surfaces needed).
Line 97. Are the Adriatic Sea and Amvrakikos Gulf turtles from different subpopulations? (The locations are fairly close and the species is ‘highly migratory’ (line 83). This is mentioned in the Discussion but should be added her.
Line 217. Delete the word ‘up’.
Table 2. In the legend, ‘Number of diatom genera’, should be ‘Number of diatom taxa in the most diverse genera’.
Lines 243-244. ‘most frequently occurring’ could mean either having the highest total count or occurring in the most samples or at the most sites. Suggestion: for the first % listed, include the units (percent of what?).
Lines 269-270. Maybe drop the color references, as they all look purple – and (I think) this blue vs purple refers only to the symbols in the headings and not the colors used to indicate abundance – and symbol shape is enough.
Line 272. ‘the fill cells the largest abundance’. The ‘largest abundance in the matrix’ can only be one cell – and all the cells are filled (whether by while or by color). Reword.
Line 254. Replace ‘the latter’ with ‘Florida samples’
Lines 281-282. This excludes the GRE skin samples, which had the lowest median value.
Line 305. ‘were the most diverse’ was a bit tricky to decipher, as it wasn’t obvious that the comparison was among the samples within each site. Maybe ‘had the lowest within-site similarity’.
Line 334. There are 5 groups, one of which is a single sample (I don’t think I would call it an outlier).
Also Line 337. ‘with a main group of 3 samples, a single group comprised of one sample, and…
Fig. 5B. If your skin samples were numbered as pairs with the carapace samples, the matching carapace sample to the skin sample within the carapace cluster (GRE-04) would be GRE-03 – which are the 2 farthest apart samples in the cluster. If this is correct, it would be worth noting (especially since the location of GRE-04 within the carapace cluster wasn’t noted).
Line 359. Sampling only 5 individuals per species also limits the number of species found (as indicated by the relatively low similarity among individuals within some of the sites).
Line 474. The diatom floras might also indicate segregation among populations of sea turtles (especially benthic feeding species).
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: Nathan Jack Robinson
Reviewer #2: Yes: Elizabeth Bergey
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files to be viewed.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0236513.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
13 May 2020

PONE-D-20-05852
Diversity of diatom communities associated with loggerhead sea turtles (Carreta carreta)
PLOS ONE
Response to reviewers
Dear Editor,
Thank you for the consideration of our manuscript for the publication in PLOS ONE. The authors thank the two reviewers for their thorough review, comments, and suggestions. We believe that the revisions substantially improved the manuscript. We made the requested changes, both in the text and in the figures, please find our answer (A) to the journal requirements (J) and reviewers’ suggestions (R) below. 
J: 1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at http://www.plosone.org/attachments/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and http://www.plosone.org/attachments/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
A: Checked and changed accordingly
J: 2. Please include a copy of Table 5 which you refer to in your text on page 17.
A: The Table caption is corrected to 5. 
J: 3. We note that Figure 1 in your submission contain map images which may be copyrighted. All PLOS content is published under the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY 4.0), which means that the manuscript, images, and Supporting Information files will be freely available online, and any third party is permitted to access, download, copy, distribute, and use these materials in any way, even commercially, with proper attribution. For these reasons, we cannot publish previously copyrighted maps or satellite images created using proprietary data, such as Google software (Google Maps, Street View, and Earth). For more information, see our copyright guidelines: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/licenses-and-copyright. We require you to either (1) present written permission from the copyright holder to publish these figures specifically under the CC BY 4.0 license, or (2) remove the figures from your submission: 
 2. If you are unable to obtain permission from the original copyright holder to publish these figures under the CC BY 4.0 license or if the copyright holder’s requirements are incompatible with the CC BY 4.0 license, please either i) remove the figure or ii) supply a replacement figure that complies with the CC BY 4.0 license. Please check copyright information on all replacement figures and update the figure caption with source information. If applicable, please specify in the figure caption text when a figure is similar but not identical to the original image and is therefore for illustrative purposes only.
A: The figure 1. has been replaced with the figure that complies with CC BY 4.0 license according to the recommendation from the Editors office. The caption now says:
“Fig 1. The sampling areas of loggerhead sea turtles. (A) Red dots indicate locations of sampled loggerheads. Inserts show details of the sampling locations: (B) Amvrakikos Gulf, Greece; (C) Adriatic Sea, Croatia; (D) Florida Bay, USA; (E) Kosi Bay, South Africa. The maps were made with Natural Earth. Free vector and raster map data @ naturalearthdata.com.”
Reviewer #1: 
R: Van de Vijver et al. present a well-written, interesting, and valuable study. My only major comment is that I believe that at the end of the discussion, I think the paper would benefit from having some more discussion about how the findings of this study could applied. The authors do a great job of explaining the why they think that diatom community structures differ between turtles from different regions; however, they do not really expand on the bigger picture implications of this. I think a rather simple fix would be to acknowledge that as diatom communities may reflect foraging patterns of these turtles, then diatom communities could be used as behavioral indicators for these species.
A: Although we appreciate the reviewer’s kind words and suggestions, we believe that if we include the conclusion proposed by the reviewer, we should have observed behavior and foraging patterns of the sea turtles that we investigated, and this was not done in our study. Also, this paper includes only one sea turtle species and we think more detailed research including comparisons between different host species with different habitats and behaviors is needed. The main objective of this study was to provide a baseline for the future epizoic diatom studies on loggerheads and we do not want to speculate about bigger implications until they can be proven. However, we have included the following sentences at the end of the abstract that we feel are appropriate conclusions drawn from the results of this study.
“Our results indicate that epizoic diatom communities differ according to host species geographical location and host substrate (skin vs. carapace). The relative abundances of common benthic diatoms and putative exclusive epizoic taxa may inform about host habitat use or behavior though detailed comparisons between different host sea turtle species have yet to be performed.”
R: All other comments are relatively minor and are listed below:
Line 25: “Epizoic diatoms form an important part of micro-epibiota on marine vertebrates” should be “Epizoic diatoms form an important part of the micro-epibiota of marine vertebrates”.
A: Corrected
R: Line 29 - 30: “Almost 400 diatom taxa belonging to more than 100 genera have been observed.” Because this sentence is written in the passive tense, it is not clear whether you are referring to only the diatom taxa observed in this study or all the taxa reported in all the published literature on this subject. I would switch this sentence to the active tense. I.e. “ We observed almost 400 diatom taxa belonging to more than 100 genera.” There are also several other examples in the document where it would be clearer to use the active tense instead of the passive tense. Please change throughout.
A: We have changed suggested use from passive voice to active, as the reviewer suggested. 
R: Line 31: “Diatom communities from Greece and Croatia showed the highest similarity, clearly differing from the communities observed in the samples from South Africa and Florida.” should be “Diatom communities from Greece and Croatia showed the highest similarity and were statistically different to those recorded from South Africa and Florida.”
A: Corrected
R: Line 32: “Part of the difference in diversity and composition may be attributed to different sampling techniques.” I think this could be rephrased as, at present, it largely undermined the entire study. How about “While sampling technique different between locations, and this may affect some of various we observed between localities, we believe that geography played a larger role”.
A: Thank you for this comment, we have changed this sentence according to your suggestion.
R: Line 38: The abstract would strongly benefit from a concluding sentence that explains what are the implications of your findings.
A: We added the following sentences: 
“Our results indicate that epizoic diatom communities differ according to host species geographical location and host substrate (skin vs. carapace). The relative abundances of common benthic diatoms and putative exclusive epizoic taxa may inform about host habitat use or behavior though detailed comparisons between different host sea turtle species have yet to be performed.”
R: Line 46: “everywhere where” should be “wherever”.
A: Corrected
R: Line 416: “Has” should be “have”.
A: Corrected
R: Line 429: The authors appear to have cited the wrong study here. The authors state “Robinson et al. [14] observed that the macro-epibiont diversity of nesting sea turtles is partially linked to the diversity of their foraging habitats.” However, they cite another study by this author that looks at diatom and noi macro-epibiont diversity. I believe the authors were aiming to cite this study instead “Robinson NJ, Lazo-Wasem EA, Paladino FV, Zardus JD, Pinou T (2017) Assortative epibiosis of leatherback, olive ridley and green sea turtles in the Eastern Tropical Pacific. Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom 97(6):1233-40.”.
A: Yes, thank you for this observation, we changed the citation accordingly. 
R: Reviewer #2: The manuscript is very well written and the graphs are all very clear. Great effort was taken to identify the taxa and the number of taxa found is quite impressive! The abstract provides a nice description of the manuscript.
A: Thank you.
R: The title could be a bit more descriptive – something like ‘Geographical variation in the diverse diatom communities associated …’.
A: The title is changed to:
“Geographical variation in the diatom communities associated with loggerhead sea turtles (Carreta carreta)”
R: The goals of the study are simply to document the diatom communities on the turtles and see whether different areas of the turtles have different diatom composition. The manuscript would be greatly improved with a hypothesis to test. For example, although a previous study demonstrated that turtles of different species in the same area have similar diatom epibionts, but you might anticipate differences among turtles from different areas, if these turtles are truly geographically separated. Also, why might you expect skin and carapace areas to have different diatom populations?
A: Thank you for your comment, however, as we have stated at the end of our introduction, the objective of the present study was to provide a baseline data for the studies of diatom diversity on loggerheads, therefore the hypothesis such as suggested could not been put forward. We expect exactly to do just that in our following manuscripts, investigate differences and links between different host species and their habitats. The different flora on the skin and carapace was expected due to the characteristics of the substratum as we have explained in the discussion, the skin is a physiologically more active substratum and favors the development of epizoic taxa. 
R: In the Discussion, there seems to be an ‘all or none’ sort of definition to epizoic taxa -as if they should never be found on non-animal surfaces. Benthic and even attached diatoms often become ‘planktonic’ – at least until they settle on a surface. If epizoic species thereby end up on non-animal sources and survive, this may not mean that they are not epizoic. Especially as the processing method does not allow distinguishing between empty frustules and live diatoms that are not thriving. Similarly, I would expect many benthic diatoms to do well on the carapace (which is relatively inert). The skin is more interesting, as I suspect there is more sloughing and secretions from the turtle – and so it is not surprising that more presumed epizoic taxa were found on the skin samples.
A: Yes, it is true, we cannot know for a fact that taxa we found as epizoic cannot survive on other non-animal surfaces, however, to our knowledge, they have not been found yet there, and apparently, these species are developing large populations on animal surfaces, therefore we label them as epizoic. 
R: Line 64. ‘accidently’ is probably the wrong word. Maybe ‘haphazardly’ might be a better choice.
A: Thank you, the word has been replaced
R: Lines 64-65. I suspect that true planktonic and tychoplanktonic species may also settle on turtles (no contact with solid surfaces needed). 
A: Yes, that is true, as the true planktonic species such as Chaetoceros and Pseudonitzschia can settle (resting stages, vegetative cells) on the marine sediment bottom, especially in the bloom period, they can also be found in samples scraped from sea turtles as they get caught on these animals (as a sediment trap) instead of travelling all the way to the bottom. However, in the sample list that we analyzed as a part of this study, we did not find any examples of these true planktonic taxa. 
R: Line 97. Are the Adriatic Sea and Amvrakikos Gulf turtles from different subpopulations? (The locations are fairly close and the species is ‘highly migratory’ (line 83). This is mentioned in the Discussion but should be added here.
A: Yes, we added this information as reviewer suggested.
R: Line 217. Delete the word ‘up’.
A: Deleted
R: Table 2. In the legend, ‘Number of diatom genera’, should be ‘Number of diatom taxa in the most diverse genera’.
A: Yes, corrected.
R: Lines 243-244. ‘most frequently occurring’ could mean either having the highest total count or occurring in the most samples or at the most sites. Suggestion: for the first % listed, include the units (percent of what?).
A: We have included: Nitzschia CRO sp.2 (present 83.3% of all samples)
R: Lines 269-270. Maybe drop the color references, as they all look purple – and (I think) this blue vs purple refers only to the symbols in the headings and not the colors used to indicate abundance – and symbol shape is enough. R: Line 272. ‘the fill cells the largest abundance’. The ‘largest abundance in the matrix’ can only be one cell – and all the cells are filled (whether by while or by color). Reword.
A: We have corrected the Figure caption following both comments:
“Fig. 3. The most abundant diatom taxa associated with loggerhead sea turtles 
Shade plot illustrating the 25 most abundant taxa recorded on loggerhead carapaces (triangle) and skins (square) from investigated localities based on square root-transformed abundance data. The white cells represent the absence of the taxa and the darkest cells the largest abundances.. Taxa are ordered by a hierarchical cluster analysis of their mutual associations across samples based on Index of Association calculated on the standardized counts. CRO = Croatia, Adriatic Sea; FLO = Florida Bay, USA; GRE = Greece, Amvrakikos Gulf; SA = South Africa, Kosi Bay”
R: Line 254. Replace ‘the latter’ with ‘Florida samples’
A: Yes, corrected.
R: Lines 281-282. This excludes the GRE skin samples, which had the lowest median value.
A: Yes, we added at the beginning of the sentence the clarification that it implies only the samples from the carapace.
R: Line 305. ‘were the most diverse’ was a bit tricky to decipher, as it wasn’t obvious that the comparison was among the samples within each site. Maybe ‘had the lowest within-site similarity’.
A: Thank you, corrected.
R: Line 334. There are 5 groups, one of which is a single sample (I don’t think I would call it an outlier).
Also Line 337. ‘with a main group of 3 samples, a single group comprised of one sample, and…
A: Thank you, corrected.
R: Fig. 5B. If your skin samples were numbered as pairs with the carapace samples, the matching carapace sample to the skin sample within the carapace cluster (GRE-04) would be GRE-03 – which are the 2 farthest apart samples in the cluster. If this is correct, it would be worth noting (especially since the location of GRE-04 within the carapace cluster wasn’t noted).
A: We noted the position of GRE-04 in the discussion and offered a possible explanation:
“Skin sample GRE-04 and the matching carapace sample GRE-03 were collected from the same turtle. The high abundances of Nitzschia cf. inconspicua and Navicula sp.7. (Fig 3.) present in above-mentioned skin sample resulted in its grouping with carapace samples.” 
R: Line 359. Sampling only 5 individuals per species also limits the number of species found (as indicated by the relatively low similarity among individuals within some of the sites).
A: Yes, we agree, the following sentence was added to the discussion. 
“This number is most likely an underestimation of the exact richness as sampling of a limited number of turtle individuals may limit the number of diatom taxa found.”
R: Line 474. The diatom floras might also indicate segregation among populations of sea turtles (especially benthic feeding species).
A: We agree as we wrote in our discussion: “Thus, the behavior of the turtles and its impact on the attached diatom flora may explain why a clear bioregionalism was found in the present study. “
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers_Van de Vijver.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0236513.r003Decision Letter 1
MéléderVonaAcademic Editor© 2020 Vona Méléder2020Vona MéléderThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
5 Jun 2020

PONE-D-20-05852R1
Geographical variation in the diatom communities associated with loggerhead sea turtles (Carreta carreta)
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Bosak,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jul 20 2020 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Vona Méléder, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (if provided):
Dear authors,
Several issues have been found throughout the document, certainly based on the fact that many of the revisions have created even more errors in the text instead of fixing them. Could you please take the comments from reviewer # 1 into account, then read your ms carefully before resubmitting.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Review Of
Geographical variation in the diatom communities associated with loggerhead sea turtles (Carreta carreta)
I still agree that the study presented by Van de Vijver et al. is interesting and worthy of publication. Nevertheless, on a detailed read through, I have noted several typos, errors, and situations were the language could be improved. Thus, I think that the text needs some considerable improvements to be at the level where it would be ready for publication. I have listed several comments below. On top of this, I would also recommend that the authors also take the time to give this manuscript a detailed read through before resubmission to make sure that the text is as clear and understandable as possible.
Title: “Carreta caretta” should be “caretta caretta”.
Line 25: I would delete this first sentence. The second sentence is a perfect location for this manuscript to start.
Line 28: “skins and shells” do not need to be pluralized in this context.
Line 28: Please include the scientific names after you first provide the species common name.
Line 33: “While sampling technique differed between locations, and this may affect some of variations we observed between localities, we believe that geography played a larger role” should be “We believe that part of this variation was due to differences in sampling techniques; however, we still believe that geography had an important role.”
Line 35 – 37: “Only 5 000 of the known diatom species are considered to be marine with 50 another 50 000 diatom species still to be discovered and described in the marine realm” should be “Of these, around 55,000 are estimated to exist in marine habitats. To date however, less than 5,000 of marine diatoms have been described.”
Line 51-52: This sentence should be moved to be the second sentence in this paragraph.
Line 62: You already mention that diatoms are found on whales and sea turtles in Line 57. Thus, it is a little confusing to again mention all the different species that diatoms are found on just a few sentences later. I would delete Lines 62 – 65 and start by talking about sea turtles.
Line 70: Delete “being”.
Line 82: This should be written in the past not present tense.
Line 111 – 112: I would argue that this is unnecessary and should be deleted.
Line 115: I do not think that originates is the appropriate word here. The population does not breed in Amvarikos, it just forages here.
Line 128: “All samples were collected in a non-invasive way for the animal.” I would delete this sentence as you explain this in the methods.
Line 150: “In total, 25 samples were analyzed, twenty from the carapace and five from the skin.” This is a very confusing way to write this. I would change it to “In total, we collected 25 samples from loggerhead skin. In addition, for five of these animals we were also able to simultaneously sample their carapaces for diatoms.”
Table 1: This could be condensed as much information is repeated. How about one line for each sampling location with ranges?
Line 159-160: “Samples were processed following the methods described by Hasle and Syvertsen [30] for South African samples and van der Werff [31].” This is a confusing way to put this. Are you trying to say that you used the Hasle and Syvertsen method only for South African samples and the other method for all the other samples?
Line 172: Delete extra comma.
Line 190: “For pairwise comparisons of the loggerhead diatom flora from four localities, the Sørenson similarity index [36] was calculated.” should be “To make pair-wise comparison in between geographic location, we used the Sørenson similarity index”
Line 213: Include ‘diatom’ before taxa and delete ‘during the counts’.
Line 234: In my opinion, it is not appropriate in this context to refer to turtles as Green turtles or South African turtles. These turtles migrate between several different countries and so the term “sampled in Greece” is more accurate than “Greek turtle”.
Line 254-255: It is not clear what you are trying to say here.
Line 363: I think you mean exact richness of the population, or do you mean individual? It is not clear.
Line 366: “Will be” should be “would be”.
Line 364 – 367: This is a run-on sentence.
Line 373: I think you mean “predominantly” not “dominantly”.
Line 381: I would add ‘sampled so far’ to the end of this sentence as very few turtles have been sampled and so you cannot say this with confidence.
Line 380: Change “known” to “observed”.
Line 399: Run-on sentence.
Line 410: This makes it sound as if this was not found in non-Greek turtles, which were not sampled. Perhaps, rephrase to say “For Greek turtles, we sampled both skin and carapace. Interestingly, we found differences…”
Line 421: I am confused as to why you would expect to find obligate epibiont diatoms in the benthos. Surely, then they wouldn’t be obligate epibionts? Please explain.
Line 451: “As the biofilm accumulates, the available, uncolonized substratum surface on the carapace decreases and the relative abundance of strictly epizoic diatom taxa that needs this kind of substratum to thrive, declines” should be “As biofilm accumulates, the available and uncolonized substratum surface on the carapace decreases and so there will also be a decline in the relative abundance of strictly epizoic diatom taxa”.
Line 455: Two double spaces in the sentence.
Line 458: Double space in this sentence.
Line 460: Wandering is a very informal and inaccurate word in this context. “Satellite tracking of loggerheads showed that Amvrakikos Gulf turtles display long-term residency in this area, occasionaly wandering off to the northern Adriatic Sea using the latter as a foraging ground” should be “Satellite tracking have revealed that loggerhead turtles in Amvrakikos Gulf generally remain resident in this area but do occasionall venture to the northern Adriatic sea to forage”.
Line 490: Satellite tracking would be a more appropriate term than GPS tracking.
Reviewer #2: The authors made most of the suggested changes and presented acceptable reasons for suggestions that did not result in changes.
I found only two minor grammatical changes that are needed:
1. In the last sentence of the Abstract, 'between' should be 'among' because more than two items are being compared.
2. on line 480, 'numberof' should be 'number of'
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: Nathan J. Robinson
Reviewer #2: Yes: Elizabeth Bergey
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Review Of Diatoms.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0236513.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
12 Jun 2020

PONE-D-20-05852
Diversity of diatom communities associated with loggerhead sea turtles (Carreta carreta)
PLOS ONE
Response to reviewers
Dear Editor,
Thank you and the two reviewers for their comments and suggestions. We made the requested changes, both in the text and in the figures, please find our answer (A) to the reviewers’ suggestions (R) below. 
R: I still agree that the study presented by Van de Vijver et al. is interesting and worthy of publication. Nevertheless, on a detailed read through, I have noted several typos, errors, and situations were the language could be improved. Thus, I think that the text needs some considerable improvements to be at the level where it would be ready for publication. I have listed several comments below. On top of this, I would also recommend that the authors also take the time to give this manuscript a detailed read through before resubmission to make sure that the text is as clear and understandable as possible.
A: Thank you for your comments and suggestions. We have checked the manuscript text and corrected it where we found mistakes or unclear wording. 
R: Title: “Carreta caretta” should be “caretta caretta”.
A: Corrected
R: Line 25: I would delete this first sentence. The second sentence is a perfect location for this manuscript to start.
A: We deleted the first sentence of the abstract and now it starts with the sentence: “Epizoic diatoms form an important part …”
R: Line 28: “skins and shells” do not need to be pluralized in this context.
A: Corrected
R: Line 28: Please include the scientific names after you first provide the species common name.
A: We added the scientific name: „loggerhead sea turtles (Caretta caretta)”
R: Line 33: “While sampling technique differed between locations, and this may affect some of variations we observed between localities, we believe that geography played a larger role” should be “We believe that part of this variation was due to differences in sampling techniques; however, we still believe that geography had an important role.”
A: We have changed this sentence to: „Part of this variation could be attributed to differences in sampling techniques; however, we believe that geography had an important role.”
R: Line 35 – 37: “Only 5 000 of the known diatom species are considered to be marine with 50 another 50 000 diatom species still to be discovered and described in the marine realm” should be “Of these, around 55,000 are estimated to exist in marine habitats. To date however, less than 5,000 of marine diatoms have been described.”
A: The sentence was changed according to the reviewer suggestion.
R: Line 51-52: This sentence should be moved to be the second sentence in this paragraph.
A: We did not move this sentence as this is the start of the description of diatom habitats, and that is also decribed in the sentences that follow to the end of the paragraph. 
R: Line 62: You already mention that diatoms are found on whales and sea turtles in Line 57. Thus, it is a little confusing to again mention all the different species that diatoms are found on just a few sentences later. I would delete Lines 62 – 65 and start by talking about sea turtles.
A: The first sentence illustrates examples of marine vertebrate hosts for epizoic diatom, and the second sentence is listing some of the taxa, only mentioning their host (cetaceans). We feel that the deleting the suggested lines would influence the context of previously known information listed in the Introduction. 
R: Line 70: Delete “being”.
A. Deleted
R: Line 82: This should be written in the past not present tense.
A: Changed to the past tense.
R: Line 111 – 112: I would argue that this is unnecessary and should be deleted.
A. The suggested sentence was deleted.
R: Line 115: I do not think that originates is the appropriate word here. The population does not breed in Amvrakikos, it just forages here.
A: We changed the expression „originates“ to „was sampled in Amvrakikos Gulf“.
R: Line 128: “All samples were collected in a non-invasive way for the animal.” I would delete this sentence as you explain this in the methods.
A: The sentence has been removed.
R: Line 150: “In total, 25 samples were analyzed, twenty from the carapace and five from the skin.” This is a very confusing way to write this. I would change it to “In total, we collected 25 samples from loggerhead skin. In addition, for five of these animals we were also able to simultaneously sample their carapaces for diatoms.”
A: We wrote: „In total, we collected 25 samples of which 20 from loggerhead carapace and for five of these animals we were also able to simultaneously sample their skin.”
R: Table 1: This could be condensed as much information is repeated. How about one line for each sampling location with ranges?
A: We have condensed the information in the Table 1, and added the range of geographical coordinates to the location name as suggested.
R: Line 159-160: “Samples were processed following the methods described by Hasle and Syvertsen [30] for South African samples and van der Werff [31].” This is a confusing way to put this. Are you trying to say that you used the Hasle and Syvertsen method only for South African samples and the other method for all the other samples?
A: Yes, that is right. The methods are further described in the same paragraph. We added the appropriate citation after each sentence where we specify the method used.
Line 172: Delete extra comma.
A: Deleted
Line 190: “For pairwise comparisons of the loggerhead diatom flora from four localities, the Sørenson similarity index [36] was calculated.” should be “To make pair-wise comparison in between geographic location, we used the Sørenson similarity index”
A: Corected.
R: Line 213: Include ‘diatom’ before taxa and delete ‘during the counts’.
A: We added diatom, but did not delete during the counts as besides the counting, we afterwards identified additionally 214 taxa, as stated further in the paragraph.
R: Line 234: In my opinion, it is not appropriate in this context to refer to turtles as Green turtles or South African turtles. These turtles migrate between several different countries and so the term “sampled in Greece” is more accurate than “Greek turtle”.
A: Yes, we agree with the reviewer and we refer to the samples as Greek, Croatian etc.. and to turtles as sampled in Greece, Croatia etc..
R: Line 254-255: It is not clear what you are trying to say here.
A: We have changed the sentence to: Although most taxa occurred in only one investigated locality…
R: Line 363: I think you mean exact richness of the population, or do you mean individual? It is not clear.
A: Taxon richness found in all epizoic samples examined in the study. 
R: Line 366: “Will be” should be “would be”.
A: Corrected.
R: Line 364 – 367: This is a run-on sentence.
A: the sentence was split into two parts, and now says: 
“Additionally, several taxa mostly belonging to the genera Amphora, Navicula and Nitzschia were grouped under a common name and detailed SEM and molecular analysis would be necessary to clarify their correct taxonomic identity. That would most likely result in the increase of the true taxa richness.”
R: Line 373: I think you mean “predominantly” not “dominantly”.
A: Yes, thank you
R: Line 381: I would add ‘sampled so far’ to the end of this sentence as very few turtles have been sampled and so you cannot say this with confidence.
A: Added.
R: Line 380: Change “known” to “observed”.
A: Changed.
R: Line 399: Run-on sentence.
A: The sentence was rewritten to: “Despite the high taxon richness, the percentage of the presumably truly epizoic taxa is rather low, although, we cannot be certain of an exact number of taxa that belong to that group.”
R: Line 410: This makes it sound as if this was not found in non-Greek turtles, which were not sampled. Perhaps, rephrase to say “For Greek turtles, we sampled both skin and carapace. Interestingly, we found differences…”
A: We rephrased this sentences as reviewer suggested.
R: Line 421: I am confused as to why you would expect to find obligate epibiont diatoms in the benthos. Surely, then they wouldn’t be obligate epibionts? Please explain.
A: Yes, we cannot exclude the possibility that some of the taxa that we consider as epizoic canot thrive on other surfaces. Marine benthic diatom diversity is largely unexplored and new discoveries are more than possible. However, in this part we simply stated that in some diatom genera there are species that are epizoic and some species that are not epizoic, but commonly found in benthic habitats. 
R: Line 451: “As the biofilm accumulates, the available, uncolonized substratum surface on the carapace decreases and the relative abundance of strictly epizoic diatom taxa that needs this kind of substratum to thrive, declines” should be “As biofilm accumulates, the available and uncolonized substratum surface on the carapace decreases and so there will also be a decline in the relative abundance of strictly epizoic diatom taxa”.
A: We rephrased the sentence as reviewer suggested.
Line 455: Two double spaces in the sentence.
A: Corrected.
Line 458: Double space in this sentence.
A: Corrected.
Line 460: Wandering is a very informal and inaccurate word in this context. “Satellite tracking of loggerheads showed that Amvrakikos Gulf turtles display long-term residency in this area, occasionally wandering off to the northern Adriatic Sea using the latter as a foraging ground” should be “Satellite tracking have revealed that loggerhead turtles in Amvrakikos Gulf generally remain resident in this area but do occasionally venture to the northern Adriatic sea to forage”.
A: We rephrased the sentence as reviewer suggested.
Line 490: Satellite tracking would be a more appropriate term than GPS tracking.
A: Corrected.
Reviewer #2: The authors made most of the suggested changes and presented acceptable reasons for suggestions that did not result in changes.
I found only two minor grammatical changes that are needed:
1. In the last sentence of the Abstract, 'between' should be 'among' because more than two items are being compared.
2. on line 480, 'numberof' should be 'number of'
A: Both mistakes were corrected.
10.1371/journal.pone.0236513.r005Decision Letter 2
MéléderVonaAcademic Editor© 2020 Vona Méléder2020Vona MéléderThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
9 Jul 2020

Geographical variation in the diatom communities associated with loggerhead sea turtles (Caretta caretta)
PONE-D-20-05852R2
Dear Dr. Bosak,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Vona Méléder, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: Nathan Jack Robinson
10.1371/journal.pone.0236513.r006Acceptance letter
MéléderVonaAcademic Editor© 2020 Vona Méléder2020Vona MéléderThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
15 Jul 2020

PONE-D-20-05852R2 
Geographical variation in the diatom communities associated with loggerhead sea turtles (Caretta caretta) 
Dear Dr. Bosak:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Vona Méléder 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE