PLoS OnePLoS ONE440plosone101285081plosPLoS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC7053761PMC7053761.1705376170537613212611010.1371/journal.pone.0229225PONE-D-19-318181Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesPlant SciencePlant AnatomyLeavesBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsHeredityBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaPlantsTreesBiology and Life SciencesMolecular BiologyMolecular Biology TechniquesCloningResearch and Analysis MethodsMolecular Biology TechniquesCloningBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaPlantsTreesPoplarsBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaPlantsSeedlingsEarth SciencesSeasonsAutumnBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsPlant GeneticsBiology and Life SciencesPlant SciencePlant GeneticsGenetic parameters of growth and adaptive traits in aspen (Populus tremuloides): Implications for tree breeding in a warming world
Genetic parameters of growth and adaptive traitshttp://orcid.org/0000-0003-2337-2299DingChenConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisMethodologyVisualizationWriting – original draft HamannAndreasConceptualizationFunding acquisitionProject administrationVisualizationWriting – review & editing YangRong-CaiFormal analysisMethodologyWriting – review & editing BrouardJean S.ConceptualizationData curationMethodologyResourcesWriting – review & editing 1
Department of Renewable Resources, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada2
Department of Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada3
Isabella Point Forestry Ltd., Salt Spring Island, British Columbia, CanadaAlbrectsenBenedicte RiberEditor in the supporting information section. However, our adherence to PLOS policies on sharing data and materials is altered with respect to height and diameter measurements used in this study. These data are owned by an industrial tree breeding cooperative and are therefore not publicly available. Interested researchers may negotiate data sharing agreements with the participating companies, which can be facilitated by Jean Brouard (jean.brouard@ipfgenetics.ca) or the Western Boreal Aspen Corporation, 11420 142 Street NW, Suite #16, Edmonton, AB T5M 1V1 Tel. +1 (780) 482-2795.

## Data Availability
Data collected by the authors on the timing of bud break and leaf senescence are available as in the supporting information section. However, our adherence to PLOS policies on sharing data and materials is altered with respect to height and diameter measurements used in this study. These data are owned by an industrial tree breeding cooperative and are therefore not publicly available. Interested researchers may negotiate data sharing agreements with the participating companies, which can be facilitated by Jean Brouard (jean.brouard@ipfgenetics.ca) or the Western Boreal Aspen Corporation, 11420 142 Street NW, Suite #16, Edmonton, AB T5M 1V1 Tel. +1 (780) 482-2795.

## Introduction
Trembling aspen (Populus tremuloides Michx) is an ecologically and commercially important tree species with high genetic diversity and a broad natural range, including the boreal forest of North America, the eastern United States, and the western mountain ranges from Mexico to Alaska [ , ]. Aspen can regenerate both via sexual and asexual reproduction [ , ]. Root suckering often produces large single-species stands after fire disturbances in boreal regions [ , ]. Over the last two decades, aspen has become one of the most important commercial forestry species in western Canada due to hardwood demand from pulp and paper mills, and the development of oriented strand board (OSB) production [ ]. Aspen and its hybrids have been utilized in short rotation forestry [ – ]. In Alberta, Canada, aspen tree improvement programs have been developed to maximize the yield in short rotation forestry systems [ , ]. Three geographic breeding regions in Alberta were initially delineated to develop locally adapted and improved planting stock [ ], of which two have active tree breeding programs [ ].
Successful tree selection and breeding programs depend on sufficiently high heritability for traits of commercial interest. Specifically, additive genetic variance components and narrow-sense heritabilities are of interest to predict the genetic gain from normal recurrent selection. In aspen, dominance and epistatic genetic variance components are of interest as well for clonal selection, because the species can readily be clonally propagated to generate reforestation stock [ ]. Broad-sense heritability of height and diameter at breast height (DBH) has previously been estimated in clonal trials and ranges from 0.36 to 0.64, where 262 clones and 11,152 ramets were tested [ ]. In a similar experiment, the broad-sense heritability was reported ranging from 0.23 to 0.35 for height and diameter, in which 18 clones and 417 ramets were tested [ ]. Heterosis and genotype-by-environment interactions have been studied in juvenile aspen [ , ]. Heterosis of interspecific crosses was also reported for growth and wood quality improvement [ , ].
Estimates of narrow-sense heritabilities, relevant for breeding programs, are usually not available because the additive and non-additive genetic effects are confounded in clonal trials. Also lacking for trembling aspen is the estimate of heritability and genetic correlations of adaptive traits that are important to avoid mal-adaptation and minimize the risk of mortality in plantations [ – ]. For example, unseasonal frost events in spring and fall may damage buds and leaves, and eventually jeopardize productivity and survival [ ]. In selection and breeding for tree growth, the inadvertent response of other traits related to fitness may occur as a byproduct. Antagonistic pleiotropy, where one gene controls multiple traits, may play a role in trade-offs between traits that show high negative genetic correlations [ ]. Such antagonistic pleiotropy may result in unexpected responses to selection when the correlated response in adaptive traits compromises expected gains in productivity. Pleiotropic loci contributing to phenological traits were reported in Populus trichocarpa [ ].
Here, we investigate whether improved growth characteristics can be accomplished through tree breeding, while controlling for risks of maladaptation. We evaluate ten progeny trials containing more than 30,000 trees with known pedigree structure, including 60 half-sib families, 100 full-sib families and 1,400 clones to estimate the breeding potential and genetic parameters for collections from Alberta. This paper focuses on the genetic variation within populations and within families which is essential for tree improvement. We estimate additive and non-additive genetic variance components for two growth traits, height, and diameter at breast height, and two adaptive traits, the timing of budbreak and leaf senescence. Further, we estimate genetic correlations among these traits to assess potential trade-offs between growth and adaptive traits. We test the hypothesis that selection for growth may have a correlated response that leads to utilizing a longer growing season, and thereby increases the risk of exposure to late spring frosts or early fall frosts.

## Materials and methods

## Study area and plant material
Active tree improvement programs in western Alberta exist for a northern and a southern breeding region with different climate conditions ( ). The tree improvement programs initially tested a large number of clones collected from natural stands, targeting plus trees with good form and without signs of pathogens and diseases. In a similar manner, 122 individuals were selected as male or female parents for a partial factorial mating design (to be detailed below). The offspring were planted in ten progeny trials, established between 2005 and 2008 by the Western Boreal Aspen Corporation (WBAC), an industrial collaborative that includes Norbord Inc. (formerly Ainsworth Engineered Canada LP), Mercer Peace River Pulp (previously Daishowa-Marubeni International Ltd.), and Weyerhaeuser Canada Ltd. Detailed origins of the parental material for the progeny trials were previously documented [ ].
 There were 64 half-sib families as well as 100 full-sib families generated in a partial factorial mating design for the two breeding regions [ ]. Each male and female parent was represented by one or two full-sib families and each female parent was also pollinated with a polymix to generate half-sib families. The pedigree structures of northern and southern breeding regions were constructed separately. Trials 1 and 2, planted in 2005, were seedling trials planted in the southern breeding region, sharing the same half-sib and full-sib families. Trials 3 to 8 were planted in 2007 and utilized families from both breeding regions. Families were clonally replicated prior to planting so that these trials have half-sib, full-sib, and clonal structure (i.e., multiple ramets of the same clone, with clones replicating multiple individuals of full-sib families). Trials 9 and 10 were established in 2008, containing different clonal material but overlap in half-sib and full-sib families with trials 3 to 7. These trials were connected through shared half-sib and full-sib families [ ].
Seedlings for Trials 1 and 2 were grown in a greenhouse in April to May 2004, hardened in September to October, packed and cold-stored in a refrigerator in winter before planting in May 2005. Clonal planting stock for trials 3–10 was produced over a two-year cycle using a rootling methodology described by Brouard et al. [ ]. First, seedlings were grown in 1-gallon pots (3.76 liters) at the Weyerhaeuser Tree Improvement Center in Drayton Valley, Alberta (53°13’N, 114°58’W, 869 m) to generate root mass. The following year, the root masses were washed and root cuttings were propagated in Beaver Plastics Styroblock-512 (60 cavities/block 220 ml plug volume) containers at Woodmere Forest Nursery in Fairview, Alberta (56°04’N, 118°24’ W, 670 m). The resulting rootling ramets were then hardened, packed and cold-stored in a refrigerator in winter before planting in May 2007 and 2008 [ ].

## Experimental design and phenotypic measurements
All trials were constructed using an alpha design [ ]. The use of alpha designs allowed for the flexible allocation of treatment and block numbers, and advantage over conventional randomized incomplete block designs. The location, exact experimental design, numbers of half-sib and full-sib families and clones for each trial are provided in . Over 30,000 individual trees were planted in this progeny trial series. Border trees surrounded each trial, and all trials except 7 and 10 were fenced to prevent browsing. Mulch layers or brush blanket mats were used to control competing vegetation, and spacing was 3×3m.
 Height measurements were carried out multiple times between 2005 and 2013 with extendable measuring poles, and diameter at breast height (DBH) was assessed with a diameter tape. Budbreak scores were obtained based on a repeated scoring method according to Li et al. [ ]. Score 0 was recorded for dormant buds, score 1 indicated a swollen bud, score 2 indicated broken bud scales, score 3 was given for the emergence of green leaves, score 4 indicated leaf extension, score 5 indicated more than two leaves emerged, and score 6 indicated fully unfolded leaves. Scores were recorded for each individual tree on April 12, 20, 22, 24, 26, May 1, 3, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19 in 2010 at trial 2. At trial 3, scores were recorded on April 18, 21, 25, 27 and May 2, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20 in 2010. In trial 8, scores were recorded on April 11, 18, 23, 26, May 3, 9, 10, 13, 15, 17, 19, 21 in 2010.
For leaf senescence scores, scoring was based on an eight-level scale according to Fracheboud et al. [ ]. Score 0 represented uniformly green leaves, score 1 indicated darker than pale green leaves, score 2 indicated a majority of pale green leaves, score 3 indicated more green than yellow leaves, score 4 indicated a majority of yellow leaves, score 5 indicated only yellow leaves, score 6 indicated 20% brown leaves, score 7 was 50% leaf abscission, and score 8 represented ≥90% leaf abscission. Observation dates for fall phenology in trial 2 were September 1, 7, 21, 29 October 5, 20 in 2011. Scores in trial 3 were recorded on September 1, 6, 23, 30 and October 6, 21 in 2011. Trial 8 was assessed on August 31, 7, 21, 29 September and October 20, 2011.
The day-of-year of a phenology event (DoY) was subsequently calculated for a critical score that showed the best separation among genotypes: score 3 for spring phenology (emergence of green leaves) and score 7 for fall phenology (50% leaf abscission). The date when the phenology reached the critical score of individual trees was determined by either the first record of the critical score, or by linear regression from the bracketing dates. The phenology data is provided as in the supporting information section.

## Statistical and quantitative genetic analysis
All quantitative genetic analysis was conducted with the ASReml-R package [ ]. For the seedling trials (1 and 2) we employed the following mixed linear model:
 Y=Xβ+Z1a+Z2f+Z3r+Z4b+Z5p+e[1]
where Y is the vector of observations of traits (tree height, day-of-year of budbreak or leaf senescence etc.); β is a vector of fixed effects; a, f, r, b and p are vectors of additive genetic effects, full-sib family (cross) effects, replicate effects, block-within-replicate effects and plot effects, respectively; e is a vector of random residuals; X is the incidence matrix of the fixed effects relating β to observations Y; and Z1 to Z5 are the incidence design matrices relating the random effects a, f, r, b and p to observations Y. We assume that the observation vector follows a normal distribution with the expected value of E(Y) = Xβ and with the covariance matrix of Var(Y) = V, i.e., Y~N(Xβ,V). For our data, the β vector has only one element (the overall mean). The vectors of five random effects a, f, r, b, and p, as well as the vector of random residual e are assumed to follow the normal distributions , , , , , respectively. Here, is the additive genetic variance, A is the pedigree kinship matrix for describing the additive genetic relationships among individual trees, represents 25% of the dominance genetic variance, are the variance components corresponding to the vectors of random effects r, b, plot and residual e respectively, It is the identity matrix of order t (t = f, r, b, plot, e). Thus, the total variance matrix can be partitioned into components due to the five vectors of random effects described above as well as the residuals,
 V=σA2Z1AZ1'+σf2Z2Z2'+σr2Z3Z3'+σb2Z4Z4'+σplot2Z5Z5'+σe2Ie[2]
The best linear unbiased estimation (BLUE) of fixed effect (β) and best linear unbiased prediction (BLUP) of random effects (a, f, r, b, p) are solutions to the following mixed model equations,
 [β^a^f^r^b^p^]=[1'11'Z11'Z21'Z31'Z41'Z5Z1'1Z1'Z1+A−1σe2σA2Z1'Z2Z1'Z3Z1'Z4Z1'Z5Z2'1Z2'Z1Z2'Z2+Ifσe2σf2Z2'Z3Z2'Z4Z2'Z5Z3'1Z3'Z1Z3'Z2Z3'Z3+Irσe2σr2Z3'Z4Z3'Z5Z4'1Z4'Z1Z4'Z2Z4'Z3Z4'Z4+Ibσe2σfbZ4'Z5Z5'1Z5'Z1Z5'Z2Z5'Z3Z5'Z4Z5'Z5+Iplotσe2σplot2]−1[1'YZ1'YZ2'YZ3'YZ4'YZ5'Y][3]
For the trials with clonal single tree plot trials, we modified model (1) into the following linear mixed model:
 Y=Xβ+Z1a+Z2f+Z3c+Z4b+Z5r+e[4]
where the model remains the same as (1) except the plot effect is removed and the effects of clones within full-sib family (c) are added. The c factor accounts for the epistasis and ¾ of the dominance [ , ]. We also assumed that a, f, r, b, p, and e followed the normal distributions as above respectively; random effect c followed the normal distribution as N(0,𝐼𝐶σC2).
Narrow-sense and broad-sense heritabilities were calculated based on following functions:
 h^i2=σ^A2σ^P2=σ^A2σ^A2+σ^NA2+σ^e2[5]
where is the additive genetic variance component; is the phenotypic variance component represented by the sum of , and ; is the variance of non-additive genetic effects; the residual error is [ ]. The broad-sense heritability was estimated as:
 H^i2=σ^G2σ^P2=σ^A2+σ^NA2σ^A2+σ^NA2+σ^e2[6]
The standard errors of the heritability were calculated with the delta method [ ].
We estimated the additive genetic correlation in seedling trials, genetic correlation in clonal trials (rG), phenotypic correlation (rP) based on individual trees observations. The linear model of tree growth and leaf phenology for a single site is:
 yijlmn=tn+rin+gnim+enimj[7]
where ynimj is the observation of j-th tree of im-th genotype for the n-th trait; tn represents the n-th trait effect, rin is the i-th replicate effect of n-th trait, gnim is the additive genetic effect of m-th genotype of n-th trait in i-th replicate in the seedling trial, while in the clonal trails, gnim is the genetic effect. In the seedling trial, the genotypes are seedlings nested in replicates, while in the clonal trial, genotypes are clones evenly assigned in each replicate. In seedling trial 2, the genetic correlation is due to the additive genetic effect. In the clonal trials, the genetic correlation is due to the total genetic effect, though the additive genetic effect is more significant, and enimj is the experimental error for each trial. The fixed effects of the mixed model are similar as the previous model, although the trait effect is added as a fixed factor. The genetic correlation ( ) was of the form
 rGij=σ^Gijσ^Giσ^Gj[8]
where is the estimated genotypic covariance between trait i and j; is the estimated phenotypic standard deviation of trait i. For seedling trials the genetic correlation is the additive genetic effect. The phenotypic correlation was calculated as follows:
 rPij=σ^Pijσ^Piσ^Pj[9]
where is the estimated phenotypic covariance between trait i and j; is the estimated phenotypic standard deviation of trait i.
Based on BLUPs, the breeding value reliability of half-sib parents and individual clones were calculated as follows:
 Ri=1−PEVσ^i2=1−sei2σ^A2[10]
where Ri is the reliability of the breeding value of the i-th parent, where PEV is the prediction error variance that equals to the standard error square of the predicted breeding value [ ]; and is the estimated additive genetic variance component.
The correlations of breeding values among sites were calculated as the Pearson’s correlation coefficients of half-sibs (breeding values) and clones (genetic values) between trials with chart.correlation of the R package PerformanceAnalytics. Bootstrapping of correlation coefficients of survival was carried out with the R boot package [ ]. The G×E effect is explored with the Type-B genetic correlation for tree height, where the same trait measured in two or more environments over the same genetic composition can be treated as two different genetically correlated traits. R code for estimating genetic parameters according to the models above are available in the Appendix in [ ].

## Results

## Genetic parameters of growth traits
Genetic parameters for height and diameter were estimated at a relatively young age. Trees were between 5 and 8 years old at the time of evaluation with the oldest seedling trials having an average height of 3-4m and most clonal trials reaching average heights of 1-2m ( ). Dominance and epistatic variance components for height and diameter were small, less than 10% of the phenotypic variance component, so that most broad-sense heritabilities were only marginally higher than narrow-sense heritabilities ( ). The highest heritabilities were estimated for a relatively small seedling trial 1 with values around 0.5. For all other trials, heritabilities for height and diameter were quite low (or unreliable) with narrow-sense heritabilities typically ranging from 0.1 to 0.2, and broad-sense heritabilities typically ranging from 0.2 to 0.3.
 Type-B genetic correlations based on shared clones and shared full-sib families could only be calculated for sister trials (1–2, 3–4, 5–6, 7–8, and 9–10). Genetic correlations among sister trials yielded rGB values around 0.7 with a standard error of approximate 0.08 for the first three pairs, indicating a relatively low degree of genotype-by-environment interactions (G×E). Pairs 7–8 and 9–10 did not yield reliable estimates. Correlations of parental breeding values could be calculated for a larger number of trial pairs that shared parents through the partial factorial mating design. Parent breeding values between sister trials in trials 1 through 6 were generally well correlated, which can be interpreted as low G×E. Trial 8 showed a negative correlation with all other trials, and it should be noted that this trial was planted in a relatively cold environment with the highest elevation ( ).

## Genetic parameters for adaptive traits
The phenology traits budbreak and leaf senescence were measured at three trials ( ), had moderate broad- and narrow-sense heritabilities ( ). Narrow-sense heritabilities for budbreak ranged from 0.4 to 0.5, while heritabilities for leaf senescence were slightly lower with values between 0.3 and 0.4. Broad-sense heritabilities were only marginally higher than narrow-sense heratibilities, and could not be estimated for the seedling trial 2 ( ). Also here, additive genetic variation was most important and dominance and epistatic variance components ranged from zero to 10% of the phenotypic variation. Moderate to strong genetic correlations were found between growth and phenology (r = -0.3 to -0.2 between height and bud break, and 0.6 to 0.8 between height and leaf senescence) with tall trees being associated with early budbreak and late leaf senescence ( ). Survival was not compromised by early budbreak or late leaf senescence. In fact, the reverse appeared to be true with negative correlations between survival and budbreak and positive correlations between survival and leaf senescence, just as for growth traits ( ).
 

## Trait variation across the landscape
The correlations between fall phenology and height and survival were generally stronger than those between spring phenology and height and survival, indicating that the adaptive value of fall phenology is high. Neither fall phenology nor budbreak showed strong spatial patterns of breeding values across both breeding regions ( ). However, correlations between height and leaf senescence are visible in these maps: comparing Figs and , high breeding values for height (green dots) are often associated with late leaf senescence (pink and purple), with a Pearson’s correlation coefficient of 0.65 (p<0.0001).
 

## Discussion
Positive associations between height and survival as well as increased growth and survival in trees that break bud early and abscise leaves late suggest that utilization of the growing season may be more important than the avoidance of early fall frosts or late spring frosts at all three test sites where phenology was assessed. Strong additive genetic correlations between growth and phenology indicate that much of the genetic gain at the early stage of stand development will be due to expanding the growing season, which may increase the risk of frost damage in spring and fall.
In studies with Populus species [ – ] and other species [ ], high heritabilities of fall phenology traits, and positive genetic correlations between productivity and fall phenology have previously been observed. Genotypes with a delayed senescence in fall may nevertheless be exposed to increased frost risks. However, climate warming trends that have materialized over the last several decades in Alberta may have decreased the risks of early fall frosts [ ]. This might potentially explain our positive association of an extended growing season in fall with high survival. Similar to the expectations of Olson et al. [ ], genotypes that utilize a longer growing season may be favored by climate warming at northern latitudes. Inadvertent selection, where individuals with better height and diameter growth are chosen, and the genetically correlated leaf senescence is extended in fall, may therefore be an unplanned but effective climate change adaptation strategy. That said, other climatic factors are likely to change, and while the length of time suitable for growth is likely to continue to increase, water limitations may lead to an overall reduction of boreal forest productivity [ , ]
In contrast, budbreak is a highly plastic trait in response to interannual variation and long-term trends in temperature. Populations can generally be expected to respond appropriately to climate change trends as long as daily temperature variances do not change for given baseline values. In other words, the frost risk associated with a certain heatsum that triggers budbreak needs to remain the same. Yet, the day-of-year for budbreak may have shifted, when this heatsum is reached. Late spring frosts are also considered a more severe threat than early fall frosts, as they may destroy buds and juvenile leaves and severely compromise early-season growth [ ]. In our study, genetic correlations between growth and budbreak were negative (i.e. early budbreak associated with better growth), but they were not nearly as strong as genetic correlations with leaf senescence. Furthermore, survival was not compromised in genotypes that started the growing season relatively early. We, therefore, conclude that correlated selection for early budbreak poses only a small risk. In fact, the results could be interpreted as indicating an adaptational lag with respect to changing climate. The utilization of a longer growing season appears to increase the growth and survival at least in this sample of three field tests. Our within population genetic analysis corroborates results from provenance research that demonstrated adaptational lag among populations through wide-ranging reciprocal transplant experiments [ ].
The previous interspecific hybrid breeding mainly exploits heterosis/specific combining ability for growth and wood quality trait improvement [ , , ]. In our study, intra-specific crosses and within family selection after field selection provide potential gain for growth and predictable phenology response due to the non-additive genetic effect such as specific combining ability and epistasis effect. Instead of producing hybrids with northern species such as P. davidiana and P. tremula [ ], for regional tree improvement, adjacent breeding zones could exchange parentages, crosses, and clones in places like Alberta without severe frost risk concern in spring and fall even in the northern plantation sites [ ].
We noted that heritabilities found in this study were generally much lower than those reported in previous studies by Gylander et al. [ ] in comparable trial series that investigated wild clonal selections, and Gylander et al. [ ] reported broad-sense heritabilities of 0.51–0.58 from clonal trials. Kanaga et al. [ ] Calculated broad-sense heritabilities for growth traits ranging from 0.30 to 0.50 in a short-term common garden study using 13 aspen clones. Our low heritability estimates for growth traits are likely due to strong environmental microsite variation at post-harvest planting sites and the juvenile age at which trees were evaluated. Heritabilities were particularly low for Trials 7 and 10, and only Trial 7 could not be fenced and showed evidence of browsing, while Trial 8 was located at the more elevated site in the study area. For growth selection at multiple sites, results of >8 growing seasons are adequate for mediocre sites and the productive site. We conclude that selection for growth traits at the current stage promises only small to moderate genetic gains, but higher heritabilities may emerge at a later date of trial evaluation.
Genetic correlations among fall phenology and spring phenology traits with growth traits were nevertheless already high in this study, and could further increase as the influence of microsite variation of the planting site decreases with the age of the trees. Survival was also not compromised, but was positively associated with early budbreak or late leaf senescence, indicating that the growing season length was more important for survival and growth than avoiding early fall or late spring frosts. We found that a substantial portion of the tested genotypes are adapted to a shorter growing season than they have experienced during the testing period. Selecting genotypes for reforestation that utilize a longer growing season may be unproblematic under continued climate warming in northern latitudes, and may lead to overall increases in forest productivity as long as water availability under increased evapotranspiration does not become a dominant limiting factor.

## Supporting information
S1 Dataset

## Phenology data for bud break and leaf senescence.
A data table in comma separated values (CSV) format, containing phenology data for Trials 2, 3, and 8. The first 14 rows contain descriptions of the variables.
(CSV)
Click here for additional data file.

We thank Jaroslav Klapste for the statistical modelling suggestions. We also thank Earl (Fred) Raley at the Western Gulf Forest Tree Improvement Program for providing help editing the manuscript. We thank Alberta-Pacific Forest Industries, Norbord Inc. (previously as Ainsworth Engineered Canada LP), Mercer Peace River Pulp (formerly Daishowa-Marubeni International Ltd.), Western Boreal Aspen Corporation, and Weyerhaeuser Company Ltd. for providing height, diameter and survival data that has been analyzed in this study, and for providing logistical support for phenology measurements.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0229225.r001Decision Letter 0
AlbrectsenBenedicte RiberAcademic Editor© 2020 Benedicte Riber Albrectsen2020Benedicte Riber AlbrectsenThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
16 Dec 2019

PONE-D-19-31818
Genetic parameters of growth and adaptive traits in aspen (Populus tremuloides): implications for tree breeding in a warming world
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr DING,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Besides meeting the complementary and constructive comments raised by two reviewers, I suggest a bit of effort is put into clarity of tables and figures. I would appreciate it if both origin and planting sites were detailed especially in table 1. It also puzzles me that there is an experimental set up with replicates, but number of replicates (clones) not indicated ... could that number potentially be 1629/6 - or would it be more correct to write 1620 in that column?   Fig 2 presents two phenology traits and one growth trait for the northern garden? whereas figure 3 only presents growth traits for the southern garden. Would it make sense to present only phenology responses in figure 2 and then the two height responses (for the southern and northern origin, I believe) could perhaps be collected in the same figure 3?.
We would appreciate receiving your revised manuscript by Jan 30 2020 11:59PM. When you are ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter.
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). This letter should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. This file should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. This file should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Manuscript'.

Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Benedicte Riber Albrectsen
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements:
Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at http://www.plosone.org/attachments/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and http://www.plosone.org/attachments/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
Thank you for stating the following in the Acknowledgments Section of your manuscript:
Funding was provided by an NSERC/Industry Collaborative Development Grant
351 CRDPJ 349100-06 and an NSERC Discovery Grant RGPIN-330527-13 through the Government
352 of Canada. We thank Alberta-Pacific Forest Industries, Norbord Inc. (previously as Ainsworth
353 Engineered Canada LP), Mercer Peace River Pulp (formerly Daishowa-Marubeni International
354 Ltd.), Western Boreal Aspen Corporation, and Weyerhaeuser Company Ltd. for their financial
355 and in-kind support.
We note that you have provided funding information that is not currently declared in your Funding Statement. However, funding information should not appear in the Acknowledgments section or other areas of your manuscript. We will only publish funding information present in the Funding Statement section of the online submission form.
Please remove any funding-related text from the manuscript and let us know how you would like to update your Funding Statement. Currently, your Funding Statement reads as follows:
"The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript."
Additionally, because some of your funding information pertains to commercial funding, we ask you to provide an updated Competing Interests statement, declaring all sources of commercial funding.
In your Competing Interests statement, please confirm that your commercial funding does not alter your adherence to PLOS ONE Editorial policies and criteria by including the following statement: "This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.” as detailed online in our guide for authors  http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/competing-interests.  If this statement is not true and your adherence to PLOS policies on sharing data and materials is altered, please explain how.
Please include the updated Competing Interests Statement and Funding Statement in your cover letter. We will change the online submission form on your behalf.

3. Thank you for stating the following in the Competing Interests section:
[I have read the journal's policy and the authors of this manuscript have the following competing interests: AH received a research grant that included matching financial contributions from industry partners for this study JSB received financial compensation from industry partners for his contributions to experimental design and analysis.].   
We note that one or more of the authors are employed by a commercial company: Isabella Point Forestry Ltd.
a.) Please provide an amended Funding Statement declaring this commercial affiliation, as well as a statement regarding the Role of Funders in your study. If the funding organization did not play a role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript and only provided financial support in the form of authors' salaries and/or research materials, please review your statements relating to the author contributions, and ensure you have specifically and accurately indicated the role(s) that these authors had in your study. You can update author roles in the Author Contributions section of the online submission form.
Please also include the following statement within your amended Funding Statement.
“The funder provided support in the form of salaries for authors [insert relevant initials], but did not have any additional role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. The specific roles of these authors are articulated in the ‘author contributions’ section.”
If your commercial affiliation did play a role in your study, please state and explain this role within your updated Funding Statement.
b.) Please also provide an updated Competing Interests Statement declaring this commercial affiliation along with any other relevant declarations relating to employment, consultancy, patents, products in development, or marketed products, etc.  
Within your Competing Interests Statement, please confirm that this commercial affiliation does not alter your adherence to all PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials by including the following statement: "This does not alter our adherence to  PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.” (as detailed online in our guide for authors http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/competing-interests) . If this adherence statement is not accurate and  there are restrictions on sharing of data and/or materials, please state these. Please note that we cannot proceed with consideration of your article until this information has been declared.
Please include both an updated Funding Statement and Competing Interests Statement in your cover letter. We will change the online submission form on your behalf.
5. We note that you have stated that you will provide repository information for your data at acceptance. Should your manuscript be accepted for publication, we will hold it until you provide the relevant accession numbers or DOIs necessary to access your data. If you wish to make changes to your Data Availability statement, please describe these changes in your cover letter and we will update your Data Availability statement to reflect the information you provide.
6. We note that Figure 1, 2 and 3 in your submission contain map/satellite images which may be copyrighted. All PLOS content is published under the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY 4.0), which means that the manuscript, images, and Supporting Information files will be freely available online, and any third party is permitted to access, download, copy, distribute, and use these materials in any way, even commercially, with proper attribution. For these reasons, we cannot publish previously copyrighted maps or satellite images created using proprietary data, such as Google software (Google Maps, Street View, and Earth). For more information, see our copyright guidelines: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/licenses-and-copyright.
We require you to either (1) present written permission from the copyright holder to publish these figures specifically under the CC BY 4.0 license, or (2) remove the figures from your submission:
a.)You may seek permission from the original copyright holder of Figure(s) [#] to publish the content specifically under the CC BY 4.0 license. 
We recommend that you contact the original copyright holder with the Content Permission Form (http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=7c09/content-permission-form.pdf) and the following text:
“I request permission for the open-access journal PLOS ONE to publish XXX under the Creative Commons Attribution License (CCAL) CC BY 4.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). Please be aware that this license allows unrestricted use and distribution, even commercially, by third parties. Please reply and provide explicit written permission to publish XXX under a CC BY license and complete the attached form.”
Please upload the completed Content Permission Form or other proof of granted permissions as an "Other" file with your submission.
In the figure caption of the copyrighted figure, please include the following text: “Reprinted from [ref] under a CC BY license, with permission from [name of publisher], original copyright [original copyright year].”
b.) If you are unable to obtain permission from the original copyright holder to publish these figures under the CC BY 4.0 license or if the copyright holder’s requirements are incompatible with the CC BY 4.0 license, please either i) remove the figure or ii) supply a replacement figure that complies with the CC BY 4.0 license. Please check copyright information on all replacement figures and update the figure caption with source information. If applicable, please specify in the figure caption text when a figure is similar but not identical to the original image and is therefore for illustrative purposes only.
The following resources for replacing copyrighted map figures may be helpful:
USGS National Map Viewer (public domain): http://viewer.nationalmap.gov/viewer/
The Gateway to Astronaut Photography of Earth (public domain): http://eol.jsc.nasa.gov/sseop/clickmap/
Maps at the CIA (public domain): https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/index.html and https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/cia-maps-publications/index.html
NASA Earth Observatory (public domain): http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/
Landsat: http://landsat.visibleearth.nasa.gov/
USGS EROS (Earth Resources Observatory and Science (EROS) Center) (public domain): http://eros.usgs.gov/#
Natural Earth (public domain): http://www.naturalearthdata.com/
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: I Don't Know
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: To Authors,
The study by Ding et al., (PONE-19-31818) evaluated ten progeny trails of P. tremultoides in western Alberta, Canada. In doing so, the authors collected survival, height, DHB, leaf abscission data from a subset of test sites planted into southern and northern breeding zones. Overall, the study used roughly 30000 tress to arrive at the conclusions – i.e., growing season is more important for survival and growth than avoiding spring & fall frost.
Line29: Insert “Canada” after Alberta. This helps the readers.
Line31: provide a relevant reference to support aspen short rotation forestry.
Line 35-36: rewrite the sentence – “Selection and breeding…….”
Line 42: change (9) to [9] and fix it throughout the text.
Line 105: replace “gallon” to standard reporting units.
Line 106: provide geographic coordinates of Drayton Valley (latitude, longitude, elevation).
Line 109: provide geographic coordinates of Fairview (latitude, longitude, elevation).
Line 142: replace day of year with “day-of-year” throughout the text.
Line 239: Under Results section….please expand Table 1 to cover survival, bud break and leaf abscission.
Line 262: Expand the results from Table 3.
Line 265: please reconfirm the correlation values to match with Table 4.
Q1. Can authors also address the role of “latitude of origin” on plant height, leaf abscission and breeding value? This would permit to test if photoperiodic adaptation has a role or not.
Line 281: Be specific with fall phenology.
L283-291: I would like to authors to consider moving Fig 2 and Fig 3 description to “Results’ section rather bringing it up under “Discussion” section.
Line 301: Provide relevant reference/s to support your argument.
Line 312: Be specific about leaf abscission and leaf senescence. These are two independent phenological events.
Line 325: Fix typo – trumula to tremula.
Line 337-338: Please confirm the age for growth selection for different sites.
Table 1: Provide units for Lat, Lon, Ele. Also, confirm if its leaf coloration or leaf abscission. Make the changes in Table heading as well.
Table 2: Provide units for height and DBH.
Reviewer #2: This is a well-circumscribed and generally well-written manuscript based on an extensive dataset. The results are interesting but not unexpected. The data do support the main conclusion, that current aspen populations are adapted to colder climates and now lag behind climate warming; but this too must be expected given its lifespan. I do think it’s worthy of publication if the venue is appropriate.
A general problem I have with the discussion is encapsulated by the comment on line 299 that seems to equate growth cessation with leaf abscission, or at least suggests that they are both in the fall. Height growth cessation generally occurs in summer, several weeks before leaf color change even begins. In Populus it takes about 4 weeks for buds to fully form after height growth cessation, then leaf abscission occurs after that. To be sure, there is generally a correlation (at least at the population/provenance level) between date of height growth cessation and date of leaf senescence, but there is greater spread in the former than in the latter. In black cottonwood and balsam poplar from western Canada, height growth cessation generally occurs in mid-July, with buds fully formed by mid-August, and leaf senescence happening in September. Aspen may be different, but probably not hugely so.
The last paragraph seems anti-climactic and disconnected from the title (i.e., the “implications for breeding in a warmer world). Could there be a better ending? What is your take home message?
Other minor points/corrections:
L9 – insert “dates of” before “budbreak”
L15 – Change to “These results suggest” or “This result suggests”
L22 – delete comma after bracket
L25-L26 – I suggest breaking this sentence up into two sentences (after “reproduction”).
L42, and elsewhere – Why do you cite the names of the first two authors on multi-authored papers; i.e., why “St. Clair, Mock (9)” rather than “St. Clair et al. (9)”? Is this correct PLOS One format?
L43 – insert “and” after clones
L45 – change “Heterosis … were” to “Heterosis … was”
L65 – delete hyphens in “within-populations” and “within-families”
L71 – “increase” should be “increases”
L90 – insert “the” before “two breeding regions”
L93 – I suggest deleting “The first two” to start the sentence with “Trials…”
L98 – delete “The” and start sentence with “Trials…”
L106 – most readers will not know that Drayton Valley is in Alberta. Insert AB
L116 – Change “number of half-sib, full-sib families and clones” to “numbers of half-sib and full-sib families, and clones”
L151 – Language needs adjusting here.
L178 – insert “the” after “into”
L194 – language needs adjusting
L211 – change “following” to “follows”?
L283 – I don’t find this surprising. There are generally much larger differences between genotypes/populations for fall/summer phenological traits than for spring phenological traits (in terms of # of days), and the weather is often warmer. A greater effect on the length of the growing season (or photosynthesizing season) is expected, and therefore a greater impact on height and/or survival.
L294 – Relative to positive correlations between productivity and senescence and/or height growth cessation, for Populus trichocarpa see reference 18. For aspen per se (Populus tremula), you might also find interesting a paper by Soolanayakanally et al. (2015. Frontiers in Plant Science 6:528).
[Another thought: I suppose if you have date of budbreak and LAB, could you then take the difference between them as the length of the active photosynthetic period and also then check the correlation with growth? It might be a bit better.]
L325 – “trumula” should be “tremula”
L336 – Was there actual evidence of browse then? More clarity around this point would be useful.
Tables – Throughout the manuscript you refer to the trials by number, not “trial code”. I suggest adding a column for trial number to Table 1 and then using those numbers instead of codes for Tables 2-4.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: Raju Soolanayakanahally
Reviewer #2: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files to be viewed.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0229225.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
30 Jan 2020

Academic Editor’s Comments to the Author:
Ref: PONE-D-19-31818
Dear Dr. DING,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Besides meeting the complementary and constructive comments raised by two reviewers, I suggest a bit of effort is put into clarity of tables and figures. I would appreciate it if both origin and planting sites were detailed especially in table 1. It also puzzles me that there is an experimental set up with replicates, but number of replicates (clones) not indicated ... could that number potentially be 1629/6 - or would it be more correct to write 1620 in that column? Fig 2 presents two phenology traits and one growth trait for the northern garden? whereas figure 3 only presents growth traits for the southern garden. Would it make sense to present only phenology responses in figure 2 and then the two height responses (for the southern and northern origin, I believe) could perhaps be collected in the same figure 3?
We would appreciate receiving your revised manuscript by Jan 30 2020 11:59PM. When you are ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Benedicte Riber Albrectsen
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Thank you for your assessment. We made the following changes to address your comments above:
Regarding the use of number of “replicates” in Table 1: what we really mean here is number of “complete blocks”. So, in the “Experimental design” column of this table, 6×10×9×3 means we have 6 complete blocks, 10 incomplete alpha blocks within each complete block, 9 treatments (which can be clone or family) within each incomplete alpha block, and 3 trees in a row plot representing the treatment within an alpha block. So, since we have 3 trees in a non-randomized row plot within an alpha block these are not true “replicates” in a statistical sense. Rather, we have 6 truly independent and randomized experimental units or replicates (i.e. one per complete block). This is a standard design in quantitative genetics, but our description was admittedly a bit confusing. We therefore expanded the footnote 2 to Table 1 as follows:
“2) The experimental design is described as the number of: complete blocks × incomplete alpha blocks within complete blocks × treatments within alpha blocks × trees per treatment in a row plot. The maximum number of treatments (clones or families) in the experiment is determined by the number of alpha bocks × treatments within each alpha block. However, the actual number of tested clones or tested families may be smaller, with filler trees or additional treatment replications filling the gaps.” (Table 1, Page 27)
Yes, that’s a good idea to re-arrange the figures by trait and not by region. That fits better with the narrative as well. Thank you for this suggestion. We changed the titles and captions for Figures 2 and 3 accordingly:
“Fig. 2. Breeding values (BV) of parents on southern breeding region test sites for phenology. The size of the circle indicates the reliability of the estimate (reliability: 0.1 = small circles, 0.7 = large circles).” (Lines 534-536)
“Fig. 3. Height breeding values (BV) of parents tested northern breeding region test sites (left panel) and the southern breeding region sites (right panel). The size of the circle indicates the reliability of the estimate (reliability: 0.1 = small circles, 0.7 = large circles). The color spectrum of red to green indicating low to high BVs, with values ranging from -55 to 45 cm.” (Lines 538-541)
_____________________________________________________________________________
Reviewer #1 Comments
The study by Ding et al., (PONE-19-31818) evaluated ten progeny trails of P. tremultoides in western Alberta, Canada. In doing so, the authors collected survival, height, DHB, leaf abscission data from a subset of test sites planted into southern and northern breeding zones. Overall, the study used roughly 30000 tress to arrive at the conclusions – i.e., growing season is more important for survival and growth than avoiding spring & fall frost.
Line 29: Insert “Canada” after Alberta. This helps the readers.
Changed as suggested. (Line 30). 
Line 31: provide a relevant reference to support aspen short rotation forestry.
We added “Aspen and its hybrids have been utilized in short rotation forestry [6-8].” (Line 29-30)
Line 35-36: rewrite the sentence – “Selection and breeding…….”
Changed to 
“Successful tree selection and breeding programs depend on sufficiently high heritability for traits of commercial interest.” (Lines 35-36)
Line 42: change (9) to [9] and fix it throughout the text.
Corrected throughout the manuscript.
Line 105: replace “gallon” to standard reporting units.
Changed to “1-gallon pots (3.79 liters).” (Line 104-105)
Line 106: provide geographic coordinates of Drayton Valley (latitude, longitude, elevation).
Added: “in Drayton Valley, Alberta (53°13’N, 114°58’W, 869 m).” (Line 105-106)
Line 109: provide geographic coordinates of Fairview (latitude, longitude, elevation).
Added: “Fairview, Alberta (56°04′ N, 118°24′ W, 670 m).” (Line 108-109)
Line 142: replace day of year with “day-of-year” throughout the text.
Changed throughout the manuscript
Line 239: Under Results section….please expand Table 1 to cover survival, bud break and leaf abscission.
Sorry, we are not sure what that comment means. Table 1 already provides survival, bud break and leaf abscission summary statistics, and is referenced in the method. We don’t refer to those traits here because this result section has the subtitle “Genetic parameters of growth traits”.
We also reference this table now under the section “Genetic parameters for adaptive traits”, in case this is what the reviewer meant:
“The phenology traits budbreak and leaf senescence were measured at three trials (Table 1), had moderate broad- and narrow-sense heritabilities (Table 3).” (Line 260) 
Line 262: Expand the results from Table 3.
We added: “Narrow-sense heritabilities for budbreak ranged from 0.4 to 0.5, while heritabilities for leaf senescence were slightly lower with values between 0.3 and 0.4. Broad-sense heritabilities were only marginally higher than narrow-sense heratibilities, and could not be estimated for the seedling trial 2 (Table 3).” (Line 261-264) 
Line 265: please reconfirm the correlation values to match with Table 4.
Corrected: “Moderate to strong genetic correlations were found between growth and phenology (r=-0.3 to -0.2 between height and bud break, and 0.6 to 0.8 between height and leaf senescence)” (Lines 266-269)
Q1. Can authors also address the role of “latitude of origin” on plant height, leaf abscission and breeding value? This would permit to test if photoperiodic adaptation has a role or not.
Our lab did investigate this across larger geographic scales based on range-wide provenance trials (e.g. see Fig. 2 in http://tinyurl.com/t6ena6m). This is a different trial design addressing different questions of population differentiation. Such large-scale geographic patterns would not be detectable in the trials analyzed here, which focus on within-population genetic variation and genetic trait correlations. 
So, we are asking different questions here: The focus of this paper is on genetic correlations among traits to assess potential trade-offs between growth and adaptive traits, and testing the hypothesis that selection for growth may have a correlated response that leads to utilizing a longer growing season, and thereby increases the risk of exposure to late spring frosts or early fall frosts. (i.e., as stated at the end of the introduction)
Line 281: Be specific with fall phenology.
This section of the discussion has been rewritten
L283-291: I would like to authors to consider moving Fig 2 and Fig 3 description to “Results’ section rather bringing it up under “Discussion” section.
OK, that would work as well. We added a final section to the results and also re-arranged the figures as suggested by the editor:
“Trait variation across the landscape
The correlations between fall phenology and height and survival were generally stronger than those between spring phenology and height and survival, indicating that the adaptive value of fall phenology may be surprisingly high. Neither fall phenology nor budbreak showed strong spatial patterns of breeding values across both breeding regions (Fig. 2). However, correlations between height and leaf abscission are visible in these maps: comparing Figs. 2 and 3, high breeding values for height (green dots) are often associated with late leaf senescence (pink and purple), with a Pearson’s correlation coefficient of 0.65 (p<0.0001).” (Lines 274-282)
Line 301: Provide relevant reference/s to support your argument.
Also in response to reviewer #2, we added the following references:
McKown AD, Guy RD, Klapste J, Geraldes A, Friedmann M, Cronk QC, et al. Geographical and environmental gradients shape phenotypic trait variation and genetic structure in Populus trichocarpa. New Phytol. 2014;201(4):1263-76. 
Soolanayakanahally RY, Guy RD, Silim SN, Song M. Timing of photoperiodic competency causes phenological mismatch in balsam poplar (Populus balsamifera L.). Plant Cell Environ. 2013;36(1):116-27. 
Soolanayakanahally R, Guy R, Street N, Robinson K, Silim S, Albrectsen B, et al. Comparative physiology of allopatric Populus species: geographic clines in photosynthesis, height growth, and carbon isotope discrimination in common gardens. Frontiers in Plant Science. 2015;6(528). doi: 10.3389/fpls.2015.00528.
Olson MS, Levsen N, Soolanayakanahally RY, Guy RD, Schroeder WR, Keller SR, et al. The adaptive potential of Populus balsamifera L. to phenology requirements in a warmer global climate. Mol Ecol. 2013;22(5):1214-30. 
D’Orangeville L, Houle D, Duchesne L, Phillips RP, Bergeron Y, Kneeshaw D. Beneficial effects of climate warming on boreal tree growth may be transitory. Nature Communications. 2018;9(1):3213. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-05705-4.
And the revised section reads:
“In studies with Populus species [34-36] and other species [37], high heritabilities of fall phenology traits, and positive genetic correlations between productivity and fall phenology have previously been observed. Genotypes with a delayed senescence in fall may nevertheless be exposed to increased frost risks. However, climate warming trends that have materialized over the last several decades in Alberta may have decreased the risks of early fall frosts [38]. This might potentially explain our positive association of an extended growing season in fall with high survival. Similar to expectations of Olson et al. [39], genotypes that utilize a longer growing season may be favored by climate warming at northern latitudes. Inadvertent selection, where individuals with better height and diameter growth are chosen, and the genetically correlated leaf senescence is extended in fall, may therefore be an unplanned but effective climate change adaptation strategy. That said, other climatic factors are likely to change, and while the length of time suitable for growth is likely to continue to increase, water limitations may lead to an overall reduction of boreal forest productivity [40,41].” (Lines 294-306)
Line 312: Be specific about leaf abscission and leaf senescence. These are two independent phenological events.
We changed “leaf abscission” to “leaf senescence” throughout the manuscript. Leaf senescence is the most appropriate term for what we measured. We are following the scoring scheme for “autumn senescence” of aspen leaves by Fracheboud et al. (2009), which includes both leaf coloration and leaf abscission criteria.
Line 325: Fix typo – trumula to tremula.
Fixed. (Line 370)
Line 337-338: Please confirm the age for growth selection for different sites.
Changed to “For growth selection at multiple sites, results of >8 growing seasons are adequate for mediocre sites and the productive site.” (Lines 342-343)
Table 1: Provide units for Lat, Lon, Ele. Also, confirm if its leaf coloration or leaf abscission. Make the changes in Table heading as well.
Units for latitude and longitude are given next to the values, and we edited the table heading to specify “Elevation (m)”. We changed “leaf coloration” to “leaf senescence” as explained in reply to the reviewer’s comment on Line 312 above.
Table 2: Provide units for height and DBH.
No, these are heritabilities that do not have units.
Reviewer #2 Comments: 
This is a well-circumscribed and generally well-written manuscript based on an extensive dataset. The results are interesting but not unexpected. The data do support the main conclusion, that current aspen populations are adapted to colder climates and now lag behind climate warming; but this too must be expected given its lifespan. I do think it’s worthy of publication if the venue is appropriate.
A general problem I have with the discussion is encapsulated by the comment on line 299 that seems to equate growth cessation with leaf abscission, or at least suggests that they are both in the fall. Height growth cessation generally occurs in summer, several weeks before leaf color change even begins. In Populus it takes about 4 weeks for buds to fully form after height growth cessation, then leaf abscission occurs after that. To be sure, there is generally a correlation (at least at the population/provenance level) between date of height growth cessation and date of leaf senescence, but there is greater spread in the former than in the latter. In black cottonwood and balsam poplar from western Canada, height growth cessation generally occurs in mid-July, with buds fully formed by mid-August, and leaf senescence happening in September. Aspen may be different, but probably not hugely so.
OK, we clarified that the trait we measure is leaf senescence, and we replaced all instances of “growth cessation” when referring to our own data. We are following the scoring scheme for “autumn senescence” of aspen leaves by Fracheboud et al. (2009), which includes both leaf coloration and leaf abscission criteria. Our metric therefore represents shut-down of photosynthetic activity, and while that timing does not influence the growth of the current season of a plant that has already set but, it will influence overall growth.
The last paragraph seems anti-climactic and disconnected from the title (i.e., the “implications for breeding in a warmer world). Could there be a better ending? What is your take home message?
OK, we followed this paragraph up with a better ending that contains the main take home message, also noted in the abstract.
 “Genetic correlations among fall phenology and spring phenology traits with growth traits were nevertheless already high in this study, and could further increase as the influence of microsite variation of the planting site decreases with the age of the trees. Survival was also not compromised, but was positively associated with early budbreak or late leaf senescence, indicating that the growing season length was more important for survival and growth than avoiding early fall or late spring frosts. We found that a substantial portion of the tested genotypes are adapted to a shorter growing season than they have experienced during the testing period. Selecting genotypes for reforestation that utilize a longer growing season may be unproblematic under continued climate warming in northern latitudes, and may lead to overall increases in forest productivity as long as water availability under increased evapotranspiration does not become a dominant limiting factor. ” (Lines 348-358)
Other minor points/corrections:
L9 – insert “dates of” before “budbreak”
Changed as suggested. (Line 9-10)
L15 – Change to “These results suggest” or “This result suggests”
Fixed. (Line 15).
L22 – delete comma after bracket
Fixed. (Line 22).
L25-L26 – I suggest breaking this sentence up into two sentences (after “reproduction”).
We changed it to “Aspen can regenerate both via sexual and asexual reproduction [2, 3]. Root suckering often produces large single-species stands after fire disturbances in boreal regions [3,4].” (Lines 25-26)
L42, and elsewhere – Why do you cite the names of the first two authors on multi-authored papers; i.e., why “St. Clair, Mock (9)” rather than “St. Clair et al. (9)”? Is this correct PLOS One format?
In text citations have been corrected to “et al.” where applicable, or the sentence structure changed so that spelling out the authors name became unnecessary.
L43 – insert “and” after clones
Added. (Line 41)
L45 – change “Heterosis … were” to “Heterosis … was”
Fixed. (Line 45)
L65 – delete hyphens in “within-populations” and “within-families”
Changed with search and replace throughout the manuscript
L71 – “increase” should be “increases”
Fixed. (Line 70)
L90 – insert “the” before “two breeding regions”
Added. (Line 89)
L93 – I suggest deleting “The first two” to start the sentence with “Trials…”
Changed as suggested. (Line 92)
L98 – delete “The” and start sentence with “Trials…”
Changed as suggested. (Line 97)
L106 – most readers will not know that Drayton Valley is in Alberta. Insert AB
Added. (Line 105)
L116 – Change “number of half-sib, full-sib families and clones” to “numbers of half-sib and full-sib families, and clones”
Changed. (Line 116)
L151 – Language needs adjusting here.
Changed as “For the seedling trials (1 and 2) we employed the following mixed linear model.” (Lines 150-151)
L178 – insert “the” after “into”
Added. (Line 177-178)
L194 – language needs adjusting
Rewritten as “We estimated the additive genetic correlation in seedling trials, genetic correlation in clonal trials (rG), phenotypic correlation (rP) based on individual trees observations.” (Lines 193-194) 
L211 – change “following” to “follows”?
Changed to “… was calculated as follows:” (Line 210)
L283 – I don’t find this surprising. There are generally much larger differences between genotypes/populations for fall/summer phenological traits than for spring phenological traits (in terms of # of days), and the weather is often warmer. A greater effect on the length of the growing season (or photosynthesizing season) is expected, and therefore a greater impact on height and/or survival.
We found the value surprisingly high relative to spring phenology, because frost damage on new leaves should have even greater impact on subsequent growth. In any case, we deleted the word “surprisingly” (Line 278)
L294 – Relative to positive correlations between productivity and senescence and/or height growth cessation, for Populus trichocarpa see reference 18. For aspen per se (Populus tremula), you might also find interesting a paper by Soolanayakanally et al. (2015. Frontiers in Plant Science 6:528).
Also in response to reviewer #1, we added the following references:
McKown AD, Guy RD, Klapste J, Geraldes A, Friedmann M, Cronk QC, et al. Geographical and environmental gradients shape phenotypic trait variation and genetic structure in Populus trichocarpa. New Phytol. 2014;201(4):1263-76. 
Soolanayakanahally RY, Guy RD, Silim SN, Song M. Timing of photoperiodic competency causes phenological mismatch in balsam poplar (Populus balsamifera L.). Plant Cell Environ. 2013;36(1):116-27. 
Soolanayakanahally R, Guy R, Street N, Robinson K, Silim S, Albrectsen B, et al. Comparative physiology of allopatric Populus species: geographic clines in photosynthesis, height growth, and carbon isotope discrimination in common gardens. Frontiers in Plant Science. 2015;6(528). doi: 10.3389/fpls.2015.00528.
Olson MS, Levsen N, Soolanayakanahally RY, Guy RD, Schroeder WR, Keller SR, et al. The adaptive potential of Populus balsamifera L. to phenology requirements in a warmer global climate. Mol Ecol. 2013;22(5):1214-30. 
D’Orangeville L, Houle D, Duchesne L, Phillips RP, Bergeron Y, Kneeshaw D. Beneficial effects of climate warming on boreal tree growth may be transitory. Nature Communications. 2018;9(1):3213. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-05705-4.
And the revised section reads:
“In studies with Populus species [34-36] and other species [37], high heritabilities of fall phenology traits, and positive genetic correlations between productivity and fall phenology have previously been observed. Genotypes with a delayed senescence in fall may nevertheless be exposed to increased frost risks. However, climate warming trends that have materialized over the last several decades in Alberta may have decreased the risks of early fall frosts [38]. This might potentially explain our positive association of an extended growing season in fall with high survival. Similar to expectations of Olson et al. [39], genotypes that utilize a longer growing season may be favored by climate warming at northern latitudes. Inadvertent selection, where individuals with better height and diameter growth are chosen, and the genetically correlated leaf senescence is extended in fall, may therefore be an unplanned but effective climate change adaptation strategy. That said, other climatic factors are likely to change, and while the length of time suitable for growth is likely to continue to increase, water limitations may lead to an overall reduction of boreal forest productivity [40,41].” (Lines 294-306)
[Another thought: I suppose if you have date of budbreak and LAB, could you then take the difference between them as the length of the active photosynthetic period and also then check the correlation with growth? It might be a bit better.]
Yes, we tried that but the genetic correlation of height with length of the utilized growing season is actually slightly below LAB, although well within the margin of error. We don’t like this composite trait because it is harder to interpret than the individual traits. 
L325 – “trumula” should be “tremula”
Fixed. (Lines 330).
L336 – Was there actual evidence of browse then? More clarity around this point would be useful.
We changed to “and only Trial 7 could not be fenced and showed evidence of browsing, while Trial 8 was located at the more elevated site in the study area.” (Lines 341-342).
Tables – Throughout the manuscript you refer to the trials by number, not “trial code”. I suggest adding a column for trial number to Table 1 and then using those numbers instead of codes for Tables 2-4.
OK, changed as suggested.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: !Response to Reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0229225.r003Decision Letter 1
AlbrectsenBenedicte RiberAcademic Editor© 2020 Benedicte Riber Albrectsen2020Benedicte Riber AlbrectsenThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
3 Feb 2020

Genetic parameters of growth and adaptive traits in aspen (Populus tremuloides): implications for tree breeding in a warming world
PONE-D-19-31818R1
Dear Dr. DING,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it complies with all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you will receive an e-mail containing information on the amendments required prior to publication. When all required modifications have been addressed, you will receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will proceed to our production department and be scheduled for publication.
Shortly after the formal acceptance letter is sent, an invoice for payment will follow. To ensure an efficient production and billing process, please log into Editorial Manager at https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the "Update My Information" link at the top of the page, and update your user information. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to enable them to help maximize its impact. If they will be preparing press materials for this manuscript, you must inform our press team as soon as possible and no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
With kind regards,
Benedicte Riber Albrectsen
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0229225.r004Acceptance letter
AlbrectsenBenedicte RiberAcademic Editor© 2020 Benedicte Riber Albrectsen2020Benedicte Riber AlbrectsenThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
13 Feb 2020

PONE-D-19-31818R1 
Genetic parameters of growth and adaptive traits in aspen (<I>Populus tremuloides</I>): implications for tree breeding in a warming world 
Dear Dr. Ding:
I am pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper at this point, to enable them to help maximize its impact. If they will be preparing press materials for this manuscript, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
For any other questions or concerns, please email plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE.
With kind regards,
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Benedicte Riber Albrectsen 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE