PLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLoS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC7842882PMC7842882.1784288278428823350796210.1371/journal.pone.0245381PONE-D-20-274661Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesEpidemiologyMedical Risk FactorsMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesRespiratory InfectionsMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsRespiratory DisordersRespiratory InfectionsMedicine and Health SciencesPulmonologyRespiratory DisordersRespiratory InfectionsPhysical SciencesMaterials ScienceMaterialsMixturesAerosolsBiology and life sciencesOrganismsVirusesRNA virusesCoronavirusesSARS coronavirusSARS CoV 2Biology and life sciencesMicrobiologyMedical microbiologyMicrobial pathogensViral pathogensCoronavirusesSARS coronavirusSARS CoV 2Medicine and health sciencesPathology and laboratory medicinePathogensMicrobial pathogensViral pathogensCoronavirusesSARS coronavirusSARS CoV 2Biology and life sciencesOrganismsVirusesViral pathogensCoronavirusesSARS coronavirusSARS CoV 2Medicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesInfectious Disease ControlSocial DistancingMedicine and Health SciencesEpidemiologyPandemicsMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesViral DiseasesCovid 19Biology and Life SciencesPhysiologyPhysiological ProcessesEatingModeling the relative risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection to inform risk-cost-benefit analyses of activities during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic
Estimating relative risks during the COVID-19 pandemichttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-0036-7606McCarthyJohn E.ConceptualizationFormal analysisMethodologyWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1622-6736DewittBarry D.ConceptualizationFormal analysisVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing DumasBob A.ConceptualizationMethodology McCarthyMyles T.ConceptualizationFormal analysisValidationWriting – original draft 
1
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Washington University in St. Louis, Saint Louis, Missouri, United States of America

2
Department of Engineering & Public Policy, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, United States of America

3
Omnium LLC, Saint Joseph, MO, United States of America

4
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL, United States of America
LinkovIgorEditor files.OutbreaksCOVID-19

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the manuscript and its files.

## 1 Introduction
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), has caused a pandemic. As of November 6, 2020, the Johns Hopkins University COVID-19 dashboard reports approximately 49 million cases and 1.2 million deaths due to the disease [ , ]. Social distancing and shutting businesses have reduced the number of cases, but there is mounting pressure to reopen businesses. The purpose of this paper is to provide a model to estimate the relative infection risks of different activities. That information can allow decision-makers in industry and government to rank activities according to their relative risk of infection. In combination with an understanding of the benefits and costs of those activities, decision-makers can then make informed choices about whether, and if so, how to allow participation in previously forbidden activities.
Despite much ongoing research, there are many parameters of coronavirus disease that remain uncertain, such as the effective reproduction number of the virus given various characteristics of a population, or the precise effectiveness of various non-pharmaceutical interventions, or the significance of aerosol transmission [ – ]. Whereas much effort has been focused on determining these and other characteristics, many of which are needed to produce estimates of absolute risk of infection, such estimates are still uncertain. Nonetheless, policy decisions need to be made.
Risk-cost-benefit analysis provides one framework with which to analyze policy alternatives in order to inform policy decisions. In general terms, it aims to characterize the undesirable outcomes and the probabilities of those outcomes (i.e., the risks) for each decision alternative, the possibly uncertain costs of those alternatives, and their possibly uncertain benefits [ ]. In its approach informed by behavioral decision research [ – ], the process involves not just normative analysis but also analysis to understand how the public perceives of the alternatives (i.e., descriptive analysis), and how to bridge the normative and descriptive perspective, when they differ (i.e., prescriptive analysis). Ultimately, the decision-maker also needs to perform a decision analysis with all of the information they have collected, which involves deciding on some decision rule to choose among the alternatives as characterized by their respective risks, costs, benefits, and the associated uncertainties.
In this study, we propose a model to estimate the relative risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection that we believe is useful for characterizing that risk for a large set of activities in both the private sector (e.g., attending a concert) and public sector (e.g., accessing government services in-person). That characterization also illuminates modifiable factors that can lower the risk of infection of a given activity. In combination with other information about the benefits and costs, the model provides a useful tool for anyone undertaking risk-cost-benefit analyses during the pandemic.
More specifically, we propose that when planning for activities that last no more than one day, we can use a model of infection probability that is linear in many potentially controllable variables, such as duration of the activity, density of participants, and infectiousness rate among the attendees. The advantages of that linearity are that it greatly simplifies analyses of different scenarios (for example, the effects of reducing density, or reducing the time spent in specific activities), and also allows comparison of relative risks across different events, even when the base parameters needed to estimate absolute risk are unknown.
This paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, we describe the assumptions of the model, and describe the model mathematically. In Section 3 we present several example calculations, analyzing the risks of idealized versions of airplane travel, attending a sporting event, sitting in a classroom, going to a restaurant, and attending a religious service. In Section 4 discuss how the model is useful, provide guidance for how it might be used, and address its limitations. Appendices provide mathematical details that we exclude from the main text, and an Excel program in the online Supplemental Information provides more detailed calculations for the paper’s examples.

## 2 The model
Here, we describe our model. We believe it is important to have a robust and well-formed, mechanistic, model of infection transmission, even if it contains many unknown parameters. As we will argue, this will allow us to draw inferences on relative risks even if we cannot quantify absolute risks. The availability of a model of infection transmission that is mechanistic will allow for comparative estimates of the consequences of specific policy choices. Confidence that a policy significantly reduces the risk of infection may be useful even in the absence of a reliable estimate of absolute risk.
We begin with some preliminary definitions, then describe the model’s assumptions, before describing the model proper.

## 2.0.1 Preliminary definitions
All the terms we define in this paper are included in Appendix 6. For now, we need the following terms:
By an activity we mean a well-defined set of interactions with clear bounds taking place over a period of time less than a day, for example a trip to a grocery store, or taking an airplane flight, or attending a sporting event as a spectator.
By the participant we mean a person attending the activity, whose probability of becoming infected we wish to model.
A neighbor at an activity is a person not in the participant’s immediate household who, for some part of the activity, is close enough to pose a risk of air-borne infection. We shall say the neighbor is in the participant’s vicinity if they are close enough to be a risk of infection. The precise nature of the vicinity is currently unknown; the CDC asserts that most infections are caused by individuals within 6 feet of each other [ ], so a 6 foot radius may be an approximation for vicinity.

## 2.0.2 Assumptions
Like any model, there are assumptions about the state of the world that are necessary for the model to apply. We state them here with some explanation, and discuss them in more detail in Section 4:
A1 Our first assumption is that the probability of infection is additive over sub-activities. This means that if one segments the activity into sub-activities, the probability of getting infected over the whole activity approximately equals the sum of the probabilities over each segment.
Mathematically, this says that if we break an activity A up into N distinct sub-activities, S1, …, SN say, then the probability p of becoming infected during activity A satisfies
 p≈x1+…+xN,(1)
where xj is the probability of becoming infected during Sj.
We cannot actually expect exact equality in ( ). Nonetheless—and this is an essential point—we can reasonably expect that the left-hand side and right-hand side of ( ) agree with each other to within 10% or less. We give a mathematical proof of this assertion in Appendix 7.
A2 For each sub-activity Sj the probability xj of infection is the sum over the forms of transmission of independent probabilities, each of which has a multiplicative form.
A3 If a neighbor is not infectious, there is 0 risk of infection from them.
A4 If a neighbor is infectious, the probability that they will infect the participant depends on the distance away, whether they are facing towards or away from the participant, mask usage, viral load in the neighbor, sneeze etiquette, air circulation, and other factors.
A5 The probability of infection from a neighbor is linear in the amount of time spent in their vicinity. See Appendix 7 for a justification of this assumption.
A6 The probability of infection in each segment is independent of the other segments.
Formally, the model does not need the following assumption, but it will be important when applying the model:
A7 There is no increased chance of infection from members of the participant’s immediate household engaging in the same activity, and we will ignore transmission from one’s immediate household members. (For example, sitting beside a household member at an activity will be treated as zero-risk).

## 2.1 Additivity over time
Assumption A1 is crucial to our study. Suppose we know an upper bound ν on the chance of an individual becoming infected by SARS-CoV-2 over the course of a day’s activities. For some given activity A, such as attending a sporting event or taking an airplane flight, we break the activity up into temporally disjoint sub-activities, S1, …, SN. (For example: entering the stadium, walking to one’s seat, sitting and watching the event, going to a restroom, leaving the stadium). Suppose the probability of becoming infected in each subactivity Sj is xj, and we wish to estimate p, the probability of becoming infected at some time during A. In Appendix 7 we prove that is a good approximation to p using assumption A6 to do so, and the smaller ν is, the better the approximation. In particular, we show:
Theorem.
The following inequalities hold:
 0.95s≤p≤sifν≤0.100.90s≤p≤sifν≤0.200.75s≤p≤sifν≤0.46.
In Appendix 7.2, we derive some estimates for ν based on previous studies. For example, using numbers from an analysis of the Diamond Princess cruise ship [ ], we calculate that ν is less-than-or-equal to 0.18, while combining US data from [ ] with epidemiological modeling from [ ] and [ ] leads to an estimate that ν is less-than-or-equal to 0.37.
A simple example is useful to get some intuition about assumption A1 and the theorem. Suppose we were interested in the probability of rolling at least a single six when we roll three dice. That probability p is simple to calculate: it is , because the rolls are independent and the probability of rolling anything other than a six for a single dice is . However, notice that, for this example, for all j ∈ {1, 2, 3}, and thus . If we were not able to calculate p exactly, s is an approximation of p that is within 0.1 of the true probability. However, notice that, as the number of dice increases, s will quickly approach—and then equal, and then exceed—unity, despite a roll of six never being guaranteed.
A1 is crucial because, if we assume that
 p≈x1+…xn,
then it follows that:
A given absolute reduction of risk in any segment Sj has approximately the same overall impact on p.
One can compare the relative risks from different activities, such as going grocery shopping, flying, or attending a sporting event, by analyzing sub-activities.

## 2.2 The full model
Putting together all of our assumptions, we wish to model the probability that a participant at an activity contracts SARS-CoV-2. Actual infection is understood to happen in one of three ways [ ]:
Airborne transmission from an infectious neighbor at the activity, either by droplets or aerosols.
Touching a contaminated surface, and then touching the participant’s face before thoroughly washing the hands.
Direct physical contact with an infectious person.
Each activity A is broken down into a sequence of segments Sj, j ∈ {1, …, N}, disjoint sub-activities each of which can be thought of as a single uniform event, either as a single event (e.g. going to the restroom) or an event with constant parameters (e.g. sitting for some period of time with one neighbor 3 feet away, 2 neighbors 6 feet away, and no other neighbors within 10 feet).
Following A3, A4, and A5, for each segment Sj, the probability that the participant becomes infected by air-borne transmission is the sum over every neighbor of [the probability the neighbor is infected] times [the probability the neighbor will cause the participant to be infected per unit time] times [the time spent in their vicinity]:
 xjA=∑nisaneighborτj,nAPr[nisinfected][timeofSj].
Here is the probability per unit time that given the configuration (distance away, orientation, mask-wearing or not, etc.) that if neighbor n is infected, they will infect the participant by air-borne transmission.
Similarly, the probability that the participant becomes infected by surface-born transmission from a surface they touch is [probability the surface is contaminated] times [probability they touch their face before washing their hands] times [probability that the touching leads to an infection]:
 xjS=∑SurfacesτjSPr[surfaceiscontaminated],
where is the probability that the participant will convey the infection from the surface to themselves.
Finally, the probability that the participant becomes infected by direct contact with an infected neighbor is [probability neighbor is infected] times [probability of touching] times [probability of transmission]:
 xjD=∑nisaneighborτj,nDPr[nisinfected]Pr[touchn],
where is the probability that if n is infected and the participant touches n, then infection will be transmitted.
Combining the above, we have (using A1, A2, and A6):
 xj=xjA+xjS+xjD,
and
 p=∑j=1Nxj.
Our contention is that this model is strategically valuable even without knowledge of the parameters
 . Even with no or highly uncertain knowledge of their values, the model allows one to estimate which activities (and which sub-activities) pose the most risk of infection. As we argue in Section 4, combined with knowledge of costs and benefits, that would allow for policymaking to decide on a set of activities to allow, and where adjustments can be made to lower the risk of those activities (e.g., choosing among competing seating configurations for an event venue).
In the next section, we outline how the model could be applied to idealized versions of airplane travel, attending a sporting event, sitting in a classroom, going to a restaurant, and attending a religious service. These examples are meant to give an idea of the value of knowing relative risks, but they do not contain the kind of fine-grained detail known by subject-matter experts that would be required for anything more than a first-order analysis.

## 3 Example calculations
We begin with an outline of how one could apply the model to commercial air travel. We then sketch the analysis for attending a sporting event, sitting in a classroom, going to a restaurant, and attending a religious service. An Excel program that allows one to see all the calculations and change the value of the inputs is available in the online Supplemental Information for all but the sporting event example (see Data Sharing Agreement).

## 3.1 Example: Air travel
Let us take travel on an airplane as an activity, as defined in Appendix 6. To use the model, we need to enumerate sub-activities Sj that together make up the air travel activity, A. The sub-activities Sj are:
boarding the plane
moving to and entering one’s seat
sitting on the plane for the duration of the flight
leaving one’s seat, and deboarding the plane.
The relevant parameters for this question, with sample values which can be changed, are:
Position of seats in the plane. We employ the seating arrangement used by United Airlines for the Boeing 737, which is available on United’s website [ ]. shows the seating plan, with 50% occupancy.
Seating arrangement.This can differ between scenarios, but for this example we will assume the plane is full.
Time spent boarding, and traveling to one’s seat while on the plane. We will assume the passenger
stands in line for 10 minutes boarding, and takes 20 seconds to sit down at their seat once they reach the correct row on the plane. These values are estimates, and will vary according to airline boarding protocols.
Order of seating. We shall assume that the plane fills back to front, so that while walking to one’s seat, one does not pass already seated passengers.
The distance apart people stand while boarding. This can vary based on preventative measures taken by airlines; for a first approximation, we will use 1.5 foot spacing.
Duration of the flight. This example will take flight duration as 180 minutes.
Deboarding, which will be modeled the same way as boarding for this example.
How risk decays with distance. There is much discrepancy in the literature as to this decay
[ , ]. Let us assume risk is inversely proportional to the square of distance from the source.
 We shall also assume for this example that there is no direct physical contact between participants and that all surfaces are disinfected.
For each sub-activity, a participant is exposed to some amount of risk from their neighbors. As we do not know absolute risks, we will quantify the risks of the various sub-activities using the hazard × exposure model described in the previous section. Given the analysis is one of relative risk, we do not have an absolute unit to use in the quantification of risk; thus, as a basic risk unit, we will use the risk of spending one minute at a distance of one foot from a stranger. Appendix 9 and the online Supplemental Information contains more detail on the calculations presented below.

## 3.1.1 Boarding and deboarding
While boarding and deboarding, some number of strangers in the vicinity contribute to the risk a participant incurs. We assume that the boarding process arranges passengers linearly, and that the risk posed by strangers further than 6 feet away is negligible. The risk for boarding is obtained by summing the risk contribution of two strangers each 1.5 feet away, two strangers each 3 feet away, two strangers each 4.5 feet away, and two each 6 feet away for a duration of 10 minutes. Note that if parameter #5 above—separation distance—were to change, the number of strangers for whom a risk contribution is calculated would also change.
Quantitatively, the risk is
 10×(2(1.5×1)2+2(1.5×2)2+2(1.5×3)2+2(1.5×4)2)≈12.7.

## 3.1.2 Entering and exiting seats
Entering and exiting seats and sitting on the plane are calculated similarly to each other, but rather differently from boarding and deboarding. While entering or exiting seats, on average, we calculate the risk contribution of each surrounding seat, sum them, and multiply by the duration taken to be 0.33 minutes. This works out to 1.1 for entering and for exiting. The cumulative risk for boarding, sitting, leaving the seat, and deboarding is thus 2 × (1.1 + 12.7)≈ 27.6.

## 3.1.3 Risk while seated
The risk calculation for sitting on the plane must account for the fact that some seats are spaced less densely on the plane than other seats. The methodology here is to calculate the average risk a participant incurs from their neighbors while seated. This value will not be the risk any individual passenger actually incurs, but is more accurate for the plane as a whole. The average risk value per minute is 1.84, so the average risk from sitting on plane for a three hour flight is 331.0. Thus, the average risk a participant incurs for this activity is 331.0 + 27.6 ≈ 359.

## 3.1.4 Changing parameters
Given the varying practices of the major airlines [ ], the percentage of occupied seats is one parameter for which we are already seeing wide variation The results for similar scenarios are:
Case 1 Airplane full, 1.5ft distancing while boarding
Risk: 359
Case 2 Middle seats empty, 3ft distancing while boarding
Risk: 146
Case 3 Airplane half full, 6ft distancing while boarding
Risk: 100
Although the numbers 359, 146 and 100 are not in absolute units, they do show the relative effect of different possible mitigation strategies. For example, removing roughly one-third of the passengers by keeping the middle seats empty and increasing social distancing while boarding (Case 2) more than halves the risk compared to the full airplane. Other scenarios could be modeled similarly.
In each of the above cases, we used the inverse square decay function to model the change in risk as distance to others changes. While the other parameters used in the model are measurable, the rate of decay of risk with distance has not been experimentally verified, and is quite uncertain. To see how sensitive to the decay function our conclusions are, we will try two very different decay functions of risk with distance. The first has a very slow exponential decay [ ], and was based on averaging over many different studies; it concluded that each additional meter of distance decreased risk by a factor of 2.02. The second has a very rapid decay, based on simulations of droplet dispersion [ ]. We shall refer to these as the Chu model and the Chen model, respectively. To normalize, we multiply the output of each function by a constant such that the risk for a full flight of three hours is the same for each risk decay model. The risk values of each case with each other decay model are listed below in .
 The relative risk at 2 meters compared to 1 meter is 25% in the inverse square model, 49.5% in the Chu model, and 4.2% in the Chen model.
Despite the great differences between the three model’s decay rates, there are many similarities in the relative risks for the three scenarios. In all cases, the vast majority of risk is incurred while sitting, and Case 3 is about 2/3 the risk of Case 2 no matter the decay assumption. However, in the Chen model, the risk for Case 2 relative to Case 1 is much more reduced than it is under either of the other two decay assumptions. summarizes how the risk score changes as a function of flight time, the cases considered above, and the decay model assumption. The values at t = 0 show the contributions of the boarding/deboarding risk to each scenario, and the relatively larger risk in the Chen and Inverse Square models compared to the Chu model. The risk scores are normalized so that the risk at the three-hour mark is the same across decay models, revealing that, under the Chu model, removing passengers from the flight (Cases 2 and 3) has less of an effect than under the other two models.
 The very large discrepancy in the relative risk in Case 1 to Case 2 is explained by the extreme sensitivity of the Chen model at close ranges. According to this model, moving from 0.2 meters to 0.3 meters reduces risk by a factor of 88. If a sensitive model such as the one presented by Chen et al. is most accurate, it will be important to be aware of the interval or intervals where risk drops rapidly.
Using the idealized example above of the airplane analysis, one can see the relative benefits of different mitigation strategies. Given the contribution of the time spent seated to the total risk score and what is currently known about mask-wearing, making masks mandatory could be a (cost-)effective strategy [ , ]. Our analysis shows that keeping the middle seat vacant unless there is a party of three travelling together at least halves the risk, under a very wide range of decay assumptions. Managing boarding is likely less costly than leaving seats empty, but our analysis finds that the total impact will be lower that adjustments to the seating plan because it takes up a small part of the total flight time. Ongoing research will likely lead to increased knowledge about mitigation strategies specific to air travel that could be effective [ ].
In addition to considering variation in parameters, there are other structural elements of the scenario that could affect the analysis. For example, it is possible that passenger compliance could vary. The above analyses have assumed that passengers follow a sequence of steps, such as boarding the plane a certain way, wearing a mask for nearly the entire flight, etc. [ ]. The extent to which people comply with specific norms about protective actions varies by group and by hazard [ ]. Social norms, social influence, and social comparisons all play a role in determining what people will do [ – ]. Planning for aberrant responses to airline (or other) policies about protective actions should be part of any private or public entity’s analyses of the possible outcomes of activities during the pandemic. Incorporating uncooperative members of the public into an analysis could demonstrate their possible negative effects, bolstering arguments for policymaking to mitigate those effects (e.g., by empowering staff with the regulatory powers to deny services to such persons when they do not have such powers already).

## 3.2 Example: Attending a sporting event at a stadium
We base our analysis on the TD Garden Stadium in Boston, MA, in the United States.
Here, the relevant sub-activities are
entering the stadium
moving to and entering one’s seat
sitting in one’s seat
getting food and or drink at a concession stand
eating in one’s seat
going to the bathroom
leaving the stadium
The relevant parameters for this question are:
Mask protocol. We assume masks are required except when eating.
Seating arrangement. For different scenarios, one can map the stadium, with certain seats kept empty, and others sold in small groups to trusted cohorts. By a “trusted cohort”, we mean somebody like a household member with whom one spends so much time in close contact that their presence at the event does not constitute an added risk. This is significant, because having multiple members of the same cohort sit together, while other cohorts sitting at a distance, means that there will be little droplet risk (though long-range aerosol transmission between different cohorts must still be considerd. For each person in the stadium, the distance from their seat to all other seats occupied by strangers (up to some cut-off distance, say 6 feet) is known.
Time spent entering. This depends on the number of entrance turnstiles, what the protocol is, and whether arrival times are deliberately staggered. We will assume 0.25 minutes.
Time spent walking to one’s seat. This depends on the lay-out of the stadium, walking speed, and density of people. Assuming staggered entrances, we estimate this at 8.3 minutes.
Social distancing requirement in corridors. This can be set by policy; we assume 3 feet.
Duration of game. Assume 190 minutes.
Concessions. This has two parts: ordering and eating. The latter is much more significant, as without a mask, and with the potential for one’s food to be contaminated, the risk of both infecting and being infected during eating is much higher. We will assume that a person eats for 15 minutes, that they are 4 times more likely to transmit infection without their mask, and that while eating they are 3.5 times as likely to be infected. (The factors of 4 and 3.5 are just guesses; as research is conducted, more accurate figures can be substituted).
How risk decays with distance. Let us assume risk is inversely proportional to the square of distance from the source.
Aerosol risk. One of the thorniest questions in devising a relative risk model is how to account for both aerosol and droplet risk. The relative risk of long-range aerosol transmission compared to short-range transmission from immediate neighbors is not known, though considered significant [ ]. There are calculators that estimate the aerosol risk, such as the CU Boulder COVID-19 Aerosol transmitter tool [ ]. However, this tool explicitly excludes droplet transmission, and assums that 6 foot social distancing is always maintained. Despite increasing awareness of the significance of aerosol transmission, there are no published studies that numerically compare aerosol risk to droplet risk. So to make a model that incorporates both, we have to make some assumption about their relative risks. This assumption can of course be changed as more information emerges.
In the paper [ ], it is argued that the aerosol risk is approximately c/V, where V is the the ventilation, measured in cubic foot per minute per person, and c is an empirical constant. We will set c = 1, meaning the droplet risk at 1 foot is the same as the aerosol risk if the ventilation is 1 cubic foot per person per minute.
Air volume of the stadium. If the stadium starts out empty and clean, the aerosol risk will be reduced somewhat.
Bathroom design and constraints. The assumptions we make, based on TD Garden stadium, are that at most 4 people will be in the bathroom at any one time, with an average visit of 4 minutes. The ventilation in the bathrooms is 1075 cfm, which is 127 liters/person/second. This very high ventilation rate leads to a very low aerosol risk. Every other sink and urinal will be blocked off, leaving a gap of 6 feet between users. There will be some passing time as people enter and exit; we estimate an upper bound of 1 minute at one foot, which is the large majority of the risk estimate of going to the bathroom.
Presence or absence of screening of attendees, that would catch some percentage of infectious people. For this model, we will assume it is not available.
Using these parameters (included in our supplemental material), we arrive at the following scores:
Full stadium: 1044 risk units, 696 of which come from the seated portion.
Half-full stadium: 335 risk units, 219 of which come from the seated portion.
21%-full stadium: 125 risk units, 77 of which come from the seated portion.
21%-full stadium, no eating or drinking: 83 risk units.
Based on these calculations, concessions pose a larger risk the fuller the stadium. However, many of the relevant parameters are uncertain or unknown, but with better estimates the above set of steps could be used to provide more realistic estimates.

## 3.3 Example: Classroom
Consider a classroom, with one possible seating arrangement as in , where 1 represents an occupied seat, and 0 an empty seat. One of us (JEM) went to a classroom at the Washington University in St. Louis and measured its layout: seats are 3.9 feet apart horizontally, and 4.3 feet apart vertically. For that classroom, its volume is approximately 5834 cubic feet, and the ventilation is 8 liters per person per second when full to capacity of 43, which is 729 cubic feet per minute.
 Let us assume that a class is 60 minutes long, and that the time taken to reach seats is negligible. Moreover, assume that everybody is required to wear a mask at all times. As before, we shall set c = 1, and assume an inverse square decay of droplet risk with distance, and that the droplet risk becomes to 0 at 6 feet.
Using these parameters, there are two different risk scores. One is the steady state score, whereby one assumes that the rate of exhalation equals the amount of exhaled breath removed by the ventilation system. The other takes into account that if the classroom starts out clean and empty, it takes a while for the air in the classroom to reach this equilibrium state. If T is the total duration (here, 60 minutes) and f is the fraction of air in the room removed per minute (here, 0.125), this correction factor reduces the effective time in the room for aerosol exposure (but not droplet exposure) to
 T+1f(e-f*T-1)
which in this case is 52 minutes. shows the two risk scores given different occupancy levels and configurations, showing a surprisingly slow decay of risk with number of people—it is not much better than linear. The Excel program in the online Supplemental Information contains the calculations and allows the interested reader to adjust the parameters and see the change in risk scores.
 

## 3.4 Further examples
Using similar procedures, one can analyze other events. More detail is provided in the Excel program provided in the online Supplemental Information.

## 3.4.1 Restaurants
Assuming that the key variables here are seating arrangement, which tables are occupied, ventilation rate, time spent at table, how long the wait is to get in, and how crowded the waiting area is. The ratio of aerosol to droplet risk must still be estimated. The principal difference between indoor and outdoor seating is that, under current understanding, there is very little aerosol risk when people are separated outdoors. When indoors, the aerosol risk depends on the ventilation (and whether the air is being replaced by fresh air, or cleaned by a virus removng filter, or just being recirculated).
For one sample restaurant we modeled, we calculated a risk score for a 60 minute meal, assuming everybody at each table is in the same trusted cohort (so they could only be infected from other tables) to be 87 if the restaurant is full, 41 if it is half-full. Of this, the aerosol risk was estimated at 13 and 6, respectively.

## 3.4.2 Religious service attendance
This situation can be modeled similarly to a classroom. The spacing of seats in the church must be determined on a case-by-case basis. Our analysis yielded a risk score of 140 risk units when full, 69 when half-full, for a one hour service. These scores decrease if people go in trusted cohorts (more likely at a religious service than in classrooms).

## 3.5 Summary
In this section, we have endeavoured to outline how one might use the approach described in Section 2.2 to frame an analysis of the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection during a variety of activities. Of course, decision-makers and analysts in any of the above public or private decisions would need to incorporate more sensitivity analyses and more details specific to those contexts, details that would be known to subject-matter experts. We believe that, when the relevant assumptions hold, the approach we have outlined can be useful in identifying the most dangerous sub-activities of an activity, which could be used to inform policy decisions including strategies to mitigate the risk posed by those sub-activities. In the next section, we discuss the advantages of the approach in more detail, as well as its limitations and the future work that would be required for a responsible application of the approach by policymakers.

## 4 Discussion
In this paper, we have described a model for estimating the relative risk of infection by SARS-CoV-2 during an activity that lasts less than a day. Even without being able to estimate absolute risks, it allows decision-makers to rank activities according to how much risk of infection they pose to the public; in combination with knowledge about those activities’ costs and benefits, decision-makers can make more informed choices about whether, and how, to allow people to participate in currently forbidden activities [ ]. Crucially, as illustrated in the example calculations, an analysis using this model also reveals which segments of the activity pose the greatest risk. When these are modifiable, stakeholders can act to lower the risk.
In contexts where the model applies, it has significant policy value, despite only being able to calculate relative risks:
The model is linear in time. Therefore, engaging in an activity for twice as long doubles the chance that a participant becomes infected. Boarding airplanes, for example, can be done in much more efficient ways than is currently the norm [ ]. Optimizing the boarding process so that passengers spend less time close to neighbors will reduce their infection risks.
The model is linear in the proportion of attendees at an activity who are infectious. This number in turn is the product of two numbers: the proportion of the population who are infectious (which will vary over time) and the probability that an infectious person will not self-isolate. The latter number can be reduced by public health education, by testing and contact tracing, and by health checks.
The model is linear in the probability that a given neighbor will cause an infection. In [ ] the authors find that home-made masks block 95% of air-borne viruses, medical masks block 97%, and N95 masks block 99.98%. That study was a mechanical simulation using nebulizers and did not distinguish in application between a potentially infectious person wearing a mask to reduce their probability of transmission, and an uninfected person wearing a mask to reduce their probability of infection. In [ ], the authors perform a meta-analysis, and find that wearing masks reduced risk, with high uncertainty in the amount, but their point estimate was a reduction to 23% of the non-mask wearing risk when using non-respirator masks (and a reduction to 4% using respirators). In [ ], the effectiveness of masks in practice is considered.
The model is linear in density of neighbors. Reducing the number of neighbors at a given distance by 50% reduces by 50% the chance of air-borne infection. Leaving seats open, and clustering only members of the same household, will reduce the risk of air-borne transmission.
For surface-borne infections, the model is linear in the probability that the surface is contaminated. Doubling the cleaning frequency will approximately halve the probability that the surface is contaminated. Indeed, if there is some small constant rate ε at which the surface becomes contaminated, the probability it is infected at time t after cleaning is εt. So if it is cleaned every T minutes, and someone touches it at a random time between 0 and T, the probability they are touching an infected surface is
 1T∫0Tεtdt=εT2.(2)
Halving T halves the right-hand side of ( ).
These linearities allow for comparisons among different scenarios, and comparisons across different activities.
Of course, deciding whether and how to relax restrictions on activities requires understanding the public’s perceptions of the risks, costs, and benefits of doing so. Formally equivalent risks could be perceived differently, in ways that might seem irrelevant to a risk analyst but would impact the decisions of potential participants in an activity [ ]. The mental models approach to risk communication [ ] would provide one way in which to systematically study those differences, by determining how the public views the risks of COVID-19 differently than the experts performing the risk analysis—are the parameters and their relationships, the possible outcomes, and the probabilities of those outcomes viewed similarly? Approaches inspired by the psychometric tradition could place COVID-related risks on the “dread-unknown” dimensions of risk that have been found to effectively characterize a wide-range of risks faced by the public [ , ]. Doing so could help decision-makers understand how COVID-related risks compare to other risks, and design their reopening strategies informed by similarities and differences in perceptions of those less-novel risks, including what is known about the public’s actions about them (e.g., commercial air travel and the risk of terrorism). Studies that characterize the public’s risk perceptions will be essential to ensuring that the analysts’ assumptions about the public’s understanding of the activity are empirically grounded, and account for any differences (e.g., by informing the design of risk communications meant for public consumption) [ ].
Furthermore, so long as there is some nontrivial amount of virus in the community, activities involving large numbers of people will almost certainly lead to some eventual transmission. Decision-makers need to evaluate the testing and contact-tracing infrastructure of the jurisdictions where the activities are located to determine whether that transmission can be contained, given that any transmission due to the activity is a burden not only to the participants, but also to the entire community. Decision-makers need to invest in empirically-tested risk communication so that participants understand the risks accurately and the public at large understands why that risk is judged to be acceptable by policymakers. There are already detailed frameworks for engaging the public about scientific and technical risks and undertaking an analytical-deliberative process to develop a plan that is widely endorsed among stakeholders [ ]. There is no reason these frameworks cannot be adapted for the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic [ ].
The model should be conceived as a tool in a bottom-up-analysis—there is no one-size-fits-all approach to the problem. Each activity has specific characteristics only known to those involved with the activity; even enumerating them can require specialist knowledge. We have attempted to outline how the model might work in a variety of scenarios, but none of those examples has the level of detail required to be used “off-the-shelf,” especially given that some of the examples used placeholders for parameter estimates that would be required for an actual implementation. The June 2020 report describing how the entertainment industry can safely return to work [ ], jointly authored by the major unions of that industry, is an example of the synthesis of modeling, industry knowledge, and risk communication that is possible (and required) when an interdisciplinary team that includes experts about the specific industry creates COVID-related policies for that industry.

## 4.1 Limitations
Like any model, the model described here depends on its assumptions. In our view, the most problematic assumptions are A2 and A6, which require independence. That could fail, if, for example, infection requires a certain minimum threshold of exposure. Similarly, A7, the assumption that those in one’s household pose no threat, could be problematic. The presence of family members could increase the risk of exposure after the activity when one returns home, given, e.g., their separate trips to the washroom or through the turnstile during the activity. The importance of these extra exposures is an empirical question, and a function of the relative risk of those sub-activities done individually, and protective actions taken after the event (e.g., social distancing, hand-hygiene, proactive testing etc.).
As it stands, our model cannot account for household transmission, given that “living in a household” violates our definition of an “activity” because living in a household lasts much longer than a day, by its nature. Furthermore, decomposing (a day in) a household into its constituent subactivities would be difficult given the variation and number of subactivities. In contrast, when attending a sporting event, there are only so many things one can do in the stadium, and, in fact, subactivities can be constrained by those running the activity in order to lower the risk of infection. That kind of control over subactivities is unlikely to be generalizable to households.
Household transmission has been found to be an important mode of transmission [ ], but there are strategies to mitigate it [ ]. If people begin to partake in more activities outside of the home, finding ways to encourage increased protective actions within the household prophylactically would help counteract the additional risk posed by leaving one’s home.
More importantly, the model assumes that the risk of infection is a function of the background risk in the population of the activity’s jurisdiction. However, that assumes the subpopulation of potential participants does not have more virus prevalence than the community at large. Whether that is true is also an empirical question. For example, are those who would choose to attend a stadium concert during a pandemic more or less likely to participate in protective actions that lower their overall risk of virus infection or of virus transmission? Part of the empirical study of the public’s risk perceptions would need to include an appraisal of that question.
Furthermore, the model has a specific definition of “activity,” and it is crucial that the definition is clear to those who would use the model. For instance, considering a semester on a university campus as ∼90 separate one-day activities would not be an appropriate use of the model, because the population on campus from one day to the next is almost identical. Unless participation in an activity incurs no additional risk for a participant beyond their usual activities, decision-makers would need to consider how to limit individual participation; for example, in limiting the number of sports games one can attend in a given time period. Otherwise, the risk of transmission among participants will surely increase over the average risk in the community as previously-shuttered activities become a part of their day-to-day life but not of the lives of their fellow community members. The feasibility of such controls should be considered during the decision-making process.
For analytical purposes, our examples show how sensitive many analyses will be to uncertainty about how the probability of infection decays with distance, including the threat of long-range exposure [ , , ]. As long as estimates for those values vary widely in the literature, decision-makers may need to be conservative in cases where an analysis is highly sensitive to changes in the relevant parameters.
Finally, of the various modes of transmission—droplet, aerosol, fomite, and direct contact—it is not known how they compare to each other. Even for the two airborne modes, droplets and aerosols, there is disagreement about their relative importance [ , , , , ]. However, the model is adaptable enough that different estimates of the relative importance of these pathways can be included, and the model can use whatever assumptions the scientific evidence supports best at the time of use.

## 5 Conclusion
The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has restricted the activities of every person in the world. As governments and businesses try to decide how to reopen society, they need an analytical framework with which to make reasoned decisions. While much of the modeling done to date has focused on estimating the parameters needed to calculate the absolute risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection, here, we focus on estimates of relative risk. Such a model should allow decision-makers to rank the risk of activities and their constituent discrete sub-activities. Combined with an accounting of their benefits and costs, decision-makers could make better-informed decisions about those activities. At the time of writing, vaccines for COVID-19 have become available for a small proportion of the population. As those vaccines become more widely available, our approach could be modified to account for estimates of the percent vaccinated of the population of potential participants in an activity.

## 6 Appendix: Definitions
By an activity we mean a well-defined set of interactions with clear bounds taking place over a period of time less than a day, for example a trip to a grocery store, or taking an airplane flight, or attending a sporting event as a spectator.
By the participant we mean a currently non-infected person attending the activity, whose probability of becoming infected we wish to model.
A neighbor at an activity is a person not in the participant’s immediate household who, for some part of the activity, is close enough to pose a risk of air-borne infection. We shall say the participant is in the neighbor’s vicinity if they are close enough to become infected.
ν is the probability that withour social distancing, an infectious individual would infect at least one susceptible individual over the course of one day.
ν′ is the expected number of new infections per day caused by an infectious individual without social distancing.
τ is the doubling time of the infection (see below).

## 7 Appendix: Additivity in time

## 7.1 Mathematical derivation of approximate additivity
Let us assume that an activity A is decomposed into N segments, called S1, …, SN, and each segment Sj has some risk xj of causing infection. We further assume that these risks are statistically independent of each other (assumption A6). Then the probability p of being infected at some time during A is
 p=1-∏j=1N(1-xj).(3)
Let
 s=∑j=1Nxj(4)
Then we claim that
 p≈s,
where the symbol ≈ means “is approximately equal to”. Indeed we claim that
 (1-e-ss)s≤p≤s.(5)
To see ( ), we use the arithmetic-geometric inequality to show
 1-p=∏j=1N(1-xj)≤(1-1N∑j=1Nxj)N=(1-sN)N≤e-s,
which yields the left-hand inequality in ( ).
The right-hand inequality follows from
 ln(1-p)=∑j=1Nln(1-xj)=-∑k=1∞1k∑j=1Nxjk≥-∑k=1∞1k(∑j=1Nxj)k=ln(1-s).(6)
The correction factor between s and p is , in the sense that
 f(s)≤ps≤1.
The function f(s) is a decreasing function of s, and has a right-hand limit of 1 as s tends to 0. Since s ≤ −ln(1 − p), we have
 f(s)≥f(-ln(1-p))=-pln(1-p).
So our conclusion is that we always have
 pln(1/(1-p))≤f(s)≤ps≤1,
justifying the claim that p ≈ s. For representative values of f(s) and g(p) = −p/ln(1 − p), see Tables and . They can be read as saying that if we know the value in the top row is an upper bound on s (respectively p) then the value in the second row is a lower bound on .
 

## 7.2 Estimating an upper bound on p
As we saw in Subsection 7.1, how good the approximation p ≈ s is depends on how close f(s) is to 1. How can we measure this?
We use the assumption that the activities we are considering last less than a day. While some activities are more risky than others, we further assume that all the events will be designed so that the total risk of an infected individual spreading the infection is no greater than it was at the beginning of the pandemic before any social distancing measures were in place. So we get an upper bound
 p≤ν(7)
where ν is the probability that before social distancing, an infectious individual would infect a susceptible individual over the course of one day. Note that for many activities, it is reasonable to assume that p is much less than ν, thus tightening the estimation in Subsection 7.1.
Since an infected individual can infect multiple susceptibles, the expected number they would infect over the course of the day would be slightly higher, namely if one assumes a Poisson distribution. (This is a small adjustment that will not materially affect our conclusion, so the reader can ignore it.)
Using a standard SIR model at the early stage of an infection, the proportion of the population that is susceptible is close to 1. So the proportion of the population that is infected will grow exponentially, like eκt for some rate κ, where 1 + ν′ = eκ. The doubling time τ is the time at which eκτ = 2, so κ = ln(2)/τ. Thus we get
 ν′=eκ-1=eln2/τ-1
and
 ν=1-e-ν′=1-e1-eln2/τ.(8)
What is τ? In [ ] they estimate that the doubling times in Chinese provinces in the period January 20—February 9 2020 ranged from 1.4 days (95% CI 1.2-2.0) in Hunan province to 3.1 days (95% CI 2.1-4.8) in Xinjiang province.
In [ ], the authors estimate the doubling time in Italy in March 2020 to be 3.4, 5.1 and 9.6 days in the first, second and third ten day periods of the month.
In [ ], the authors estimate the probability of infection in a crowded zone (summed over all neighbors in the vicinity) to be 1.8% per hour, and to be 0.18% and 0.018% in moderate and uncrowded zones, using data from the cruise ship Diamond Princess. If we assume at most 12 hours spent in crowded zones per day on the cruise ship, this would yield the estimate
 ν′≤1-(1-0.018)12=.20,
which in turn from ( ) gives
 ν≤0.18.
In [ ], the authors use an SEIR model on the data from [ ], and take into account the incubation period (6 days) recovery period (14 days) and a mortality rate of 1%. They assume that transmission rates are the same in asymptomatic and symptomatic states, and get a value of ν that is 0.126. This follows from their equation
 ν=R01δ+1ωR+ωD
and using their values R0 = 2.5, ωR = 1/14 is recovery rate from symptomatic to recovered, and ωD = .01 is the mortality rate.
The value R0, the number of new people infected per infectious person, is widely reported by time and geographic region—see e.g. [ ] for estimates of R0 by U.S. state. If one makes the more conservative estimate that only asymptomatic carriers will be circulating, and using the same 6 day incubation period, then one gets the bound
 ν≤R06.
With an estimate of 2.22 for pre-mitigation R0 in the U.S. [ ], this gives the bound
 ν≤2.226=0.37.

 gives some values of ν as a function of τ.
 

## 8 Appendix: Refinement to additivity over segments
One can refine the analysis in Appendix 7. Let us assume ( ) and ( ) both hold, and that we have segmented the activity into sufficiently small pieces that each xj ≤ ε for some small ε that we assume satisfies .
Then we can tighten the bounds in ( ) to
 1-e-s≤p≤1-e-(1+ε)s.(9)
Indeed, to see this start with equality ( ) to get
 ln(1-p)=-∑k=1∞1k∑j=1Nxjk≥-∑k=1∞1ksεk-1≥-s-εs∑2∞1kεk-2≥-s-εs∑2∞1k12k-2=-s-εs(-2+4ln(2))≥-s-εs.
Exponentiating, we get the right-hand inequality in ( ).

## 9 Appendix: Airplane interior
We include further details on the airplane interior of the Boeing 737-800 from Section 3.1. in the main text shows the interior with 50% occupancy. In feet, the width of the seats is 1.71 in First class, and 1.4 in Economy Plus and Economy. The pitch is 3.08 in First, 2.83 in Economy Plus, and 2.5 in Economy. The aisle is 3.18 feet wide.
To calculate the average seating risk per minute for a given seating arrangement and risk decay, we calculate for each occupied seat the distance to each other occupied seat, and this gives a corresponding risk score based on the chosen decay model. These are all summed up, and then divided by the number of occupied seats, to get the average risk score per minute seated.
To calculate the risk of entering a seat, we assume the passenger spends a certain amount of time in the aisle using the overhead bin. In this example, we assume 20 seconds; of course, that could be changed. During that period, we calculate their distances from other passengers and then a corresponding risk score per minute.

## Supporting information
S1 File(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.

 10.1371/journal.pone.0245381.r001Decision Letter 0
LinkovIgorAcademic Editor© 2021 Igor Linkov2021Igor LinkovThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
24 Sep 2020

PONE-D-20-27466
A deterministic linear infection model to inform Risk-Cost-Benefit Analysis of activities during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. McCarthy,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process. All reviewers expressed concerns that warrant a major revision.
Please ensure that your decision is justified on PLOS ONE’s publication criteria and not, for example, on novelty or perceived impact.
==============================
Please submit your revised manuscript by Nov 08 2020 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Igor Linkov
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2.  Thank you for stating the following in the Competing Interests section:
"JEM, BAD and MTM received funding from Delaware North, a company that may be affected by the research reported in the paper.".
We note that one or more of the authors are employed by a commercial company: 'Omnium LLC'.
1.     Please provide an amended Funding Statement declaring this commercial affiliation, as well as a statement regarding the Role of Funders in your study. If the funding organization did not play a role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript and only provided financial support in the form of authors' salaries and/or research materials, please review your statements relating to the author contributions, and ensure you have specifically and accurately indicated the role(s) that these authors had in your study. You can update author roles in the Author Contributions section of the online submission form.
Please also include the following statement within your amended Funding Statement.
“The funder provided support in the form of salaries for authors [insert relevant initials], but did not have any additional role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. The specific roles of these authors are articulated in the ‘author contributions’ section.”
If your commercial affiliation did play a role in your study, please state and explain this role within your updated Funding Statement.
2. Please also provide an updated Competing Interests Statement declaring this commercial affiliation along with any other relevant declarations relating to employment, consultancy, patents, products in development, or marketed products, etc.  
Within your Competing Interests Statement, please confirm that this commercial affiliation does not alter your adherence to all PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials by including the following statement: "This does not alter our adherence to  PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.” (as detailed online in our guide for authors http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/competing-interests) . If this adherence statement is not accurate and  there are restrictions on sharing of data and/or materials, please state these. Please note that we cannot proceed with consideration of your article until this information has been declared.
* Please include both an updated Funding Statement and Competing Interests Statement in your cover letter. We will change the online submission form on your behalf.
Please know it is PLOS ONE policy for corresponding authors to declare, on behalf of all authors, all potential competing interests for the purposes of transparency. PLOS defines a competing interest as anything that interferes with, or could reasonably be perceived as interfering with, the full and objective presentation, peer review, editorial decision-making, or publication of research or non-research articles submitted to one of the journals. Competing interests can be financial or non-financial, professional, or personal. Competing interests can arise in relationship to an organization or another person. Please follow this link to our website for more details on competing interests: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/competing-interests
3. We note you have included  tables to which you do not refer in the text of your manuscript. Please ensure that you refer to Tables 1 and 4 in your text; if accepted, production will need this reference to link the reader to the Table.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: No
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: McCarthy et al. have formulated a “deterministic linear” modeling framework to inform risk-cost-benefit analysis of activities during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. The model outputs infection probabilities that are additive over defined sub-activities and infection pathways. Namely, the model assumes independence of the individual probabilities and that activities cannot last longer than one day. Then, the model is applied to estimate the risk associated with taking an airplane ride, under varying parameter choices. Furthermore, the authors argue that the linearity assumption makes the model easier to interpret, with minimal sacrifice in reliability.
This is a very timely topic and I would like to applaud the authors for tackling this topic using a more abstract, mathematical framework. The results suggest that the model has a high potential utility in estimating relative risks associated with various activities. I would recommend this paper for acceptance, but believe a couple aspects of the manuscript could be thoroughly revised. First, the paper needs further clarity in terms of definitions (i.e., “deterministic” model), assumptions, and presentation of the mathematics. Second, the model application to the airplane ride example should consider a wider range of parameters and augmented interpretation of estimated risk values. These revisions to the paper will enhance the demonstration of the model’s potential ability for application in risk estimation and decision making.
More detailed comments are provided in the attached document.
Reviewer #2: During the COVID-19 pandemic, difficult decisions are being made which trade off the risk of infection with the reward of normal activity. This paper addresses the challenge of making such decisions, and provides a practical simplified type of analysis. The question is whether the simplified analysis is fit for practical purpose.
The simplified example selected for detailed study is air travel. As a former safety consultant for a major international airline, I know that all major airlines will have undertaken their own far more elaborate safety studies to make flying as COVID-19 secure as possible. These studies will include tests of aerosol dispersion within planes, and the practical effectiveness of sanitization measures.
Almost 200 passengers were on board a flight from the Greek island of Zante to Cardiff, Wales, on August 25. As many as seven people from three parties were infectious on the plane. Sixteen have since tested positive for the coronavirus. According to passengers, the flight attendants did not enforce the COVID-19 rules sufficiently. The largest concern over flying is being on a plane where a group of younger asymptomatic passengers may flout the rules about keeping their face coverings on, instead leaving them round their chins. Flouting of rules is itself a contagious mode of human behavior. Once a number of passengers remove their face coverings, others will follow. Passengers may also wander around the cabin to talk with friends without face coverings.
Disregard of COVID-19 rules on board a plane is not taken into account in the authors’ air travel example. For any mass gathering of people, e.g. stadiums, disregard of COVID-19 rules is a serious worry. Over the summer, outdoor sports stadiums could have allowed 10% of the usual number of spectators, who could be easily socially distanced. The concern has been over the deliberate violation of social distancing measures.
The authors’ paper should be revised to include a substantial improvement to their air travel example. Recognition of noncompliant human behaviour is essential to be realistic.
Reviewer #3: Review of PONE-D-20-27466 “A deterministic linear infection model…” by McCarthy et al.
The paper seems to argue that there needs to be a way to compute relative risks that is simpler for decision makers to break down and interpret. I agree that this is a worthy avenue of research, as communicating the impact of risk reduction in the aid of proper policy design is crucial to seeing us safely through this pandemic.
However, I believe this manuscript should not be published for the following reasons.
• The paper’s conclusions reflect the input assumptions in a way that makes it appear to be an elaboration of the obvious. It would be more interesting and helpful if the paper’s model were used to compare strategies, demonstrate some surprising conclusion, or compute (believable) quantitative results.
• Simply adding together probabilities, rather than computing the “probabilistic sum”, is called the rare event approximation in risk analysis. This method is used without relevant reference, and in a circumstance where it is arguably inappropriate as the estimated events are not rare. The correct calculation with the probabilistic sum is not much more complicated, and need not necessarily be a barrier in communicating with policy analysts.
• Statements in the discussion such as “Making masks mandatory, and enforcing this rule, is clearly the most cost-effective strategy” are not supported by any of the analysis in the manuscript. I would not dispute this claim, but it is not in any way supported by the example given, nor are most of the other claims in the final paragraph of the discussion where the example is brought up.
• Assumption A6 is a requirement for the proof of A1, and therefore when A6 is being questioned, A1 is being questioned in the discussion. Considering A1 is a foundational assumption for the manuscript this is cause for concern. I agree that this assumption should be questioned, but the paper itself seems to be questioning whether it is valid. The authors begin to acknowledge this issue, but their discussion seems insufficient.
• The independence assumption in A2 and A6 is also perhaps not justified in the example given. For example, the suggested means of boarding back to front without disrupting queuing order would place passengers mostly in close proximity to those they had queued with. Therefore the risk of infection whilst seated would be highly dependent on the risk of infection whilst queuing.
• Assumption A4 notes that the risk of infection depends not only on the distance from the neighbour, but the direction they are facing etc. This assumption is not consistent with the example given, or its application is not apparent. The equation in 3.1 seems to treat all passengers within a queue equally, indicating that the direction they are facing is not a relevant factor.
• Assumption A7 assumes that multiple individuals from the same household do not infect each other and that this assumption is important when applying the model. This assumption is not justified, nor is the implied importance of the assumption ever discussed. Also a point of the discussion notes the impact of households of three travelling together as an additional consideration when leaving middle seats vacant, despite this being perfectly possible whilst maintaining vacant middle seats.
• The model allows for transmission through airborne particulates, touching contaminated surfaces and direct physical contact. Yet, in the example that is given the latter two are assumed to be of negligible impact.
• Use of non-SI units.
• References poorly formatted.
• Non-standard use of pi before definition.
• Equations are not numbered throughout.
• Doesn’t meet the PLOS ONE formatting requirements. For example appendix 8 contains an important definition that would benefit from being in the main body of the text.
• Additional case studies might improve the manuscript. For instance, what would the impact of different boarding policies be? The authors assume that the aircraft will be seated from back to front perfectly, but the impact of this happening imperfectly could be discussed. As could the impact of having an unordered boarding policy.
• The analysis could be improved by having examples where a decision has to be made between two scenarios that are not clear cut. It is fairly trivial to assume that having fewer people on an aircraft would lower the risk of one becoming infected. If there was an example such as having a full school attendance with everyone wearing a mask and limited social distancing versus only having half attendance with full social distancing (>2m) then the model may appear to be more useful.
• The cited literature seems depauperate at best. There seem to be no publications on the subject of disease transmission from grouping on aircraft. They could have cited the recent JAMA article: https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamanetworkopen/fullarticle/2769383?utm_source=For_The_Media&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=ftm_links&utm_term=081820
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes: Gordon Woo
Reviewer #3: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Review_PONE-D-20-27466.pdf
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0245381.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
4 Dec 2020

(Word Document version included in uploaded documents).
REVIEWER #1
Summary and Recommendation: 
McCarthy et al. have formulated a “deterministic linear” modeling framework to inform risk- cost-benefit analysis of activities during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. The model outputs infection probabilities that are additive over defined sub-activities and infection pathways. Namely, the model assumes independence of the individual probabilities and that activities cannot last longer than one day. Then, the model is applied to estimate the risk associated with taking an airplane ride, under varying parameter choices. Furthermore, the authors argue that the linearity assumption makes the model easier to interpret, with minimal sacrifice in reliability. 
This is a very timely topic and I would like to applaud the authors for tackling this topic using a more abstract, mathematical framework. The results suggest that the model has a high potential utility in estimating relative risks associated with various activities. I would recommend this paper for acceptance, but believe a couple aspects of the manuscript could be thoroughly revised. First, the paper needs further clarity in terms of definitions (i.e., “deterministic” model), assumptions, and presentation of the mathematics. Second, the model application to the airplane ride example should consider a wider range of parameters and augmented interpretation of estimated risk values. These revisions to the paper will enhance the demonstration of the model’s potential ability for application in risk estimation and decision making. 
Reply: Thank you for reviewing our manuscript. As we describe below, we have implemented the changes you have requested and believe the paper has been improved as a result. Thank you for your comments and suggestions.
Broader Comments: 
I. The model is posited as a “deterministic model” throughout the manuscript. It appears that “deterministic” refers to the fact that the values of the model parameters are deterministic (i.e., the 𝜏 parameters in Section 2 and the probability that a neighbor is infected), although this was not explicitly laid out. I believe that more exposition on the meaning of “deterministic” within the context of the model is desirable. In some cases, the usage of the word can be confusing – a few examples below: 
In the Introduction, the authors mention the “advantages of a linear (deterministic) model”, as if “linear” and “deterministic” are directly interchangeable. This is somewhat confusing and should be explained more thoroughly! 
The authors differentiate between a “deterministic or statistical” model in Section 2.0.2. What exactly is the difference in this context? After all, we are still concerned with a probabilistic model, which outputs probabilities. 
Reply: Thank you for your comment. It is clear that our terminology was confusing, and upon reflecting on its use in the passages you referenced and elsewhere, we have decided to change how we refer to the model. We now describe the model as one of “relative risk” – if we pique the reader’s interest and they continue through the paper, they will learn all they need to about the model. Emphasizing that it is not, e.g., a regression model, is probably less essential than we thought it was when we wrote the original draft and used the terminology that we did there. We hope you find the change an improvement. 
II. The authors applied their model to the specific example of COVID-19 risk on an airplane ride. A brief discussion of how estimated risk differs with varying parameters is provided in Section 3.4-3.5. The number of scenarios considered (three varying airplane distancing and boarding distance, three decay assumptions) is relatively small and should be expanded. Ideally, there should be a visualization that demonstrates how varying certain parameters alters the risk (i.e., figures or counter plots). Some more discussion on the interpretation of the discrepancy in estimated risk values (i.e., 359 for scenario 1 vs. 146 for scenario 2) is also desirable. 
Reply: Following the reviewer’s suggestion, we have expanded the airplane example, including its sensitivity analysis section, and added the new Figure 2, which shows how risk changes as a function of flight time, seating arrangement, and decay model. Inspired by the reviewer’s comments, we have also added additional examples, which include an analysis of attending a sporting event and of classroom attendance (at the level of detail of the air travel example in the original manuscript), and then sketches of applying the same approach to restaurants and religious services. We have also included more text about comparing the different numbers produced by the different models.
Specific comments on manuscript details: 
ABSTRACT 
• The authors state early on that their model “can produce estimates of relative risk”. This is an important point – the distinction between relative and absolute risk, as well as the value of estimating relative risk should be more clearly laid out here. 
Reply: Thank you for the suggestion – we have made changes to the abstract along the lines that you suggest, including noting in the abstract that relative risk allows one to rank sub-activities by their risk of infection even when the probability of infection is unknown (or highly uncertain).
• “..in which we assume infections come from a series of independent risks.” Without having read the entire article, it was not immediately evident to me that “series of independent risks” refers to independence with regards to time interval, mode of transmission, etc. I would consider discussing the independence property earlier in the abstract, and provide some more explanation (of course, the full treatment is still most appropriate for Section 2). 
Reply: Following the reviewer’s recommendation, we rephrased the sentence about independence in the abstract. However, given that the abstract must be concise, we leave the more thorough discussion to Section 2.
SECTION 2 
• Section 2.0.2, A7: In my opinion, this assumption requires more discussion (which was included to some extent in Section 4.1). If a household member is infected, this member presumably has a very high likelihood of infecting other household members upon returning home. This is because household members spend significant time together indoor, share surfaces, and are perhaps rather likely to not wear PPE while at home. 
Ideally, the model would be extended to account for the possibly significant increase in risk from household members doing activities together. If this is not feasible, at least some further discussion may be desirable. 
Reply: Thank you for the comment. Once somebody is infected, there is indeed a significant chance that they will infect another household member. But it is unlikely that I would catch COVID from a household member while attending a baseball game together, and not have caught it if we both stayed home. We have added more about household transmission to the discussion.
• Section 2.1: Here, a couple examples relating 𝑠, �, and 𝜋 are provided. The authors give a couple estimates of 𝜋 in the Appendix using real data. I would suggest listing these estimates in Section 2.1, so that the reader has some more context regarding realistic values of 𝜋. 
Reply: We have added some of those numbers from the Appendix to the main text.
• - Section 2.2: The model for infection probability by air-borne transmission includes the term [time of � ], so it appears that infection probability scales linearly with time spent in the vicinity of an infected neighbor. 
I would suggest adding an assumption (or multiple assumptions) in Section 2.0.2 to differentiate between additive and multiplicative properties for the probabilities. This would account for the linear relationship of the probabilities with [time of �j ].
Reply: Our apologies to the Reviewer, but we do not understand the comment. If it has not been addressed among the changes in our revised manuscript, could the Reviewer rephrase it? The probability from each subactivity is added together; the probability for each subactivity is calculated in a straightforward way.
• The contention “that this model is strategically valuable even without knowledge of the parameters...” should at least be briefly justified. 
Reply: We have added some extra text after that claim along the lines suggested by the reviewer.
SECTION 3 
• In the sub-activity decomposition, one sub-activity considered is ‘duration of the flight’. I think that activities such as passengers walking around, using the restroom, and interfacing with flight attendants (such as during meal service), etc. need to be accounted for. Or if such activities are insignificant from the risk point-of-view, the insignificance should be justified. 
Reply: This is totally correct - to fully analyze the flight, all the sub-activities would need to be considered separately. Space limitations preclude us from doing this for each of our examples, but in Example 3.2 we do consider the effect of eating while attending a sporting event. We have also calculated the risk at a stadium from going to the bathroom, but the calculation is lengthy, and the risk relatively small, so we did not include it, but we could if the editor would like us to. We have also included more discussion of the limitations of our examples, including discussing the kinds of details mentioned by the Reviewer, which would be required for the fine-grained analysis that a decision-maker would want to complete for their specific decision context.
• Sections 3.2-3.3: The calculation of the risk contributions (1.14 in Section 2, 1.84 in Section 3) needs more clarity (either here or in the Appendix). It is not immediately evident from the text how these numbers were obtained. 
Reply: We have included more details in Appendix 8.
Furthermore, the risk in Section 3.2 is calculated to be 27.58. But in Section 3, the authors chose to round this number up to 27.6 It is best to be consistent with significant figures. 
Reply: Thank you for catching that discrepancy in significant figures – we have fixed it (and others). In the calculations, we included more decimal places to make the calculation easier to follow. In reporting the final risk score, we rounded to the nearest integer. We have added more detail to show the calculations in the text.
• Section 3.5: The authors claim the second decay function “has a very rapid decay” – best to provide a quantitative justification for “very rapid” here. 
Reply: Thank you for the comment. We have included the quantitative decay from 1 to 2 meters.
SECTION 4 
• The authors claim that doubling the cleaning frequency will approximately halve the probability that the surface is contaminated. This should be mathematically justified (1- 2 sentences is sufficient if the math is trivial). 
Reply: We have included a mathematical justification.
• It was an excellent idea to include discussion of perceived vs. actual risk. The section could benefit from a few more sentences on how to model and quantify perceived risk, as well as discrepancy between perceived and actual risk. Regarding a decisions-making framework, some more quantitative discussion on how perceived risk could be incorporated is also beneficial. 
Reply: Thank you for the suggestion. We have added text about approaches to modeling perceived risk, such as the mental models approach of risk communication (Morgan, Fischhoff, Bostrom, & Atman, 2002) and approaches from cognitive science (Slovic, Finucane, Peters, & MacGregor, 2004), as well as psychophysics (Fox-Glassman & Weber, 2016). We have also added text conjecturing how one might incorporate such work into a specific decision analysis.
• Section 4.1: The discussion on limitations is solid but could benefit from more discussion on how much the limitations quantitatively affect the model accuracy, bias, or estimation confidence. In addition, are these limitations possible to address within the “deterministic linear” framework proposed, or would addressing them require a fundamentally different model? 
Reply: Thank you for the comment. We have expanded our section on limitations and hope some of your concerns are addressed there. In our review of the literature, the biggest weakness is the lack of data – nobody knows how risk decays with distance or direction, what the relative risks between aerosol and droplet transmission are, what the effect of being outdoors is, what the risk of fomites is, etc. Given that lack of data, we think the focus should be on making sure risks and possible effects of mitigating actions are in the correct direction. 
SECTION 6 
• The correlation factor is defined as 𝑓(𝑠). Some more clarity regarding why 𝑓(𝑠) can be considered the correlation factor is desirable. 
Reply: f(s) is the correction factor, not the correlation factor. We explain more clearly in the revision what we mean by this. 
• In Section 6.2, the authors thoroughly discuss some estimates of 𝜋. However, the link from estimates of 𝜋 to how close 𝑓(𝑠) is to 1 is not entirely evident. Is Table 4, which outputs 𝑓(𝑠) for each considered value of 𝜋, important in this regard? This need to be more clearly discussed. 
Reply: We added an explanation of how the tables can be used in Section 6.1.
SECTION 7 
• Why omit the proof? Even if the proof is trivial, one should include a few lines sketching how the result is obtained. 
Reply: The proof has been added.
Our thanks again to the reviewer for their close reading of our manuscript and their comments. 
 
REVIEWER #2
Reviewer #2: During the COVID-19 pandemic, difficult decisions are being made which trade off the risk of infection with the reward of normal activity. This paper addresses the challenge of making such decisions, and provides a practical simplified type of analysis. The question is whether the simplified analysis is fit for practical purpose.
The simplified example selected for detailed study is air travel. As a former safety consultant for a major international airline, I know that all major airlines will have undertaken their own far more elaborate safety studies to make flying as COVID-19 secure as possible. These studies will include tests of aerosol dispersion within planes, and the practical effectiveness of sanitization measures.
Almost 200 passengers were on board a flight from the Greek island of Zante to Cardiff, Wales, on August 25. As many as seven people from three parties were infectious on the plane. Sixteen have since tested positive for the coronavirus. According to passengers, the flight attendants did not enforce the COVID-19 rules sufficiently. The largest concern over flying is being on a plane where a group of younger asymptomatic passengers may flout the rules about keeping their face coverings on, instead leaving them round their chins. Flouting of rules is itself a contagious mode of human behavior. Once a number of passengers remove their face coverings, others will follow. Passengers may also wander around the cabin to talk with friends without face coverings.
Disregard of COVID-19 rules on board a plane is not taken into account in the authors’ air travel example. For any mass gathering of people, e.g. stadiums, disregard of COVID-19 rules is a serious worry. Over the summer, outdoor sports stadiums could have allowed 10% of the usual number of spectators, who could be easily socially distanced. The concern has been over the deliberate violation of social distancing measures.
The authors’ paper should be revised to include a substantial improvement to their air travel example. Recognition of noncompliant human behaviour is essential to be realistic.
Reply: We thank the reviewer for their comments. We have changed the text in how we present the example – and have added additional examples at the request of the other reviews -- in order to make it clear that we do are not providing the example(s) as a fully-worked analysis, one that someone could use off the shelf, but rather, for pedagogical purposes, demonstrating where our model might be useful within the context of an analysis that includes the sorts of details that a subject-specialist would know. Therefore, the air travel example is not meant to be the centerpiece of the manuscript, and we have changed the language in the manuscript to better bound the ambitions of our work and note the need for future work. We believe that the addition of the other examples – as well as a spreadsheet that allows readers to change parameter values and see the calculations for themselves – all help to ensure that the examples are understood as intended.
Following the reviewer’s advice, we have added some additional text about the difficulties of incorporating uncertain human behaviour into analyses. We have suggested, following the reviewer and Reviewer #1’s comments, how might one go about the descriptive research necessary to characterize that behaviour.
 
REVIEWER #3
The paper seems to argue that there needs to be a way to compute relative risks that is simpler for decision makers to break down and interpret. I agree that this is a worthy avenue of research, as communicating the impact of risk reduction in the aid of proper policy design is crucial to seeing us safely through this pandemic.
However, I believe this manuscript should not be published for the following reasons.
• The paper’s conclusions reflect the input assumptions in a way that makes it appear to be an elaboration of the obvious. It would be more interesting and helpful if the paper’s model were used to compare strategies, demonstrate some surprising conclusion, or compute (believable) quantitative results.
Reply: Thank you for the comment. We have expanded the section on examples by including more detail in the air travel example – including additional sensitivity analyses – and by including additional scenarios. We also now include a spreadsheet that allows the interested reader to see more detail of the calculations and perform more sensitivity analyses. In our view, a quantitative model’s usefulness is not diminished when it validates the conclusions of one’s conceptual model. While having surprising results might be more exciting to read, that is a matter of taste. We defer to the Editor about whether to alter our exposition. 
• Simply adding together probabilities, rather than computing the “probabilistic sum”, is called the rare event approximation in risk analysis. This method is used without relevant reference, and in a circumstance where it is arguably inappropriate as the estimated events are not rare. The correct calculation with the probabilistic sum is not much more complicated, and need not necessarily be a barrier in communicating with policy analysts.
Reply: A main point of the paper is that there are great advantages in simplicity and communicability in using an additive model – conceptually, this is much easier to convey to the general public. Moreover, we prove mathematically in Section 6 that the difference between the sum of the probabilities and the exact mathematical formula is small, and far less than the inherent errors in estimating the probabilities in the first place. 
• Statements in the discussion such as “Making masks mandatory, and enforcing this rule, is clearly the most cost-effective strategy” are not supported by any of the analysis in the manuscript. I would not dispute this claim, but it is not in any way supported by the example given, nor are most of the other claims in the final paragraph of the discussion where the example is brought up.
Reply: Thank you for the comment. We have changed the exposition in the paragraph, adding more detail to explain when our example analysis supports a given conclusion, and changing the language when we are speculating. We should have qualified those statements in the original manuscript. Our thanks for pointing out our error. 
• Assumption A6 is a requirement for the proof of A1, and therefore when A6 is being questioned, A1 is being questioned in the discussion. Considering A1 is a foundational assumption for the manuscript this is cause for concern. I agree that this assumption should be questioned, but the paper itself seems to be questioning whether it is valid. The authors begin to acknowledge this issue, but their discussion seems insufficient.
Reply: Thank you for your comment. We have clarified the invocation of A6 in proving that $s$ is a good approximation to $p$. We have added more to the discussion in the limitations, following the reviewer’s suggestion. 
• The independence assumption in A2 and A6 is also perhaps not justified in the example given. For example, the suggested means of boarding back to front without disrupting queuing order would place passengers mostly in close proximity to those they had queued with. Therefore the risk of infection whilst seated would be highly dependent on the risk of infection whilst queuing.
Reply: Thank you for the comment. This is a good observation, but we do not think it violates independence. Of course, there is more than one way to define independence; our interpretation is as follows: We are assuming that the probability of becoming infected during the whole activity is sufficiently low that we can ignore the chance of the event happening to the same person twice. If I am standing and then sitting beside some person X who is infectious, my probability of becoming infected on both occasions is indeed higher than if my immediate neighbor Y were non-infectious. But the probability that I become infected from X while boarding is independent of the probability of becoming infected from X while sitting. It is true that independence could be interpreted more strictly, in which case the fact that I am standing beside X while boarding does affect my probability of sitting beside X. But if X is the only infectious person on the plane, the probability they infect someone is approximately the sum of the probability they infect someone while boarding and the (much larger) probability that they infect someone while sitting. It does not really matter if the two potential targets are the same or different. 
• Assumption A4 notes that the risk of infection depends not only on the distance from the neighbour, but the direction they are facing etc. This assumption is not consistent with the example given, or its application is not apparent. The equation in 3.1 seems to treat all passengers within a queue equally, indicating that the direction they are facing is not a relevant factor.
Reply: This is because there is no good data on how infection varies with direction (as we see, there is no agreement even on how it varies with distance, as the variation between the Chen and Chu model show). Once research has established a better understanding of how infection risk varies with distance and direction, this could be incorporated into modelling boarding. For now, we have to make due with rough estimations.
• Assumption A7 assumes that multiple individuals from the same household do not infect each other and that this assumption is important when applying the model. This assumption is not justified, nor is the implied importance of the assumption ever discussed. Also a point of the discussion notes the impact of households of three travelling together as an additional consideration when leaving middle seats vacant, despite this being perfectly possible whilst maintaining vacant middle seats.
Reply: Thank you for the comment. We have added more discussion about A7 to the manuscript, nothing the importance of household transmission and ways to mitigate it. 
• The model allows for transmission through airborne particulates, touching contaminated surfaces and direct physical contact. Yet, in the example that is given the latter two are assumed to be of negligible impact.
Reply: Airlines claim that they filter the air so efficiently that airborne transmission is not a risk. This may not be correct. In Example 3.2 we consider how to incorporate aerosols. There is no data we know of that gives any ways to numerically compare risks between fomite transmission and air-borne transmission. Until such data becomes available, we don’t see how to combine these into a common score. Direct physical contact with strangers is avoidable outside of hospital settings; again there is no data comparing it to other forms of transmission, but for public events such as the ones in our example this is less important than fomite transmission because it is avoidable. 
• Use of non-SI units.
• References poorly formatted.
• Non-standard use of pi before definition.
• Equations are not numbered throughout.
• Doesn’t meet the PLOS ONE formatting requirements. For example appendix 8 contains an important definition that would benefit from being in the main body of the text.
Reply: Thank you for the comments. We have changed pi to the Greek letter nu – our apologies if the use of pi made the exposition less clear than it could have otherwise been. Our manuscript is typeset using LaTeX, so should we be fortunate enough to be accepted for publication by a journal, we can easily reformat the text to the requirements set out by that journal’s production editor. We do not use SI units because in the US guidelines are given in feet and minutes, so these are natural units to use when quantifying risk. (It is also a little unnatural to think of a flight length or game time in seconds).
• Additional case studies might improve the manuscript. For instance, what would the impact of different boarding policies be? The authors assume that the aircraft will be seated from back to front perfectly, but the impact of this happening imperfectly could be discussed. As could the impact of having an unordered boarding policy.
Reply: Thank you for the comment. In the revision, we have included more variations in the parameters of the air travel example. We have also added new examples, which include an analysis of attending a sporting event and of classroom attendance (at the level of detail of the air travel example in the original manuscript), and then sketches of applying the same approach to restaurants and religious services.
• The analysis could be improved by having examples where a decision has to be made between two scenarios that are not clear cut. It is fairly trivial to assume that having fewer people on an aircraft would lower the risk of one becoming infected. If there was an example such as having a full school attendance with everyone wearing a mask and limited social distancing versus only having half attendance with full social distancing (>2m) then the model may appear to be more useful.
Reply: Thank you for the comment. We hope that the reviewer will approve of the additional examples (which include an analysis of a classroom), as well as the addition of the Excel program allowing the reader to better explore our examples and their limitations. We have also more clearly bounded the ambition of our examples – they are meant to demonstrate who one might apply the model for first-order estimates, and they are not meant to (nor do they) contain the level of detail necessary for a decision-maker in a particular policy domain (e.g., education) to use the example to make a decision. Rather, we hope they convey how one might use the model, and how it might be useful when combined with the subject-matter knowledge that experts in each particular domain would possess.
• The cited literature seems depauperate at best. There seem to be no publications on the subject of disease transmission from grouping on aircraft. They could have cited the recent JAMA article: https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamanetworkopen/fullarticle/2769383?utm_source=For_The_Media&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=ftm_links&utm_term=081820
Reply: Thank you for pointing us to that article. We have updated the cited literature.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: reply to reviewers v3.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0245381.r003Decision Letter 1
LinkovIgorAcademic Editor© 2021 Igor Linkov2021Igor LinkovThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
23 Dec 2020

PONE-D-20-27466R1
Modeling the relative risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection to inform Risk-Cost-Benefit Analyses of activities during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. McCarthy,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
One reviewer is critical, please address his concerns to the extent possible
Please submit your revised manuscript by Feb 06 2021 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Igor Linkov
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: COVID-19 is a rapidly evolving crisis, and actual data are being gathered on infection sources to help make the type of decisions considered in this paper. Public policy is being driven by accumulating data on infections in restaurants, schools, places of worship etc.. In respect of sports stadiums, a prime concern has been on the travel to stadiums, some of which may involve public transport, and the mingling of fans in congested bars outside the stadiums.
While the analysis that has been undertaken has some merit as an academic exercise, for practical decision-making, this is rather moot. Indeed, with the deployment of effective vaccines in the coming months, the analysis presented will cease to be of much practical relevance by the end of 2021.
I tend to agree with the third reviewer about the publication of this paper.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Review_PONE-D-20-27466R1.pdf
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0245381.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
24 Dec 2020

(also included as an attachment)
REVIEWER #1
COVID-19 is a rapidly evolving crisis, and actual data are being gathered on infection sources to help make the type of decisions considered in this paper. Public policy is being driven by accumulating data on infections in restaurants, schools, places of worship etc.. In respect of sports stadiums, a prime concern has been on the travel to stadiums, some of which may involve public transport, and the mingling of fans in congested bars outside the stadiums.
While the analysis that has been undertaken has some merit as an academic exercise, for practical decision-making, this is rather moot. Indeed, with the deployment of effective vaccines in the coming months, the analysis presented will cease to be of much practical relevance by the end of 2021.
Reply: Thank you for reading our manuscript and the comments. Given the variation in vaccine distribution both within and between countries – and the international audience of the journal – we believe that jurisdictions exist where our approach could still be helpful for many months to come. There is also the possibility that the current virus will mutate to a point that the vaccine does not work effectively, or a new pandemic could occur with another air-borne virus. As of 12/24/2020, WHO estimates 1.724 million deaths from COVID-19, and in many places there is significant fatigue with broad lockdown measures. A better understanding of which events are more dangerous, and which mitigations strategies are more effective, could significantly help the formulation of public policy. 
It could be interesting to adjust the model to account for the percentage of vaccinated persons in the population of potential activity participants (e.g., among sports fans). As far as we know, no population exists yet that is sufficiently vaccinated to produce herd immunity. 
REVIEWER #2
Review for publication in PLOS One 
‘Modeling the relative risk of SARS-CoV2 infection to inform Risk-Cost-Benefit Analyses of activities during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic 
(McCarthy, Dewitt, Dumas, and McCarthy) 
Summary and Recommendation: 
McCarthy et al. have revised their model of SARS-CoV2 relative infection risk, which is used for risk-cost-benefit analyses of typical human activities. Since their first submission of this work to PLOS One, the authors have significantly improved the presentation of their work. The first key change is that the authors have re-posited the model, eliminating reference of the model as “deterministic” and minimizing the ensuing confusion. Second, the authors have significantly expanded the application of their model to human activities. Not only have they improved analysis of the airplane ride case study, but they have also considered several additional environments (stadium, classroom, restaurants, and religious services). 
I would recommend publication of this article, and outline some (mostly minor) revisions for the authors to consider. In particular, I would strongly suggest the authors to consider some of my comments regarding modeling and analysis of risk in some of the microenvironments studied (see Section 3). 
Reply: Thank you for the thorough review of our manuscript and your helpful comments in this and the first review.
ABSTRACT 
• A bit more clarity is desired here regarding the distinction between ‘activity’, ‘route of infection’, and ‘constituent components of activities’. 
• I would suggest clarifying what the ‘linearity assumption’ refers to. This is specified later in the paper, but without further explanation here, it is a bit unclear to the reader. 
Reply: We have altered the manuscript to reflect the reviewer’s suggestions.
SECTION 3 
• The authors claim that the risk from going to the bathroom is small and thus omit the bathroom analysis from the paper. In my opinion, this merits a brief justification. I would suspect there is nonnegligible risk due to the close distance between two people who are using neighboring urinals. 
Reply: We added our calculation of the bathroom risk at one stadium. With less mitigation, the risk would be higher; but it is calculable along the same lines as other parts of the event.
• Regarding long-range aerosol transmission (i.e., as mentioned in 3.2), the authors may wish to consider investigating the CU Boulder COVID-19 Aerosol Transmission Estimator tool. 
Reply: We have included a reference to this model. However, it explicitly excludes calculation of risk from droplets, or any exposure within 6 feet. We know of no published results that allow both droplet and aerosol risk to be included in the same quantitative model, so for now we are using the (admittedly crude) approximation that the aerosol risk is proportionate to the reciprocal of the ventilation per person per unit time. Once data appears that allows both droplet and aerosol risk to be estimated simultaneously, the model should be updated to include these results.
• Regarding Section 3.4.1 (Restaurants), I strongly suggest to discuss the risk associated with indoor vs. outdoor dining (a frequently-debated policy issue facing citywide governments). Ideally this should be accompanied by more in-depth discussion on the ratio of aerosol to droplet risk. 
Reply: We added some remarks on this – basically being outdoors reduces the aerosol risk dramatically, but not so much the droplet risk. We completely agree that an in-depth discussion on the ratio of aerosol to droplet risk would be incredibly valuable. However, the data does not exist yet.
• Some further discussion on modeling of trusted cohorts (i.e., in the context of restaurants and religious services) is desirable in the main body of the text. 
Reply: We explained more clearly what we mean by a trusted cohort. If two people are living together with no attempt at self-isolation, then they incur no significant extra risk from each other if they attend an event together.
SECTION 4 
• The discussion on household transmission is an important addition. How would the model devised by the authors be applied to household transmission risk? Or would this not be possible? Household transmission has been a large contributor to the late-fall spike in infections within the U.S., so I believe that more discussion on this matter would be desirable. 
Reply: Unfortunately, we believe our model cannot be adapted as it stands to households. Households are not “activities” in our sense of the word, because living in one lasts much longer than a day, by its nature. We also believe that the decomposition of living in a household into subactivities would be much more difficult than the other examples, because of the variation in what might constitute a “subactivity,” and the variation in the ability to restrict subactivities, in the way that a stadium operator might do in order to lower infection risk. We have added more to this section to indicate these limitations of our approach.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: reply to reviewers #2 v1.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0245381.r005Decision Letter 2
LinkovIgorAcademic Editor© 2021 Igor Linkov2021Igor LinkovThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
30 Dec 2020

Modeling the relative risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection to inform Risk-Cost-Benefit Analyses of activities during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic
PONE-D-20-27466R2
Dear Dr. McCarthy,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Igor Linkov
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0245381.r006Acceptance letter
LinkovIgorAcademic Editor© 2021 Igor Linkov2021Igor LinkovThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
6 Jan 2021

PONE-D-20-27466R2 
Modeling the relative risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection to inform Risk-Cost-Benefit Analyses of activities during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic 
Dear Dr. McCarthy:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Igor Linkov 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE