PLoS OnePLoS ONE440plosone101285081plosPLoS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC7145105PMC7145105.1714510571451053227178110.1371/journal.pone.0230853PONE-D-20-008141Research ArticleResearch and Analysis MethodsBioassays and Physiological AnalysisElectrophysiological TechniquesBrain ElectrophysiologyElectroencephalographyBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyElectrophysiologyNeurophysiologyBrain ElectrophysiologyElectroencephalographyMedicine and Health SciencesPhysiologyElectrophysiologyNeurophysiologyBrain ElectrophysiologyElectroencephalographyBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceNeurophysiologyBrain ElectrophysiologyElectroencephalographyBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceBrain MappingElectroencephalographyMedicine and Health SciencesClinical MedicineClinical NeurophysiologyElectroencephalographyResearch and Analysis MethodsImaging TechniquesNeuroimagingElectroencephalographyBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceNeuroimagingElectroencephalographyBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryBiomarkersBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyMusculoskeletal SystemBody LimbsArmsHandsMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyMusculoskeletal SystemBody LimbsArmsHandsBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyHeadEyesMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyHeadEyesBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyOcular SystemEyesMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyOcular SystemEyesBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyBrainCerebral HemispheresLeft HemisphereMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyBrainCerebral HemispheresLeft HemisphereBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyBrainCerebral HemispheresRight HemisphereMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyBrainCerebral HemispheresRight HemispherePhysical SciencesPhysicsThermodynamicsEntropyBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyElectrophysiologyMembrane PotentialAction PotentialsMedicine and Health SciencesPhysiologyElectrophysiologyMembrane PotentialAction PotentialsBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyElectrophysiologyNeurophysiologyAction PotentialsMedicine and Health SciencesPhysiologyElectrophysiologyNeurophysiologyAction PotentialsBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceNeurophysiologyAction PotentialsHigher hypnotic suggestibility is associated with the lower EEG signal variability in theta, alpha, and beta frequency bands
Entropy quantifies the hypnotic suggestibilityhttp://orcid.org/0000-0003-0854-0354KeshmiriSoheilFormal analysisFunding acquisitionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3077-7657AlimardaniMaryamConceptualizationData curationFunding acquisitionMethodologyWriting – review & editing ShiomiMasahiroFunding acquisitionSupervision SumiokaHidenobuSupervision IshiguroHiroshiSupervision HirakiKazuoConceptualizationData curationFunding acquisitionMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionValidation 
1
Advanced Telecommunications Research Institute International (ATR), Kyoto, Japan

2
Department of Cognitive Science and Artificial Intelligence, Tilburg University, the Netherlands

3
Graduate School of Engineering Science, Osaka University, Japan

4
Department of General Systems Studies, Tokyo University, Japan
De PascalisVilfredoEditor , ] but also as a potential tool in treatment of a number of chronic and psychological disorders [ – ]. Oakley et al. [ ] define hypnosis as a change in baseline mental activity in response to induction and/or a set of verbal instructions (referred to as suggestions) that facilitate such hypnotic mental states as increased absorption, focused attention, and reduced spontaneous thoughts [ ]. Although a typical hypnotic phenomenon (e.g., sensory experience, amnesia, etc.) requires specific suggestions, research indicates that hypnotizability is rather associated with the brain activity during attention outside hypnosis [ ]. In other words, individuals are able to respond to hypnotic suggestions without the need for a formal induction procedure [ , ]. In fact, Braffman and Kirsch [ ] consider this responsiveness outside the hypnotic state as a predictor of suggestibility of individuals during hypnosis. A review of the literature by Gruzelier [ ] provides further support for the correspondence between attentional capability of individuals and their degree of suggestibility during hypnosis.
The study of hypnotic state using EEG [ , ] presents a promising gateway for assessing the effect of hypnosis on the brain neural activity. This is due to the mind-brain supervenience [ ] conjecture which states that the mental and cognitive events are accompanied by changes at neural level. It is apparent that the ability to infer such a correspondence between the mental and cognitive events on the one hand and the change in the neural activity that accompanied them on the other hand can provide a robust basis for realization of the neurophysiological [ , , , , ] and socio-psychological bases of hypnosis phenomenon [ – ]. Such an understanding can also help realize the potential of hypnosis as a solution concept for clinical treatment of mental and behavioural disorders at brain functional level [ – ].
Although a number of previous studies reported a significant change in spectral band power between pre- and post-hypnotic induction and/or high and low suggestible individuals [ , – ], these findings appeared to be inconclusive [ , ]. For instance, whereas some pointed at an increase in the theta activity in high hypnotizable subjects [ , ], others reported on its reduced [ ] or even absence [ ] of activity. Such inconsistencies can be attributed to the use of a direct measure of band amplitude (e.g., averaging over a given spectral power) to quantify the effect of hypnotic experience on the human subjects’ brain activity. Wutz et al. [ ] pointed that the modulation of information does not necessarily involve change in local power, thereby implying the possibility of the presence of a significant information when power is not elevated. Moreover, Jamieson and Burgess [ ] stated that given the equivalent sensory and behavioural processing demands in pre- and post-hypnotic phases, it is not reasonable to expect a significant difference in the spectral band amplitude between these settings and/or the brain activity of high and low hypnotizable individuals. These results, collectively, identified that the mere changes in the band amplitude did not represent a plausible measure for analysis of the potential effect of hypnotic experience on individuals’ brain activity [ ].
To address this shortcoming, a number of EEG-based biomarkers for study and analysis of hypnosis phenomenon in human subjects have been introduced [ , , , ]. For instance, Fingerkurts and colleagues [ ] considered the structural synchrony measure [ ] in the study of the neutral hypnosis (i.e., a hypnotic procedure that involves no specific suggestions other than those for becoming hypnotized) of a single hypnotic virtuoso. Their results indicated that this measure was able to detect the change in local and remote functional connectivity (FC) between the brain regions during hypnotic state. Terhune et al. [ ] reported a significant reduction of Phase Lag Index among highly hypnotizable individuals which was more pronounced between the frontal and the parietal electrode groupings in the upper alpha band. Cardeña et al. [ ] found a relation between depth of hypnosis and the topographic variability in the beta and gamma bands. Jamieson and Burgess [ ] utilized the coherence (COH) [ ] and the imaginary component of coherence (iCOH) [ ] to show an increase in the theta and a decrease in the beta1 (13.0-19.9 Hz) band from pre-hypnosis to hypnosis condition among highly hypnotizable participants.
Although these measures provided encouraging results in identifying an EEG-based hypnotic biomarker, their applicability appeared to be limited. For instance, Deivanayagi et al. [ ] found that COH associated the state of hypnosis with lowered theta and alpha frequency bands. They further envisioned the use of this measure to study the effect of hypnosis on higher frequencies such as beta and gamma bands. In contrast, Sabourin et al. [ ] found that COH indicated an increase in theta power during hypnosis in both low as well as high hypnotizable individuals. They further observed that the change in alpha power was not a predictor of hypnotic susceptibility, that highly susceptible subjects had more beta activity in the left than right hemispheres, and that low susceptible subjects showed only a weak lateralized asymmetry. On the other hand, the structural synchrony measure [ ] was only tested on a single hypnotic virtuoso and in a neutral hypnosis setting. This made it difficult to draw an informed conclusion on its utility in a broader domain (e.g., its sensitivity and specificity in a larger mixed group of high and low hypnotizable subjects and/or neural activity during hypnotic suggestions). In the same vein, the approach by Jamieson and Burgess [ ] required to employ two different measures (i.e., COH and iCOH) for analysis of two frequency bands (i.e., theta and beta1, respectively). It is also worthy of note that their results did not identify any significant differences in power [ ]. Furthermore, these results were primarily based on the state of hypnosis (i.e., without observing responses of the participants to hypnotic suggestions). It is apparent that a robust EEG-based hypnosis biomarker that exhibits a high specificity allows for drawing a more informed conclusion on the effect of hypnosis on the brain activity. Such a measure can provide adequate answers to divided perspectives on phenomenological [ , ] as well as the role of hypnosis in clinical treatment of mental disorders [ , – ].
An important characteristic that is attributed to the brain functioning is the relation between the variation in the brain activity and its information content [ , ]. For instance, Miller [ , p. 81] argued that there is a direct correspondence between the “amount of information” and the variance since “anything that increases the variance also increases the amount of information” (ibid.). Similarly, Cohen et al. [ ] considered the ability to identify meaningful variation in the brain activation to be an indicator of an effective analysis approach. Accordingly, Lundqvist et al. [ ] showed that the change in variation in information of neural spike rate best represents the burst of brain activity in response to working memory (WM) tasks. These findings that are in line with the concept of entropy [ ], as originally formulated by Shannon [ ], indicated the adequacy of the use of information-theoretic measures as summary statistics of the brain activity. In fact, it comes as no surprise that entropy in its various formulation [ ] is utilized exhaustively for analysis of the information content of biological signals [ – ].
In the context of EEG time series analysis, DE appears to be first utilized by Duan et al. [ ]. Subsequently, Zheng and Lu [ ] noted the DE’s ability to discriminate between EEG pattern of low and high frequency, given the EEG’s higher low frequency energy over high frequency energy. They further showed (ibid.) that DE can outperform such features as differential asymmetry (DASM), rational asymmetry (RASM), and power spectral density (PSD) in EEG frequency-domain analysis. Shi et al. [ ] used DE in the analysis of the EEG time series associated with vigilance. Alimardani et al. [ ] also utilized DE to achieve a significantly above average classification accuracy of low versus high suggestible participants during hypnosis. In this respect, Keshmiri et al. [ ] demonstrated that DE quantifies the information content of brain activity in terms of a shift (e.g., increase and/or decrease) in its neural population spiking (i.e., its variation in information) as it is charactrized by Fano factor [ ].
Given these findings, we sought the utility of DE for quantification of the brain neural responses to hypnotic suggestions. Specifically, we utilized DE of the theta, alpha, and beta frequency bands of fourteen-channel EEG recordings of twelve carefully selected high and low hypnotically suggestible individuals. We found that the higher hypnotic suggestibility was associated with a significantly lower variability in information content of theta, alpha, and beta frequencies. We also observed that such a lower variability was accompanied by a significantly higher functional connectivity (FC, a measure of spatiotemporal synchronization) in the parietal and the parieto-occipital regions in the case of theta and alpha frequency bands and a non-significantly lower FC in the central region’s beta frequency band.
Our results contribute to the field in two ways. First, they identify the applicability of DE as a unifying measure to reproduce the similar observations that are separately reported through adaptation of different hypnotic biomarkers in the literature. Second, they extend these previous findings that were based on neutral hypnosis (i.e., a hypnotic procedure that involves no specific suggestions other than those for becoming hypnotized) to the case of hypnotic suggestions, thereby identifying their presence as a potential signature of hypnotic experience.

## Materials and methods

## Subjects
Forty-six subjects (17 females, age M = 24.2, SD = 6.4) participated in this experiment from which two were removed for not following the instructions properly. All participants were university students/staff and were right-handed. Eleven participants had previously experienced hypnosis either in form of a stage show or a research experiment. Participants received explanation prior to the experiment and signed a written informed consent form (Approval number: 412-2, University of Tokyo).

## Hypnosis test and suggestibility score
The experiment included a pre-recorded Harvard Group Scale of Hypnotic Susceptibility, Form A (HGSHS:A, referred to as Harvard test hereafter) [ ]. It was administered for two purposes: 1) to test the subjects’ susceptibility to hypnosis, and 2) to give a full hypnosis session for EEG recording. This test comprises of twelve items. They are: 1) Head falling 2) Eye Closure 3) Hand lowering 4) Arm immobilization 5) Finger lock 6) Arm rigidity 7) Hands moving 8) Communication inhibition 9) Fly hallucination 10) Eye catalepsy 11) Post-hypnotic amnesia 12) Post-hypnotic suggestion (touching left ankle). In addition to these, two more items “Cooling of hands” and “Warming of hands” were added before items 11 and 12. These items were prepared by a professional hypnotist and added to the instructions, immediately following item 10.
From twelve items in Harvard test, subjects with scores 0 through 3 were categorized in LOW suggestible group. Similarly, we included the subjects with scores 8 through 12 in High suggestible group. This resulted in 8 LOW participants and 6 High participants. The remainder of participants were considered as Mid suggestible group and were subsequently excluded from present analyses.

## Experimental procedure
After receiving explanation, subjects were seated in a comfortable chair and the experimenter placed the EEG electrodes.
Subjects were asked to avoid unnecessary movements during the recording unless they were instructed so. The recording took place in five stages ( ). It started by a five-minute baseline recording (Pre-baseline) with eyes open. Next, subjects listened to an audio file of hypnotic instructions (in Japanese). Instructions started with items one and two of Harvard test, corresponding to preparation and induction phases, respectively. The Induction phase (i.e., eye closure in Harvard test) lasted for fifteen minutes. It primarily included verbal instructions to help subjects enter a state of deep relaxation and focused attention. In the suggestion phase, subjects listened to items three through ten of Harvard test (i.e., hand lowering, arm immobilization, finger lock, arm rigidity, hands moving, communication inhibition, fly hallucination, and eye catalepsy) ( ), followed by two additional suggestions of cooling and warming. Each suggestion lasted for two to five minutes. The experimenter noted down the behavioural responses of subjects to each suggestion as the session progressed. Then, subjects entered the awake phase after which items eleven and twelve of Harvard test were administered, thereby bringing subjects back to alert condition. The entire hypnosis session lasted for fifty minutes. At the end of the session, subjects answered to Harvard scoring assessment questionnaire. Finally, we recorded a five minutes post-hypnosis baseline with eyes open.
 

## Data acquisition
EEG signals were recorded from 14 sites that covered the frontal, central, temporal, parietal and occipital areas. Electrodes were placed on an EEG cap (g.tec, g.GAMMAsys) according to 10-20 international system (F3, Fz, F4, T7, C3, Cz, C4, T8, P3, Pz, P4, O1, Oz, and O2) ( ) and were selected to cover five main cortical regions (i.e., frontal, central, temporal, parietal and occipital) in both left and right hemispheres (red circles) and midline locations (green circles). We chose these electrodes due to their relative alignment with the brain regions that were identified by the previous research for their significant involvement in hypnosis: the default mode network (DMN) [ ] and fronto-parietal network [ , , ]. From a broader perspective, the channels that were included in our study covered all the major lobes of the brain that are involved in action, emotion, language, cognitive control, and action (see [ ], Chapters 9 through 12 for a detailed treatment of the subject).
A reference electrode was mounted on the right ear, with a ground electrode on the forehead. Impedance of electrodes was kept below 5 kOhm by applying conductive gel. Recorded signals were amplified using g.USBamp developed at Guger Technologies (Graz, Austria). The sampling rate was 128 Hz. A 50.0 Hz notch filter was used to reduce the noise.

## Data preprocessing
We performed offline preprocessing on the recorded EEG signals, using EEGlab version 13.4.4b [ ]. Data was first monitored and gross movement artefacts were excluded manually. Next, EEG time series of all channels were filtered within 0.5 to 30.0 Hz. We excluded gamma band (30-60Hz) from our analysis because the Harvard hypnosis test mainly includes motor items that require movement as a behavioural response and therefore, artefacts from muscle activity during these suggestions could have contaminated high-frequency EEG signals. Eye-movement and noises from other sources were rejected using independent component analysis (ICA) in EEGlab (eegrunica function). Then, we segmented these cleaned EEG signals into fourteen phases. They were: (1) pre-hypnosis baseline, (2) induction, (3) suggestion1, (4) suggestion2, (5) suggestion3, (6) suggestion4, (7) suggestion5, (8) suggestion6, (9) suggestion7, (10) suggestion8, (11) suggestion9, (12) suggestion10, (13) awake, (14) post-hypnosis baseline. These phases were selected based on the onset and offset of each hypnotic suggestion, as registered by the experimenter during the experiment. The rest times between the suggestions were excluded. Finally, the EEG data of each phase for every channel was decomposed into three frequency bands: theta (4-7.9 Hz), alpha (8-11.9 Hz), and beta (12-28 Hz).

## Feature extraction
We computed DE of a given frequency band (i.e., theta (θ), alpha (α), or beta (β)) for each of the fourteen EEG channels of every participant as [ ]
 H(Xj(f))=12logb(2πeσXj(f)2),j=1,…,14,f=θ,α,β(1)
where is the variance of a given frequency band, f ∈ [θ, α, β], in jth EEG channel of a participant and computes the entropy of the frequency band, f, in jth EEG channel of the participant. visualizes this feature extraction process. Although there is no restriction in selection of logarithm base, b, in , we used b = 2, thereby interpreting the change in brain activity in bits, as originally presented by Shannon [ ]. As a result, calculated DEs quantified the average amount of variation in information in the brain activity in response to hypnotic suggestions.
 

## Statistical analyses
Given the results of Harvard test [ ], we identified a total of fourteen participants in LOW (eight participants, three females, M = 25.13, SD = 6.47) and HIGH (six participants, three females, M = 24.67, SD = 5.28) suggestible groups. First, we balanced the number of participants in HIGH and LOW suggestible groups. Result of Harvard test suggested that all the LOW suggestible participants scored either one or three. Therefore, we excluded two participants with the highest score (i.e., three in our case) at random and included the remaining six LOW suggestible participants in this group. As a result, our analyses included six participants in each of LOW (three females, M = 25.83, SD = 7.48) and HIGH groups, out of which four participants (one female) had previously experienced hypnosis either in form of a stage show or a research experiment. We adapted this selection procedure from Jiang et al. [ ].
Each individual experienced 5 main stages ( ) that included 14 phases: a baseline recording phase and an induction (2 initial phases), 10 suggestions (10 separate phases), an awakening from hypnosis phase, and a post-baseline (2 final phases). The 10 suggestions in the middle were segments of interests in our study. We computed one DE value for each segment in each frequency band and each EEG location. Given 10 suggestions and that each of HIGH and LOW groups included 6 participants, we had 6 × 10 = 60 DEs, per frequency band and for each of HIGH and LOW groups (e.g., 60 DEs for alpha band at F3). In the case of FC, we used these 60 DE values, per frequency (i.e., 6 participants × 10 suggestions), per channel, to compute the pairwise correlations among the channels.
Our analyses comprised of two primary steps: 1) significance test in which we verified whether the DEs associated with the LOW and HIGH suggestible groups significantly differed 2) change in degree of synchrony in which we determined whether the observed significant difference between LOW’s and HIGH’s DEs was also associated with a significant change in the participants’ brain regional FC in response to hypnosis suggestions. We elaborate on these steps below.

## DEs’ significance test
For this test, we used the LOW and HIGH participants’ DE values that pertained to suggestion phases (i.e., suggestion1 through suggestion10) and performed a group-wise Wilcoxon rank sum between each of the frequency bands (e.g., theta band between LOW and HIGH). Each group included 6 individuals.

## Change in functional connectivity (FC)
To determine any potential significant change in functional connectivity among EEG channels of HIGH versus LOW suggestible groups, we performed all-pair FC analysis. For this purpose, we combined DEs of all participants for a given channel at a given frequency band and computed the pairwise FC using Pearson correlation (i.e., every pair of channels). This resulted in 14 × 14 FC matrices, per frequency band, where 14 refers to the number of EEG channels. For each channel, we then computed the average Pearson correlations that it had with the remainder of the channels and only considered those channels whose averaged Pearson correlations were ≥ 0.70 (i.e., primarily strong and very strong correlations) in our analysis. For the selected channels, we also counted the number of channels that they were synchronized with (i.e., number of channels that they showed ≥ 0.70 correlation with). For both of these measures (i.e., averaged correlation and number of synchronized channels, per selected channel), we used Kruskal-Wallis test to determine the effect of suggestibility on FC. We followed this test with post hoc paired Wilcoxon rank-sum test.
For Kruskal-Wallis, we reported the effect size , as suggested by Rosenthal and DiMatteo [ ]. In the case of Wilcoxon test, we used [ ] as effect size with W denoting the Wilcoxon statistics. N is the sample size in both cases. The effect size in non-parametric tests is considered [ ] small when r ≤ 0.3, medium when 0.3 < r < 0.5 and large when r ≥ 0.5.

## Ethics statement
All subjects singed a written informed consent from in accordance with ethical approval of the Ethics Committee (Approval number: 412-2), University of Tokyo. Every participant received a payment at the end of the experiment.

## Results

## DEs’ significance test
 shows the results of Wilcoxon rank sum on frequencies (i.e., theta, alpha, and beta) of fourteen EEG channels of HIGH and LOW suggestible participants. Although we observed significant differences between paired frequencies (e.g., theta band in HIGH and LOW groups) in all EEG channels (shown in , column p <), their differences exhibited a varying degree of effect ( , column r). In what follows, we highlight the brain regions that exhibited strong effect sizes (i.e., r ≥ 0.50) in two or more frequency bands. provides the full results of the significant differences, per brain region, per frequency.
 In the frontal region, we observed a large effect size between theta as well as alpha of HIGH and LOW suggestible groups at all channels as shown in the first row of , namely, F3, Fz, and F4.
In the case of temporal regions ( , left and right subplots) we observed large-effect significant difference in theta and alpha bands at both T7 and T8 locations and a large-effect significant difference in beta band only at T8.
In the central regions ( , middle subplots), we observed such large-effect significant differences in theta and alpha bands at Cz and C4 only.
In parietal area, shown in third row of , such significant differences with large effect sizes were observed in theta and beta bands at P3 along with theta and alpha bands at Pz, P4.
In the occipital region (fourth row of ), we observed large-effect significant differences between theta as well as beta bands of HIGH and LOW suggestible groups at O1 and O2.
Taken together, our analyses indicated that the significant differences that were charactrized with a large effect size were mainly associated with theta and alpha bands. In the case of beta band, such differences were primarily observed at T8 with only a marginally large effect size at P3.

## Change in functional connectivity (FC)
 depicts the functional connectivity density in HIGH and LOW suggestible groups, per frequency band. Between-group Kruskal-Wallis test identified a significant effect of suggestibility (p <.001, H(1, 83) = 23.21, η2 = .28). Post hoc analysis of this result ( ) indicated a significantly higher functional connectivity in HIGH suggestible groups with respect to theta and alpha bands. On the other hand, it indicated ( ) a non-significant difference in the beta band.
 shows the paired connectivity map of the channels in HIGH and LOW suggestible groups. Between-group Kruskal-Wallis test indicated the significant effect of suggestibility on number of channels that different channels were synchronized with (i.e., number of channels that they showed ≥.70 correlation with) (p <.01, H(1, 83) = 6.84, η2 = .08). Post hoc analysis of this result ( ) implied a significantly higher number of synchronized channels in HIGH compared to LOW suggestible groups in the case of theta ( ) and alpha ( ) and a non-significantly lower number of synchronized channels in HIGH versus LOW in beta band ( ).
 

## Discussion
In this article, we examined the utility of DE as a reliable biomarker for quantification of the brain neural responses to hypnotic suggestibility. In doing so, we attributed the inconsistencies among the findings in hypnosis literature [ , ] to application of the overall change in power (e.g., averaging the change in power amplitude in a given frequency band) in their analyses which ignored the crucial role of the brain variability in its functioning [ , ]. Our approach was motivated by the viewpoint that advocates the possibility of the presence of significant information in the absence of any observable elevation in power [ ].
Fano factor (i.e., ) [ ] characterizes the neural spiking as a deviation of activation of neural population from their expected firing rate. It is apparent that such a deviation is minimized when responses of a given neural population is in unison in which case the firing of every individual neuron tends to the expected firing rate of the entire neural population (i.e., σ2 → 0). In this respect, it appears plausible to construe the observed lower information content (and hence the variability) in the HIGH suggestible participants’ theta, alpha, and beta frequency bands as a marker of a neural population that exhibits a highly (i.e., in comparison with LOW suggestible participants) synchronized activity to hypnotic suggestions. This interpretation is in accord with Keshmiri et al. [ ] on direct correspondence between the change in variation in information and neural spiking rate. It also finds further support in recent findings by Wittig Jr. et al. [ ] that showed that the spiking neuronal activity was suppressed and became more reliable in preparation for verbal memory formation. In the present study, this interpretation was also evident in the significantly higher FC in the theta and alpha frequency bands in the case of HIGH compared to LOW suggestible participants.
We observed that the large effect of hypnotic suggestibility on information content of the theta, alpha, and beta frequency bands was not confined to the EEG channels that covered a specific hemisphere but manifested (with comparable strength in their effect sizes) in both, EEG channels on the left as well as the right hemispheres. This, in turn, suggested that the brain activity of HIGH suggestible participants (i.e., in comparison with LOW participants) exhibited a rather global neural responses to hypnotic suggestions whose effect was significantly distributed between their left and right hemispheric neural activity. Recent study by Han et al. [ ] on projection patterns of 591 individual neurons in the mouse primary visual cortex revealed that most neurons targeted multiple cortical areas, often in non-random combinations. Furthermore, their results indicated that the signals that were carried by individual cortical neurons were shared across subsets of target areas, and thus concurrently contributed to multiple functional pathways. These findings provided a promising evidence in support of the global brain neural excitation in response to stimuli, as observed in our results in the case of HIGH suggestible participants during the hypnotic suggestions.
Our results also identified a significantly higher FC in HIGH suggestible participants’ theta and alpha bands that was more pronounced in the parietal (in the case of theta) and centroparietal (for alpha) regions and that was accompanied by a non-significantly smaller FC in the beta band in central region. In this respect, Jamieson and Burgess [ ] also reported similar changes in FC from pre-hypnosis to hypnosis state using iCOH (increase in theta) [ ] and COH (decrease in beta1) [ ]. However, their analyses which were primarily based on the state of hypnosis (i.e., without observing responses of the participants to hypnotic suggestions) did not identify any significant differences [ ] between pre-hypnosis and hypnosis state on these bands. Our results complemented these findings by extending the observed effects from neutral hypnosis to hypnotic suggestions, thereby identifying their presence as a potential signature of hypnotic state. Moreover, our findings improved their results by introducing a single measure (i.e., DE in contrast to iCOH and COH for the theta and beta bands, respectively) that was able to capture the significant differences between HIGH and LOW suggestible participants.
Burgess and Gruzelier [ ] suggested the potential role of alpha oscillations for a hippocampally dependent large-scale integration of information across brain areas that were distributed over temporal, fronto-parietal, and occipital regions. A number of previous findings also proposed the role of theta band in transfer of information between the hippocampus and the neocortex [ , ] as well as in reflecting the intensification of attentional processes [ ]. Our findings on the effectiveness of DE as an information-theoretic measure of brain neural responses to hypnosis suggestions were in line with these findings on the role of alpha and theta bands in information processing and transfer of information between functionally connected brain regions. Additionally, a comprehensive review by Perlini and Spanos [ ] on the contribution of alpha band to hypnosis responses of human subjects concluded that the observed tentatively positive findings on the role of alpha band in the hypnotic state required further investigation to ensure the reproducibility of its effect. In this respect, previous findings during neutral hypnosis [ , ] on the significant increase in alpha FC in conjunction with our results on differentially large effect of alpha during hypnotic suggestions provided further evidence for the substantial role of this frequency band during hypnosis.
Another interesting observation was the apparent higher frontal area’s FC in the HIGH compared to LOW suggestible groups. Rainville and Price [ ] showed that the absorption-related effect included increased activation in the frontal and posterior parietal regions. Moreover, Bell et al. [ ] identified that an increase in prefrontal cortex activity indicated the potential involvement of the executive system during hypnosis suggestions that was accompanied by an increased occipital regional blood flow (rCBF) [ ]. They also showed that this increase in occipital rCBF was negatively correlated with hypnotic absorption [ ]. These findings pointed at the engagement of executive attentional network [ ] during hypnotic experience. This view found further evidence in the requirement of the attentional processes for selective enhancement of target-stimulus processing as well as inhibition of competing processes and responses [ , – ]. In this respect, the ability of DE for quantification of the enhanced frontal activity in HIGH suggestible participants along with the observed increases in the occipital channels contributed to these findings and their interpretation of hypnosis as an altered state of consciousness [ , ].
We also observed a higher FC between temporal and occipital channels in the case of HIGH suggestible participants. Previous research also identified the occurrence of such temporo-occipital functional linkings in response to visual stimulation [ , ]. Although it is plausible to attribute this to the open-eye effect during hypnosis session, it is an unlikely expectation in our case since our subjects had their eyes close throughout the experiment (except for the pre- and post-baselines which are not included in our analyses). Therefore, it is possible to propose that this effect, that was also reported by Fingerkurts and colleagues [ ] during the neutral hypnosis of a single hypnosis virtuoso (eyes open in their case), is a neuro-cognitive marker of hypnosis. In fact, Fingerkurts and colleagues [ ] suggested that this effect might indicate the participants’ readiness processing of the suggestions and translation to hallucinated realities in perception. However, this hypothesis requires further investigation to test for its validity.
A number of mental and behavioural disorders are charactrized by peculiar functioning of the brain neural activity that are observable in the theta and alpha frequencies [ – ]. Moreover, the use of hypnotic suggestions to suppress episodic memories (post-hypnotic amnesia) implies alterations in the brain areas responsible for long-term memory retrieval (i.e., occipital, temporal, and prefrontal) [ , ]. Our results on ability of DE in capturing the significant effect of hypnotic suggestions on these frequencies along with its utility in quantification of the observed distributed brain activity in response to hypnotic suggestions (with its effect most pronounced in frontal, temporal, and occipital regions) hint at its utility as a robust biomarker for study of the effect of hypnosis suggestions on the brain. They further highlight the potential of DE as an adequate biomarker for quantification of the effect of hypnosis on brain neural responses during the treatment of such behavioural and mental disorders.

## Limitations and future direction
Our results identified DE as a potential unifying measure to reproduce previous observations that were based on multiple biomarkers. DE also appeared to further complement these measures by extending their results during the neutral hypnosis to the case of hypnotic suggestions, thereby identifying such neural activations as potential signatures of hypnotic experience. However, our results did not compare DE with these previous measures (e.g., COH). Therefore, future comparative analyses of DE and these other measures to clarify their respective dis/advantages will be necessary to thoroughly appreciate their proper domain of application.
We also primarily focused on determining whether DE can identify the subtle differences between high versus low suggestible individuals’ neural responses to hypnotic suggestions. Therefore, we did not include the individuals’ pre-hypnosis rest period. Inclusion of such baselines (e.g., as control signals) can help determine whether DE can also quantify the change in the brain activity of these individuals from their respective pre-hypnosis rest time. This is indeed an important and interesting venue for future research, considering the association between hypnotizability and the brain activity during attention outside hypnosis [ ] and the potential role of such a responsiveness in prediction of the individuals’ suggestibility [ ].
Given our primary objective, we inevitably discarded a rather larger sample of individuals that were categorized as mid-hypnotizable group. However, inclusion of these individuals whose responses to hypnotic suggestions are not distinctively low or high, can potentially shed light on the nature of the observed variation of information in the brain during hypnosis. For instance, DE might be useful for determining whether the change from low to high suggestibility occurs along a continuum that encompasses the mid-suggestible group’s brain activity or such differences are rather associated with distinct and mutually exclusive neural responses.
Considering the crucial role of the cortical self-organized criticality [ – ] in maximizing its information capacity [ – ], entropy has been proven as a powerful tool for quantification of the variability in brain functioning [ ] and cortical activity [ ] in such broad area of research as information processing capacity of working memory (WM) [ ] and the state of consciousness [ ]. Although the use of DE in neuroimaging (e.g., Tononi et al. [ ] and Carhart-Harris [ ]) and EEG studies (e.g., Duan et al. [ ], Zheng and Lu [ ], Shi et al. [ ], and Zheng et al. [ ]) has presented promising results, its application for modeling of the brain functioning requires further investigation. Specifically, parametric adaptation of DE for the analysis of EEG time series [ – , ] assumes that such data is homoscedastic and normally distributed. While the applicability of such an assumption in neuroimaging studies has been investigated [ , , ], similar theoretical studies to better position the use of DE in EEG-based brain research is currently (to the best of our knowledge) lacking. Such analyses can help determine the domain of applications in which DE may not be an adequate measure for modeling the EEG time series of the brain activity. Along the same direction, it is also interesting to further examine the utility of the non-parametric formulation of the differential entropy [ , ] for modeling of EEG time series [ ].
In the present study, we were specifically interested in behavioural responses to hypnotic suggestions that were mainly ideo-motor suggestions, inducing movement and therefore noise in EEG. Therefore, we decided to exclude the gamma band from our analyses, considering its vulnerability to movement-related artefacts. Subsequently, we opted for a lower sampling rate of 128 Hz for EEG recordings. This choice was in accord with our overview of the EEG-based hypnosis research that identified 128 Hz and 256 Hz as the most commonly used sampling rates [ , , ]. However, future research that is empowered with high density electrodes and that includes higher frequency bands can allow for more comprehensive realization of the underlying dynamics of brain responses to hypnotic suggestions. Such setting can also provide better testbeds for critical examination of DE and other biomarkers for study of hypnosis.
In spite of the fact that the original group of individuals who participated in our hypnosis experiment formed a moderately acceptable sample size (i.e., forty-six subjects), the final validation for their inclusion in LOW and HIGH groups based on Harvard test [ ] resulted in a small sample. Furthermore, all of these individuals were university students/staff, some of whom had previous exposure to hypnosis experience. As a result, it is plausible to presume that our participants were able to more readily comprehend and follow our experimental procedure, thereby contributing to an above-average outcome that one might expect from a general population. Therefore, it is crucial to reevaluate these findings while considering a broader general population.
The present findings are not only of interest to the psychology and neuroscience community but also to the researchers in the field of AI and brain-computer interfaces [ , ]. For instance, the use of DE as a biomarker of hypnosis can be utilized in development of real-time EEG classifiers that detect their users’ responses to hypnotic suggestions. This, in turn, can expedite the deployment of the automated hypnotherapeutic systems of the future for clinical treatment of mental and behavioural disorders at brain functional level [ – ]. Such adaptations, in turn, can take the field a step closer to personalized hypnosis interventions that are tailored around the individuals’ suggestibility level.

## Supporting information
S1 Data(ZIP)
Click here for additional data file.

 10.1371/journal.pone.0230853.r001Decision Letter 0
De PascalisVilfredoAcademic Editor© 2020 Vilfredo De Pascalis2020Vilfredo De PascalisThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
12 Feb 2020

PONE-D-20-00814
Higher Hypnotic Suggestibility Is Associated with the Lower EEG Signal Variability in Theta, Alpha, and Beta Frequency Bands
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Keshmiri,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
We would appreciate receiving your revised manuscript by Mar 28 2020 11:59PM. When you are ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter.
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). This letter should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. This file should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. This file should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Manuscript'.

Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Vilfredo De Pascalis
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements:
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at http://www.plosone.org/attachments/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and http://www.plosone.org/attachments/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2. Please provide additional details regarding participant consent. In the ethics statement in the Methods and online submission information, please ensure that you have specified whether consent was informed.
3. We note that you have indicated that data from this study are available upon request. PLOS only allows data to be available upon request if there are legal or ethical restrictions on sharing data publicly. For more information on unacceptable data access restrictions, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions.
In your revised cover letter, please address the following prompts:
a) If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially sensitive information, data are owned by a third-party organization, etc.) and who has imposed them (e.g., an ethics committee). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent.
b) If there are no restrictions, please upload the minimal anonymized data set necessary to replicate your study findings as either Supporting Information files or to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. For a list of acceptable repositories, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-recommended-repositories.
We will update your Data Availability statement on your behalf to reflect the information you provide.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: General Overview:
This study investigates and highlights the search for an effective and robust biomarker in the EEG to delineate hypnotisability. Overall this is a well written and researched article with solid justification for the use of an information content approach.
The study concept is certainly worthy of publication however, will require some minor additional amendments both in grammar and with some minor additional proof reading with respect to processes and assumptions. Also, the limitations of the study should be addressed in the final discussion; role of high density electrodes approaches, sampling sizes stability of hypnotized state, potential for artifactual findings, false positives etc.
Overall, this is an innovative study, which was conceptualised, designed and tested well and will certainly add to the literature and field.
Abstract
The clarity of abstract’s argument and discussion of findings, may need some proof reading. eg the sentence with “summary statistics” unclear. This abstract doesn’t include details of the population tested and how. Refer to last paragraph in Introduction comment below. Maybe include this instead.
Introduction
• Very well written and latest research discussed well. Good Structured narrative.
• Justification for this direction of research argued and presented well.
• P2 line 46. The use of the word “recently” to reflect work that is 13 yrs old. [ref 14]
• Line 58 COH beta effect also seen in other studies (eg Deivanayagi et al 2007) and some did not (Sabourin et al 1990 ref 30). May need to clarify this in line 58. 68 why? There are some consistencies.
• Line 97 Why discuss the methodology/results and conclusions of the experiment in the introduction? Should only be discussing the justification of the study. Some of this material would be better in the abstract.
Material and Methods
• Line 127. Would a broader community sample have been more useful than a possibly biased academic one?
• Line 146: Would it also have been on some research interest to also examine the EEG of the mid hypnotisability group, to see if there is a linear relationship on response differences? This may have been useful.
• What were the gender distribution of the remaining 14 (8L, 6H) tested? How many of these had previously been hypnotized?
• Line 151.” placed the electrodes.” How, by what scheme; electro cap should be explained, (ref?) etc?
• Fig 1: were the other electrodes recorded or were just 14 recorded? If so, why were these selected? The electrode map may be misleading if the other electrodes were not used.
• Line 176. A faster sampling rate may have been less problematic (especially for measuring higher EEG frequencies).
• Line 182. It would have been difficult to record gamma anyway with the low sampling rate.
• Line 192. Why were the rest times excluded? These could have been associated with a control baseline.
• Line 208. How was this balanced? 8 vs 6? Or another process?
• Line 222. How were 60 DE values calculated, based on time? Why 60? Needs clarifying.
Results
• Line 284 Should read “Change in Functional Connectivity (FC)”
• Fig 5: Clarify that the left COH map is High and right is low.
• It would have been interesting to see a comparison with standard coherence maps for each band with the changes in FC.
• Requires some clarity about how the 14 states were used to produce the data for subsequent analyses (average of suggestion1-10?). This is mentioned in Discussion line 349. Should be addressed in Results in more detail and why?
Discussion
• A well written discussion about the effects/implications for the findings, however there should also be a discussion about the potential limitations of the study.
• There should also be some discussion about how the study could be expanded in future.
• When is DE not an adequate biomarker? what are the bare minimum requirements to be able to calculate it? Eg Can you do a case study on an individual? Perhaps this should be discussed in Methods as well. By citing and including the work of Duan et al 2013, Wei et al 2020, Lu et al 2020(changes in emotions), Wang et al 2020 (cognitive Control), may be useful.
References:
• Might be useful to add other studies cited above if used in narrative.
Reviewer #2: Page 1 (Abstract)
Change “Variational information” to “Variation of information”
Change “accompanies with a” to “accompanied by a”.
Change “provides a direct” to “provides direct”.
Page 2 lines 34 and 35
The phrase “power and information do not necessarily need to be modulated” is confusing in the context of the wider sentence. I suspect the authors intend to convey either that modulation of power does not necessarily involve modulation of information or that modulation of information does not necessarily involve change in local power or BOTH. The sentence should be rewritten to better convey the authors intended meaning.
Page 3 line 68 “significant differences” should probably be changed to read “significant differences in power”. Line 73 change “perspective” to “perspectives” and change “as role” to “as the role”.
Page 6 line 180 “major artefacts” is simply too vague and in-descriptive consider changing this to something like “gross movement artefacts”.
Results
Page 8 figure 3 legend P<.05 and p<.01 are un-necessary as there are no such results displayed.
Numerical values presented in Table 1 should not be reproduced in text on page 8 and page 10. The values shown in Table 1 appear to be inconsistent with the corresponding images displayed in Figure 3 for the means for lows and highs for beta at P3 and also for alpha at O2. Please check this. Consider if Figure 3 adds value for the reader in understanding these results.
Page 11 line 287 presents an eta squared value as does line 296. Please check is eta squared the intended/appropriate/correct effect size measure?
Repetition of numerical values from table 2 and table 3 in text on page 11 (and page 12) appears redundant and un-necessary. This is probably best removed.
Discussion
It may be worth acknowledging that dendritic potentials drive scalp recorded EEG alongside axonal spiking.
Page 12 Line 329 refers to findings in separate hemispheres. This seems to imply hemisphere specific tests were conducted and reported but I do not recall seeing such. Please clarify this issue for the readers.
Page 13. Lines 348 – 349 “did not identify any significant differences” did you mean “differences in alpha”? If so please state that or otherwise clarify the frequency bands referred to.Line 370 change “the hypnosis” to “hypnosis”.
Page 14 line 392 change “to speculate” to read “to propose that”.
Line 402 reference [77] consider adding an additional recent relevant finding on the role of functional connectivity in upper alpha in hypnotic amnesia suggestion responses
Jamieson, G. A., Kittenis, M. D., Tivadar, R. I., & Evans, I. D. (2017). Inhibition of retrieval in hypnotic amnesia: dissociation by upper-alpha gating. Neuroscience of consciousness, 3(1).
Note my conflict of interest I am a co-author. Please do not include this reference here unless you consider it adds value for the reader.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files to be viewed.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0230853.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
21 Feb 2020

First and foremost, the authors would like to express their gratitudes for the reviewers’ time and kind consideration to review their manuscript. The comments by the reviewers certainly helped improve the quality of the results as well as their presentations instructively and substantially.
In the pages that follow, we provide our point-by-point responses to the reviewers’ comments.
Sincerely,
Responses to Reviewer 1
Abstract
Reviewer’s Comment: The clarity of abstract’s argument and discussion of findings, may need some proof reading. eg the sentence with “summary statistics” unclear.
Authors’ Response: We replaced “summary statistics” with the term biomarker. For further changes to the Abstract, please see our response to reviewer’s comment “This abstract doesn’t include details...”
Reviewer’s Comment: This abstract doesn’t include details of the population tested and how. Refer to last paragraph in Introduction comment below. Maybe include this instead.
Authors’ Response: To provide brief information about participants and the frequencies used in this study, we added the following to the Abstract.
“For this purpose, we utilized differential entropy (DE, i.e., the average information content in a continuous time series) of theta, alpha, and beta frequency bands of fourteen-channel EEG time series recordings that pertain to the brain neural responses of twelve carefully selected high and low hypnotically suggestible individuals.”
With regards to the changes applied to the last paragraph in Introduction, please refer to our response to reviewer’s comment “Line 97 Why discuss the methodology/results and conclusions...”
Introduction
Reviewer’s Comment: P2 line 46. The use of the word “recently” to reflect work that is 13 yrs old. [ref 14]
Authors’ Response: In the revised version of the manuscript, “recently” is removed.
Reviewer’s Comment: 68 why? There are some consistencies.
Authors’ Response: The authors are not certain whether they follow the reviewer’s comment and will be thankful if the reviewer kindly provides further information.
Reviewer’s Comment: Line 58 COH beta effect also seen in other studies (eg Deivanayagi et al 2007) and some did not (Sabourin et al 1990 ref 30). May need to clarify this in line 58.
Authors’ Response: To clarify this point, we added the following to the Section Introduction, lines 60-68, in the current version of the manuscript.
“For instance, Deivanayagi et al. [28] found that COH associated the state of hypnosis with lowered theta and alpha frequency bands. They further envisioned the use of this measure to study the effect of hypnosis on higher frequencies such as beta and gamma bands. In contrast, Sabourin et al. [31] found that COH indicated an increase in theta power during hypnosis in both low as well as high hypnotizable individuals. They further observed that the change in alpha power was not a predictor of hypnotic susceptibility, that highly susceptible subjects had more beta activity in the left than right hemispheres, and that low susceptible subjects showed only a weak lateralized asymmetry.”
Reviewer’s Comment: Line 97 Why discuss the methodology/results and conclusions of the experiment in the introduction? Should only be discussing the justification of the study. Some of this material would be better in the abstract.
Authors’ Response: We addressed this issue in two steps.
1. Abstract: We added the following information to the Abstract of the manuscript.
“For this purpose, we utilized differential entropy (DE, i.e., the average information content in a continuous time series) of theta, alpha, and beta frequency bands of fourteen-channel EEG time series recordings that pertain to the brain neural responses of fourteen carefully selected high and low hypnotically suggestible individuals.”
2. Introduction: We modified the content of this part (Section Introduction, lines 108-117, in the current version of the manuscript) as follows:
“Given these findings, we sought the utility of DE for quantification of the brain neural responses to hypnotic suggestions. Specifically, we utilized DE of the theta, alpha, and beta frequency bands of fourteen-channel EEG recordings of twelve carefully selected high and low hypnotically suggestible individuals. We found that the higher hypnotic suggestibility was associated with a significantly lower variability in information content of theta, alpha, and beta frequencies. We also observed that such a lower variability was accompanied by a significantly higher functional connectivity (FC, a measure of spatiotemporal synchronization) in the parietal and the parieto-occipital regions in the case of theta and alpha frequency bands and a non-significantly lower FC in the central region’s beta frequency band.”
Material and Methods
Reviewer’s Comment: Line 127. Would a broader community sample have been more useful than a possibly biased academic one?
Authors’ Response: This is in fact an important observation by the reviewer. In the current version of the manuscript, we added a new Section (Limitations and Future Direction, lines 425-495, in the current version of the manuscript) in which we discussed some of the limitations and future direction of this research. With regards to the study sample, we included the following paragraph (lines 478-486) to this Section.
“In spite of the fact that the original group of individuals who participated in our hypnosis experiment formed a moderately acceptable sample size (i.e., forty-six subjects), the final validation for their inclusion in LOW and HIGH groups based on Harvard test [63] resulted in a small sample. Furthermore, all of these individuals were university students/staff, some of whom had previous exposure to hypnosis experience. As a result, it is plausible to presume that our participants were able to more readily comprehend and follow our experimental procedure, thereby contributing to an above-average outcome that one might expect from a general population. Therefore, it is crucial to reevaluate these findings while considering a broader general population.”
Reviewer’s Comment: Line 146: Would it also have been on some research interest to also examine the EEG of the mid hypnotisability group, to see if there is a linear relationship on response differences? This may have been useful.
Authors’ Response: We discussed this matter in Section Limitations and Future Direction (lines 442-449, in the current version of the manuscript) as follows.
“Given our primary objective, we inevitably discarded a rather larger sample of individuals that were categorized as mid-hypnotizable group. However, inclusion of these individuals whose responses to hypnotic suggestions are not distinctively low or high, can potentially shed light on the nature of the observed variation of information in the brain during hypnosis. For instance, DE might be useful for determining whether the change from low to high suggestibility occurs along a continuum that encompasses the mid-suggestible group’s brain activity or such differences are rather associated with distinct and mutually exclusive neural responses.”
Reviewer’s Comment: What were the gender distribution of the remaining 14 (8L, 6H) tested? How many of these had previously been hypnotized?
Authors’ Response: Prior to providing our response to reviewer’s comment, the authors would like to clarify that the number of participants that were included in this study were 12 and not 14. The reviewer’s observation on 14 participants is correct as we originally identified 14 individuals that were not among the “Mid suggestible group” (Section Hypnosis Test and Suggestibility Score, lines 146-148, in the current version of the manuscript). However, we balanced the number of participants in such a way that LOW and HIGH groups each included 6 participants. Out of these 12 participants, four participants (one female) had previously experienced hypnosis either in form of a stage show or a research experiment. We included this information in Section Statistical Analyses (lines 217-227, in the current version of the manuscript). It reads as follows.
“Given the results of Harvard test [63], we identified a total of fourteen participants in LOW (eight participants, three females, M = 25.13, SD = 6.47) and HIGH (six participants, three females, M = 24.67, SD = 5.28) suggestible groups. First, we balanced the number of participants in HIGH and LOW suggestible groups. Result of Harvard test suggested that all the LOW suggestible participants scored either one or three. Therefore, we excluded two participants with the highest score (i.e., three in our case) at random and included the remaining six LOW suggestible participants in this group. As a result, our analyses included six participants in each of LOW (three females, M = 25.83, SD = 7.48) and HIGH groups, out of which four participants (one female) had previously experienced hypnosis either in form of a stage show or a research experiment. We adapted this selection procedure from Jiang et al. [18].”
Reviewer’s Comment: Line 151.” placed the electrodes.” How, by what scheme; electro cap should be explained, (ref?) etc?
Authors’ Response: EEG signals were recorded from 14 sites that covered the frontal, central, temporal, parietal and occipital areas. Electrodes were placed on an EEG cap (g.tec, g.GAMMAsys) according to 10-20 international system (F3, Fz, F4, T7, C3, Cz, C4, T8, P3, Pz, P4, O1, Oz, and O2) (Figure 1 (c)) and were selected to cover five main cortical regions (i.e., frontal, central, temporal, parietal and occipital) in both left and right hemispheres (red circles) and midline locations (green circles). We added this information in Section Data Acquisition, lines 171-176, in the current version of the manuscript, as follows.
“EEG signals were recorded from 14 sites that covered the frontal, central, temporal, parietal and occipital areas. Electrodes were placed on an EEG cap (g.tec, g.GAMMAsys) according to 10-20 international system (F3, Fz, F4, T7, C3, Cz, C4, T8, P3, Pz, P4, O1, Oz, and O2) (Figure 1 (c)) and were selected to cover five main cortical regions (i.e., frontal, central, temporal, parietal and occipital) in both left and right hemispheres (red circles) and midline locations (green circles).”
Reviewer’s Comment: Fig 1: were the other electrodes recorded or were just 14 recorded? If so, why were these selected? The electrode map may be misleading if the other electrodes were not used.
Authors’ Response: Only the 14 electrodes that are highlighted in Figure 1 were used in this study. We chose these electrodes due to their relative alignment with the brain regions that were identified by the previous research for their significant involvement in hypnosis: the default mode network (DMN) [64] and fronto-parietal network [1,8,10]. From a broader perspective, these electrodes covered all the major lobes of the brain that are involved in action, emotion, language, cognitive control, and action [65]. We included this information in Section Data Acquisition, lines 176-182, in the current version of the manuscript, as follows.
“We chose these electrodes due to their relative alignment with the brain regions that the previous research identified their significant involvement in hypnosis: the default mode network (DMN) [64] and fronto-parietal network [1,8,10]. From a broader perspective, the channels that were included in our study covered all the major lobes of the brain that are involved in action, emotion, language, cognitive control, and action (see [65], Chapters 9 through 12 for a detailed treatment of the subject).”
With regards to the electrodes that were used in our study, we first modified Figure 1 (c) caption to to better clarify the electrodes that we used in our study, as follows.
“Fourteen electrodes placed on the frontal, temporal, central, parietal, and occipital areas in both left and right hemispheres (red circles) and the midline locations (i.e. green circles) recorded EEG signals during the experiment.”
However, the authors would also like to state that they have no objection to change of this subplot, in case the reviewer finds it necessary.
Reviewer’s Comment: Line 176. A faster sampling rate may have been less problematic (especially for measuring higher EEG frequencies).
Authors’ Response: In the present study, we were specifically interested in behavioural responses to hypnotic suggestions that were mainly ideo-motor suggestions, inducing movement and noise in EEG. We clarified this point in Section Data Preprocessing, lines 191-195, in the current version of the manuscript. It reads as follows.
“We excluded gamma band (30-60Hz) from our analysis because the Harvard hypnosis test mainly includes motor items that require movement as a behavioural response and therefore, artefacts from muscle activity during these suggestions could have contaminated high-frequency EEG signals.”
Therefore, we decided to exclude the gamma band from our analyses, considering its vulnerability to movement related artefacts. Subsequently, we opted for a lower sampling rate of 128 Hz for EEG recordings. This choice was in accord with our overview of the EEG-based hypnosis research that identified 128 Hz and 256 Hz as the most commonly used sampling rates (references [14,31,100] in the current version of the manuscript). However, we agree with the concern of the reviewer on highlighting this limitation along with the use of high density electrodes. Therefore, we added the following discussion to Section Limitations and Future Direction, lines 467-477, in the current version of the manuscript.
“In the present study, we were specifically interested in behavioural responses to hypnotic suggestions that were mainly ideo-motor suggestions, inducing movement and noise in EEG. Therefore, we decided to exclude the gamma band from our analyses, considering its vulnerability to movement related artefacts. Subsequently, we opted for a lower sampling rate of 128 Hz for EEG recordings. This choice was in accord with our overview of the EEG-based hypnosis research that identified 128 Hz and 256 Hz as the most commonly used sampling rates (references [14,31,100] in the current version of the manuscript). However, future research that is empowered with high density electrodes and that includes higher frequency bands can allow for more comprehensive realization of the depth and breadth of brain responses to hypnotic suggestions. Such setting can also provide better testbeds for critical examination of DE and other biomarkers for study of the hypnosis.”
Reviewer’s Comment: Line 182. It would have been difficult to record gamma anyway with the low sampling rate.
Authors’ Response: Please refer to the authors’ response to reviewer’s comment “Line 176. A faster sampling rate may have been less problematic...”
Reviewer’s Comment: Line 192. Why were the rest times excluded? These could have been associated with a control baseline.
Authors’ Response: We primarily focused on determining whether DE can identify the subtle differences between high versus low suggestible individuals’ neural responses to hypnotic suggestions. Therefore, we did not include the individuals’ pre-hypnosis rest period. However, we agree with the reviewer’s point on the importance of inclusion of such baselines (e.g., as control signals) to determine whether DE can also quantify how the brain activity of these individuals differed from their respective pre-hypnosis rest time. In the current version of the manuscript, we discussed this matter in Section Limitations and Future Direction, lines 433-441, in the current version of the manuscript. It reads as follows.
“We also primarily focused on determining whether DE can identify the subtle differences between high versus low suggestible individuals’ neural responses to hypnotic suggestions. Therefore, we did not include the individuals’ pre-hypnosis rest period. Inclusion of such baselines (e.g., as control signals) can help determine whether DE can also quantify the change in the brain activity of these individuals from their respective pre-hypnosis rest time. This is indeed an important and interesting venue for future research, considering the association between hypnotizability and the brain activity during attention outside hypnosis [10] and the potential role of such a responsiveness in prediction of the individuals’ suggestibility [13].”
Reviewer’s Comment: Line 208. How was this balanced? 8 vs 6? Or another process?
Authors’ Response: Please refer to the authors’ response to reviewer’s comment “What were the gender distribution of the remaining 14 (8L, 6H) tested?”
Reviewer’s Comment: Line 222. How were 60 DE values calculated, based on time? Why 60? Needs clarifying.
Authors’ Response: Please also refer to the authors’ response to reviewer’s comment “Requires some clarity about how the 14 states ...”
Results
Reviewer’s Comment: Line 284 Should read “Change in Functional Connectivity (FC)”
Authors’ Response: The heading has been changed to “Change in Functional Connectivity (FC)”
Reviewer’s Comment: Fig 5: Clarify that the left COH map is High and right is low.
Authors’ Response: We added the following sentence to the caption of Figure 5:
“In these subplots, the left map is associated with HIGH and the right map corresponds to LOW group.”
Furthermore, we identified the subplots that corresponded to HIGH and LOW groups by adding “HIGH” and “LOW” headings to their respective subplots.
Reviewer’s Comment: It would have been interesting to see a comparison with standard coherence maps for each band with the changes in FC.
Authors’ Response: The present study was primarily meant to verify whether such information-theoretic measures as DE can benefit the hypnosis research via providing a robust quantitative measure that can distinguish between the low and high suggestible individuals. However, we also agree with the reviewer on the importance of such comparative analyses. To pinpoint the necessity for such comparative analyses, we added the following paragraph to Section Limitations and Future Direction (lines 425-432, in the current version of the manuscript).
“Our results identified DE as a potential unifying measure to reproduce previous observations that were based on multiple biomarkers. DE also appeared to further complement these measures by extending their results during the neutral hypnosis to the case of hypnotic suggestions, thereby identifying such neural activations as potential signatures of hypnotic experience. However, our results fell short in comparative analysis of DE with these previous measures (e.g., COH). Therefore, future comparative analyses of DE and these other measures to clarify their respective dis/advantages will be necessary to thoroughly appreciate their proper domain of application.”
Reviewer’s Comment: Requires some clarity about how the 14 states were used to produce the data for subsequent analyses (average of suggestion1-10?). This is mentioned in Discussion line 349. Should be addressed in Results in more detail and why?
Authors’ Response: Each individual experienced 14 phases which included a baseline recording, an induction phase (2 initial phases), 10 suggestions (10 separate phases), an awakening from hypnosis, and a post-baseline (2 final phases). The 10 suggestions in the middle where segments of interests in our study. We did not average the 10 segments, but rather computed one DE value for each segment in each frequency band and each EEG location. Given 10 suggestions and that each of HIGH and LOW groups included 6 participants, we had 6 X 10 = 60 DEs, per frequency band and for each of HIGH and LOW groups (e.g., 60 DEs for alpha band at F3). In the case of FC, we used these 60 DE values, per frequency (i.e., 6 participants × 10 suggestions), per channel, to compute the pairwise correlations among the channels. We verified this information in Section Statistical Analysis, lines 228-237, in the current version of the manuscript. It reads as follows.
“Each individual experienced 5 main stages (Figure 1) that included 14 phases: a baseline recording phase and an induction (2 initial phases), 10 suggestions (10 separate phases), an awakening from hypnosis phase, and a post-baseline (2 final phases). The 10 suggestions in the middle where segments of interests in our study. We computed one DE value for each segment in each frequency band and each EEG location. Given 10 suggestions and that each of HIGH and LOW groups included 6 participants, we had 6 × 10 = 60 DEs, per frequency band and for each of HIGH and LOW groups (e.g., 60 DEs for alpha band at F3). In the case of FC, we used these 60 DE values, per frequency (i.e., 6 participants × 10 suggestions), per channel, to compute the pairwise correlations among the channels.”
We further modified the information associated with the FC analysis (Section Change in Functional Connectivity (FC), lines 250-263, in the current version of the manuscript) to more clearly explain how DEs were used during the FC analysis. The modified Section reads as follow.
“To determine any potential significant change in functional connectivity among EEG channels of HIGH versus LOW suggestible groups, we performed all-pair FC analysis. For this purpose, we combined DEs of all participants for a given channel at a given frequency band and computed the pairwise FC using Pearson correlation (i.e., every pair of channels). This resulted in 14 × 14 FC matrices, per frequency band, where 14 refers to the number of EEG channels. For each channel, we then computed the average Pearson correlations that it had with the remainder of the channels and only considered those channels whose averaged Pearson correlations were ≥ 0.70 (i.e., primarily strong and very strong correlations) in our analysis. For the selected channels, we also counted the number of channels that they were synchronized with (i.e., number of channels that they showed ≥ 0.70 correlation with). For both of these measures (i.e., averaged correlation and number of synchronized channels, per selected channel), we applied Kruskal-Wallis test to determine the effect of suggestibility on FC. We followed this test with post-hoc paired Wilcoxon rank-sum test.”
Discussion
Reviewer’s Comment: A well written discussion about the effects/implications for the findings, however there should also be a discussion about the potential limitations of the study.
Authors’ Response: We added a new Section (Limitations and Future Direction, lines 425-495) in which we discussed some of the limitations and future direction of our research. It highlights the following topics:
1. Comparison with other measures (lines 425-432, in the current version of the manuscript): We discussed how the future can benefit from comparative analysis of DE and other measures that are used in the study of the neural correlates of hypnosis. Please refer to the authors’ response to reviewer’s comment “It would have been interesting to see a comparison with standard coherence...” for the content of the discussion that has been included in this paragraph.
2. The use of resting period EEG (lines 433-441, in the current version of the manuscript): In this paragraph, we stated the reason why we excluded the resting state EEG recordings of the participants in our study. We further pinpointed how the inclusion of this recordings in analysis of the effect of hypnosis on the brain activity can benefit the future research. for the content of the discussion that has been included in this paragraph. Please refer to the authors’ response to reviewer’s comment “Line 192. Why were the rest times excluded? These could have been associated with a control baseline.” for the content of the discussion that has been included in this paragraph.
3. The use of Mid- hypnotisable group in the future research (lines 442-449, in the current version of the manuscript): In this paragraph, we underlined the exclusion of the larger portion of our sample that corresponded to the mid-hypnotisable group, given the main objective our study. We further underlined how the inclusion of this group can help determine the potential relationship between high and low suggestible individuals. Please refer to the authors’ response to reviewer’s comment “Line 146: Would it also have been on some research interest to also examine...” for the content of the discussion that has been included in this paragraph.
4. Use of DE, minimum requirements, limitations, and potential solutions (lines 450-466, in the current version of the manuscript): In this paragraph, we summarized the our motivation for considering the entropy (in general) and highlighted the major and previous studies that brought the DE for EEG analyses to the spot light. We then briefly discussed the main assumption for the use of DE and finally highlighted how an alternative solution might be considered to lighten it. This paragraph reads as follows.
“Considering the crucial role of the cortical self-organized criticality [82–84] in maximizing its information capacity [85–87], entropy has been proven as a powerful tool for quantification of the variability in brain functioning [88] and cortical activity [89] in such broad area of research as information processing capacity of working memory (WM) [47] and the state of consciousness [91]. In this regards, although the use of DE in neuroimaging (e.g., Tononi et al. [90] and Carhart-Harris [88]) and EEG studies (e.g., Duan et al. [56], Zheng and Lu [57], and Shi et al. [58], Zheng et al. [94]), its application for modeling of the brain functioning requires further investigation. Specifically, parametric adaptation of DE for the analysis of EEG time series [56–59] assumes that the time series data under investigation is normally distributed. Although the applicability of such an assumption in neuroimaging studies has been investigated [60,94,95], similar theoretical studies to better position the use of DE in EEG-based brain research is currently (to the best of our knowledge) lacking. Such analyses can help determine the domain of applications in which DE may not be an adequate measure for modeling the EEG time series of the brain activity. Along the same direction, it is also interesting to further examine the utility of the non-parametric formulation of the differential entropy [97,98] for modeling of EEG time series of the brain signal variability [99].”
5.Sampling rate and number of electrodes in the present study (lines 467-477, in the current version of the manuscript):In this paragraph, we briefly discussed why we chose the sampling rate adapted in this study. Furthermore, we underlined the necessity for research using dense electrode EEGs and higher sampling rate for collecting the brain responses to hypnosis suggestions in higher frequencies to more comprehensively and critically examine the utility of DE and other biomarkers in hypnosis studies. Please refer to the authors’ response to reviewer’s comment “Line 176. A faster sampling rate may have been ...” for the content of the discussion that has been included in this paragraph.
6. Sample size and demographic limitations (lines 478-486, in the current version of the manuscript): This paragraph discussed the shortcomings imposed by the sample of participants that were included in our study. Please refer to the authors’ response to reviewer’s comment “Line 127. Would a broader community sample have been more useful than a possibly biased academic one?” for the content of the discussion that has been included in this paragraph.
7. Prospect of future utilization (lines 487-495, in the current version of the manuscript): We closed this Section by pointing at one potential real-world application of the findings such the results that we presented in this manuscript.
“The present findings are not only of interest to the psychology and neuroscience community but also to the researchers in the field of AI and brain-computer interfaces [101, 102]. For instance, the use of DE as a biomarker of hypnosis can be utilized in development of real-time EEG classifiers that detect their users’ responses to hypnotic suggestions. This, in turn, can expedite the deployment of the automated hypnotherapeutic systems of the future for clinical treatment of mental and behavioural disorders at brain functional level [23-26]. Such adaptations, in turn, can take the field a step closer to personalized hypnosis interventions that are tailored around the individuals’ suggestibility level.”
Reviewer’s Comment: There should also be some discussion about how the study could be expanded in future.
Authors’ Response: Please refer to the authors’ response “7. Prospect of future utilization (lines 487-495, in the current version of the manuscript)” to reviewer’s comment “Reviewer’s Comment: A well written discussion about the effects/implications for the findings…,”
Reviewer’s Comment: When is DE not an adequate biomarker? what are the bare minimum requirements to be able to calculate it? Eg Can you do a case study on an individual? Perhaps this should be discussed in Methods as well. By citing and including the work of Duan et al 2013, Wei et al 2020, Lu et al 2020(changes in emotions), Wang et al 2020 (cognitive Control), may be useful.
Authors’ Response: We discussed this matter in Section Limitations and Future Direction, lines 442-449 (Please refer to the authors’ responses to reviewer’s comment “A well written discussion about the effects/implications for the findings …,” point number 3, for the content of the discussion that has been included in this paragraph). With regards to the recommended references, we added them to the manuscript as they were in line with our study and their inclusion improved our manuscript. Specifically, Duan et al. (2013), Zheng et al. (2015), and Shi et al. (2013) were first discussed in Section Introduction, lines 96-102, in the current version of the manuscript, as follows.
“In the context of EEG time series analysis, DE appears to be first utilized by Duan et al. [56]. Subsequently, Zheng and Lu [57] noted the DE’s ability to discriminate between EEG pattern of low and high frequency, given the EEG’s higher low frequency energy over high frequency energy. They further showed (ibid.) that DE can outperform such features as differential asymmetry (DASM), rational asymmetry (RASM), and power spectral density (PSD) in EEG frequency-domain analysis. Shi et al. [58] used DE in the analysis of the EEG time series associated with vigilance.”
They were further cited in Section Limitations and Future Direction (lines 455-456, in the current version of the manuscript) during the discussion about further consideration on the use of DE.
References:
• Might be useful to add other studies cited above if used in narrative.
Authors’ Response: We cited the following references, as they benefited the clarity of our results.
56. R.-N. Duan, J.-Y. Zhu, & B.-L. Lu, Differential entropy feature for EEG-based emotion classification, Proceedings of IEEE 6TH International IEEE/EMBS Conference on Neural Engineering (NER), 7, 81-84 (2013).
57. Zheng, W. L., Lu & B. L., Investigating critical frequency bands and channels for EEG-based emotion recognition with deep neural networks, IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development, 7, 162-175 (2015).
58. Shi, L.C., Jiao, Y.Y. & Lu, B.L. Differential entropy feature for EEG-based vigilance estimation, 35th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), 6627-6630 (2013).
96. Zheng, W.L., Liu, W., Lu, Y., Lu, B.L. & Cichocki, A., Emotionmeter: A multimodal framework for recognizing human emotions, IEEE transactions on cybernetics, 49, 1110-1122 (2018).
However, we could not find Lu et al 2020(changes in emotions), Wang et al 2020 (cognitive Control). We would like to ask the reviewer to provide the DOIs of these articles, in case the reviewer finds their inclusion may further benefit our manuscript.
The other newly cited research in the current version of the manuscript are references 82-97 and 100-102.
Responses to Reviewer 2
Reviewer #2: Page 1 (Abstract)
Reviewer’s Comment: Change “Variational information” to “Variation of information”
Authors’ Response: All occurrences of “Variational information” are changed to “Variation of information”
Reviewer’s Comment: Change “accompanies with a” to “accompanied by a”.
Authors’ Response: All occurrences of “accompanies with a” are changed to “accompanied by a”
Reviewer’s Comment: Change “provides a direct” to “provides direct”.
Authors’ Response: “provides a direct” is changed to “provides direct”
Reviewer’s Comment: Page 2 lines 34 and 35
The phrase “power and information do not necessarily need to be modulated” is confusing in the context of the wider sentence. I suspect the authors intend to convey either that modulation of power does not necessarily involve modulation of information or that modulation of information does not necessarily involve change in local power or BOTH. The sentence should be rewritten to better convey the authors intended meaning.
Authors’ Response: We in fact intended the second description that is mentioned by the reviewer. Therefore, we modified the manuscript by replacing our sentence with “modulation of information does not necessarily involve change in local power.” In the current version of the manuscript, it reads as follows (Section Introduction, lines 34-36, in the current version of the manuscript).
“Wutz et al. [39] pointed that the modulation of information does not necessarily involve change in local power, thereby implying the possibility of the presence of a significant information when power is not elevated.”
Reviewer’s Comment: Page 3 line 68 “significant differences” should probably be changed to read “significant differences in power”.
Authors’ Response: “significant differences” is changed to “significant differences in power”
Reviewer’s Comment: Line 73 change “perspective” to “perspectives” and change “as role” to “as the role”.
Authors’ Response: “perspective” is changed to “perspectives” and “as role” is changed to “as the role”
Reviewer’s Comment: Page 6 line 180 “major artefacts” is simply too vague and in-descriptive consider changing this to something like “gross movement artefacts”.
Authors’ Response: “major artefacts” is changed to “gross movement artefacts”
Results
Reviewer’s Comment: Page 8 figure 3 legend P<.05 and p<.01 are un-necessary as there are no such results displayed.
Authors’ Response: P<.05 and p<.01 are removed from Figure 3.
Reviewer’s Comment: Numerical values presented in Table 1 should not be reproduced in text on page 8 and page 10.
Authors’ Response: Numerical values in text on pages 8 and 10 are removed.
Reviewer’s Comment: The values shown in Table 1 appear to be inconsistent with the corresponding images displayed in Figure 3 for the means for lows and highs for beta at P3 and also for alpha at O2. Please check this. Consider if Figure 3 adds value for the reader in understanding these results.
Authors’ Response: We checked all the values in Table1 and verified that they were correct. With regards to Figure 3, the authors believe that its inclusion allows the readers to visually appreciate the significant differences that have been reported in this manuscript. However, the authors are willing to exclude the figure in case the reviewer considers this modification to be necessary.
Reviewer’s Comment: Page 11 line 287 presents an eta squared value as does line 296. Please check is eta squared the intended/appropriate/correct effect size measure?
Authors’ Response: We checked these values. Whereas the eta squared at line 287 (line 304, in the current version of the manuscript) is 0.28, it is 0.08 in line 296 (line 312 in the current version of the manuscript). The authors would also like to bring to reviewer’s kind attention that whereas the first eta-squared is associated with Kruskal-Wallis test on FC values, the latter pertains to this applied on the number of channels that different channels were synchronized with (i.e., the number of undirected connections among them).
Reviewer’s Comment: Repetition of numerical values from table 2 and table 3 in text on page 11 (and page 12) appears redundant and un-necessary. This is probably best removed.
Authors’ Response: Numerical values from table 2 and table 3 in text are removed.
Discussion
Reviewer’s Comment: Page 12 Line 329 refers to findings in separate hemispheres. This seems to imply hemisphere specific tests were conducted and reported but I do not recall seeing such. Please clarify this issue for the readers.
Authors’ Response: We rewrote this sentence as follows (Section Discussion, lines 340-343, in the current version of the manuscript).
“We observed that the large effect of hypnotic suggestibility on information content of the theta, alpha, and beta frequency bands was not confined to the EEG channels that covered a specific hemisphere but manifested (with comparable strength in their effect sizes) in both, EEG channels on the left as well as the right hemispheres.”
Reviewer’s Comment: Page 13. Lines 348 – 349 “did not identify any significant differences” did you mean “differences in alpha”? If so please state that or otherwise clarify the frequency bands referred to.
Authors’ Response: We rewrote this part (Section Discussion, lines 358-363, in the current version of the manuscript) as follows.
“In this respect, Jamieson and Burgess [40] also reported similar changes in FC from pre-hypnosis to hypnosis state using iCOH (increase in theta) [44] and COH (decrease in beta1) [43]. However, their analyses which were primarily based on the state of hypnosis (i.e., without observing responses of the participants to hypnotic suggestions) did not identify any significant differences [40] between pre-hypnosis and hypnosis state on these bands.”
Reviewer’s Comment: Line 370 change “the hypnosis” to “hypnosis”.
Authors’ Response: All occurrences of “the hypnosis” are changed to “hypnosis”
Reviewer’s Comment: Page 14 line 392 change “to speculate” to read “to propose that”.
Authors’ Response: “to speculate” is changed to “to propose that”
Reviewer’s Comment: Line 402 reference [77] consider adding an additional recent relevant finding on the role of functional connectivity in upper alpha in hypnotic amnesia suggestion responses
Jamieson, G. A., Kittenis, M. D., Tivadar, R. I., & Evans, I. D. (2017). Inhibition of retrieval in hypnotic amnesia: dissociation by upper-alpha gating. Neuroscience of consciousness, 3(1).
Note my conflict of interest I am a co-author. Please do not include this reference here unless you consider it adds value for the reader.
Authors’ Response: Thank you very much for your suggestion and the clarity on issues potentially associated “conflict of interest.” We cited (Section Discussion, Reference No. 82, line 416, in the current version of the manuscript) this reference as we found its findings to be useful to the potential readers interested in the line research presented by our results and other results cited in our manuscript.
Responses to Editor
Editor’s Comment: 2. Please provide additional details regarding participant consent. In the ethics statement in the Methods and online submission information, please ensure that you have specified whether consent was informed.
Authors’ Response: The Ethics Statement is moved to Section Materials and Methods, lines 269-272, in the current version of the manuscript. The current statement also provides additional information regarding the “informed written consent” from the participants. It reads as follows.
“All subjects singed a written informed consent from in accordance with ethical approval of the Ethics Committee (Approval number: 412-2), University of Tokyo. Every participant received a payment at the end of the experiment.”
Editor’s Comment: b) If there are no restrictions, please upload the minimal anonymized data set necessary to replicate your study findings as either Supporting Information files or to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. For a list of acceptable repositories, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-recommended-repositories.
Authors’ Response: Upon acceptance of the manuscript, data-files of the extracted entropy-features that have been utilized during analyses reported in this article will be uploaded in a public repository by the second and third authors of this manuscript.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Hypnosis_AuthorsReviewResposnes.pdf
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0230853.r003Decision Letter 1
De PascalisVilfredoAcademic Editor© 2020 Vilfredo De Pascalis2020Vilfredo De PascalisThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
11 Mar 2020

Higher Hypnotic Suggestibility Is Associated with the Lower EEG Signal Variability in Theta, Alpha, and Beta Frequency Bands
PONE-D-20-00814R1
Dear Dr. Keshmiri,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it complies with all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you will receive an e-mail containing information on the amendments required prior to publication. When all required modifications have been addressed, you will receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will proceed to our production department and be scheduled for publication.
Shortly after the formal acceptance letter is sent, an invoice for payment will follow. To ensure an efficient production and billing process, please log into Editorial Manager at https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the "Update My Information" link at the top of the page, and update your user information. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to enable them to help maximize its impact. If they will be preparing press materials for this manuscript, you must inform our press team as soon as possible and no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
With kind regards,
Vilfredo De Pascalis
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0230853.r004Acceptance letter
De PascalisVilfredoAcademic Editor© 2020 Vilfredo De Pascalis2020Vilfredo De PascalisThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
17 Mar 2020

PONE-D-20-00814R1
Higher Hypnotic Suggestibility Is Associated with the Lower EEG Signal Variability in Theta, Alpha, and Beta Frequency Bands
Dear Dr. Keshmiri:
I am pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper at this point, to enable them to help maximize its impact. If they will be preparing press materials for this manuscript, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
For any other questions or concerns, please email plosone@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE.
With kind regards,
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Prof. Vilfredo De Pascalis
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE