PLoS BiolPLoS Biol212plosbiol101183755plosPLoS Biology1544-91731545-7885PLOSPMC8321514PMC8321514.1832151483215143432448810.1371/journal.pbio.3001313PBIOLOGY-D-20-033681Meta-Research ArticleComputer and Information SciencesArtificial IntelligenceMachine LearningResearch and Analysis MethodsMathematical and Statistical TechniquesStatistical MethodsAnalysis of VariancePhysical SciencesMathematicsStatisticsStatistical MethodsAnalysis of VariancePhysical SciencesMathematicsApplied MathematicsAlgorithmsMachine Learning AlgorithmsResearch and Analysis MethodsSimulation and ModelingAlgorithmsMachine Learning AlgorithmsComputer and Information SciencesArtificial IntelligenceMachine LearningMachine Learning AlgorithmsComputer and Information SciencesSoftware EngineeringPreprocessingEngineering and TechnologySoftware EngineeringPreprocessingResearch and Analysis MethodsResearch AssessmentPeer ReviewResearch and Analysis MethodsComputer and Information SciencesResearch and Analysis MethodsMathematical and Statistical TechniquesStatistical MethodsTest StatisticsPhysical SciencesMathematicsStatisticsStatistical MethodsTest StatisticsEducating the future generation of researchers: A cross-disciplinary survey of trends in analysis methods
Trends in analytics across biological and social scienceshttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-0533-3010BoltTaylorConceptualizationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7129-3793NomiJason S.Writing – original draftWriting – review & editing BzdokDaniloWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2278-8962UddinLucina Q.Writing – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Department of Psychology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, Florida, United States of America2
Department of Biomedical Engineering, McConnell Brain Imaging Centre (BIC), Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI), Faculty of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Canada3
Mila—Quebec Artificial Intelligence Institute, Montreal, Canada4
Neuroscience Program, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, United States of AmericaDirnaglUlrichAcademic Editor ], the availability of large, complex datasets [ – ], and increasing computational resources [ – ]. The classic statistical tools (e.g., t test, analysis of variance (ANOVA), and linear regression) taught in introductory statistics courses are, at times, perceived insufficient to prepare researchers for the age of big data, machine learning, and open-source software. Concerned that BLS sciences educational training is struggling to keep up with these trends, many researchers and statisticians have advocated for educational reform to introductory research methods and statistics courses [ – ]. We argue that a crucial step in this direction is a more complete understanding of actual trends in analytic method usage across BLS sciences. Such an understanding will offer valuable insights into the necessary methodological skills and knowledge needed to train early career scientists for future success in their disciplines and their interdisciplinary collaborations.
Increasingly, analytic methods developed in one discipline find fruitful application in another. For example, deep learning, a machine learning technique developed by the artificial intelligence community, has successfully been used by biologists to predict three-dimensional protein structure [ ]. The explosive adoption of neural networks across biology and multiple other fields illustrates the need for educational training to note these trends and keep pace with the demand for expertise in these emerging advanced analytic approaches.
In this study, we conducted a systematic charting of analytic method usage across BLS disciplines over time. We applied natural language processing tools to a large corpus of open-access peer-reviewed literature. Our study aimed to map out the methodological landscape of the BLS disciplines and identify changing trends over the past decade (2009 to 2020). Here, we use the term “analytic methods” to broadly denote any quantitative or qualitative method for data analysis, including any algorithms, statistics, or models used to describe, summarize, or interpret a sample of data. This definition is meant to exclude those elements of research methodology involved in data collection or experimental or study design. “Study” is also broadly defined as a peer-reviewed quantitative- or qualitative-based assessment of measured data points, including experimental, observational, or meta-analytic research. We retraced trends in analytic methods across (1) time; and (2) research disciplines. From a temporal perspective, we identified analytic methods that have increased or decreased in prominence across BLS disciplines over the past decade (2009 to 2020). From a cross-disciplinary perspective, we identified analytic methods that are uniquely prominent within each BLS discipline and the similarity or dissimilarity of BLS disciplines, in terms of their usage of analytic methods.
Our survey found that analytic methods commonly taught in introductory research methods and statistics courses (e.g., t test, ANOVA) remain the most commonly mentioned methods in BLS research articles over the past decade. However, these methods have largely declined in prominence, or remained stable, over the past decade. On the other hand, multivariate statistics and machine learning methods have exhibited a consistent, sometimes exponential, increase in mentions from 2009 to 2020. Further, we found that analytic methods are not equally distributed across BLS disciplines, but tend to cluster into certain disciplines over others.

## Results

## Preprocessing and analysis summary
The primary goal of this study is to describe and understand usage shifts in analytic methods across BLS disciplines over time. We analyzed approximately 1.3 million articles published in a decade of research to accomplish this goal. We extracted mentions/adoptions of analytic methods from “Methods and materials” and “Results” sections of a large corpus of peer-reviewed articles (PubMed Central Open Access Subset, PMC OAS [ ]). We used a named entity recognition (NER) algorithm trained specifically for this purpose. We refer to these extracted mentions from the text as analytic method entities—unique strings of alphanumeric characters that refer to a distinct method for data analysis. The extracted entities then underwent a sequence of preprocessing steps including removal of unwanted characters and lemmatization (i.e., removing inflectional endings). The preprocessing workflow included a manual entity disambiguation step that classified entities referring to equivalent analytic methods to the same category—e.g., “Cox regression” and “Cox PH regression” were both classified as “Cox proportional hazards regression.” The final number of unique analytic method entities after these preprocessing steps was N = 250. In addition to pre-preprocessing of analytic method entities, articles were classified into a set of 15 research disciplines ( ) using a supervised machine learning framework pooling information from article titles, abstracts, and journal names. The 15 disciplines were chosen by the authors from a survey of the corpus to balance breadth and specificity of the BLS literature. The disciplines and their abbreviations are as follows: animal/insect/plant biology (ANIMAL), biochemistry and molecular biology (BIOCHEM), clinical research (CLINIC), computer science and informatics (CS), ecology and evolutionary science (ECO), oncology (ONCO), environmental science (ENVIRON), psychology (PSYCH), population and behavioral genetics (POPGENE), neuroscience (NEURO), chemistry and material science (CHEM), engineering and biotechnology (ENG), human physiology (PHYSIO), immunology (IMMUN), and epidemiology and public health (EPIDEM). The preprocessing pipeline is illustrated in . Details of the preprocessing pipeline are included in the “Methods and materials” section.
 The analytic method entities extracted from all articles were used as input to 3 analytic pipelines: (1) analytic method trends to observe temporal trends in analytic method usage over the time window of 2009 to 2020 (at an annual frequency); (2) discipline by analytic method probability analysis to understand what analytic methods are unique to each BLS discipline; and (3) analysis of analytic method groupings to discover data-driven clusters of analytic methods that frequently co-occur within and across BLS disciplines. To promote reproducibility and reuse, the full code for all preprocessing and analytic processes are provided on the following web page: https://github.com/tsb46/stats_history.

## Journal, discipline, and analytic method statistics
The corpus of open-access peer-reviewed literature predominantly consisted of science general journals, such as PLOS ONE, Scientific Reports, and Nature Communications ( ). This observation highlights one advantage of the machine learning classification of journal articles into scientific disciplines. The common practice of article classification by its journal publication would fail to capture the mixture of scientific disciplines contained within these science general journals. Discipline-specific journals with high article counts included Oncotarget (ONCO), BMJ Open (CLINIC, EPIDEM), BMC Genomics (BIOCHEM), Sensors (ENG), BMC Public Health (EPIDEM), and Frontiers in Psychology (PSYCH). These discipline-specific journals publish peer-reviewed articles in a specific area of study and have a more focused readership. The disciplines with the highest article counts are primarily biomedical and clinical disciplines: CLINIC (N = 333,547), EPIDEM (N = 172,949), BIOCHEM (N = 160,016), and ONCO (N = 111,818) ( ). The top 10 journals by discipline and the article counts for each discipline are provided in the Supporting information ( ).
 To provide a visual illustration of the similarity between disciplines in their overall analytic method counts, we deployed classical multidimensional scaling (MDS). MDS is a simple manifold learning technique that expresses each discipline’s total analytic method counts in a parsimonious two-dimensional space ( ). The distances between the disciplines in the resulting plot reflect the dissimilarity/similarity in total analytic method counts. This approach made apparent that 2 disciplines stood out as relative outliers in analytic method mentions: Evolution/Ecology and Chemistry/Material Sciences. As depicted in , these select disciplines revealed a unique profile of analytic method mentions. For illustration, we consider the discipline of Ecology/Evolutionary Sciences. Compared with other BLS disciplines, distance matrix and manifold learning methods (e.g., MDS) are more widely used in the analysis of ecological data [ – ]. Such methods have been found to be uniquely suited for the analysis of species composition and abundance data [ ]. For example, distance matrices constructed through metric/nonmetric dissimilarity metrics (e.g., Bray–Curtis dissimilarity) are used to represent a species-by-sample/site matrix. Manifold learning methods are routinely used to analyze the resulting distance matrices [ ]. Manifold learning methods are often referred to as “ordination” in ecology.
The most frequently mentioned analytic method entities included null hypothesis testing (e.g., p-values and null hypothesis), confidence intervals, correlation, linear regression, logistic regression, t tests, and ANOVAs. Other frequently mentioned analytic method entities included bootstrap resampling techniques, meta-analysis, dimension reduction, and clustering techniques (e.g., principal component analysis [PCA] and hierarchical clustering), classification performance metrics (e.g., area under the curve and receiver operating characteristic [ROC]), survival models (e.g., cox regression), and bioinformatic algorithms (e.g., sequence alignment and phylogenetic tree construction methods). Interestingly, content analysis—a sometimes quantitative, sometimes qualitative coding method of documents to examine communication patterns—also appears in the top 50 most frequently mentioned method entities.

## Analytic method trends
A primary goal of our survey was to examine trends in analytic method mentions in research articles over the past decade (2009 to 2020). We first manually categorized analytic methods into larger superordinate categories of conceptually similar methods (analytic method categories—e.g., t test/ANOVA, generalized linear models [GLIMs], and survival analysis) (N = 34). Because the total number of articles in the corpus increased significantly year over year, the raw frequency counts for all analytic method categories exhibited a consistent increase in total counts over the time span of the corpus. In order to track what analytic method categories have increased or decreased in mentions relative to the total number of articles per year, we calculated the proportion of articles mentioning each category per year (2009 to 2020). We display yearly trends for 12 of the 34 analytic method categories in . Trends for all analytic method categories are provided in and Figs. A data-driven analysis of all analytic method trends without grouping into superordinate categories is provided in . Raw counts and proportions for all analytic methods without grouping into superordinate categories are provided in and Data, respectively.
 We make a distinction between those analytic method categories that are commonly taught in introductory research method and statistics courses—e.g., null hypothesis testing, t tests/ANOVA, linear regression, 2-way contingency tables (e.g., chi-squared test), and interval estimation (e.g., confidence intervals) [ – ] and those analytic method categories taught in advanced statistics or computer science courses—e.g., dimension reduction and clustering techniques (e.g., PCA, nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF), and K-means clustering), machine learning classifiers (e.g., support vector machines and random forest classifier), and regression subset selection methods (e.g., Lasso regression). We nominally refer to these 2 groups as “introductory” and “advanced” analytic methods, respectively. Note that we do not intend by this distinction to mean that “introductory” methods are less sophisticated or appropriate for data analysis than “advanced” analytic methods. This distinction is merely meant to distinguish between those analytic methods typically taught in introductory courses in data analysis from more advanced undergraduate and graduate data analysis courses.
As can be observed from , introductory statistical methods—e.g., null hypothesis, testing, t tests/ANOVA, linear regression, and confidence intervals—have remained the dominant analytic methods mentioned in BLS methodology and results sections over the past decade. Null hypothesis testing concepts and statistics (e.g., p-values, null hypothesis, and alternative hypothesis) are by far the most commonly mentioned analytic “methods” in the BLS sciences—approximately 35% of articles per year mention 1 or more analytic methods in this category. The next most prominently mentioned analytic method category are ANOVA/t tests—statistics for comparing mean differences between 1 or more means collected from independent groups or repeated observations. Interval estimation approaches (e.g., confidence interval and credible interval) for calculating the possible values of a population parameter is the third most prominent analytic method category.
While baseline differences in the proportion of articles that mention an analytic method category are important to consider, of primary interest for this survey are the relative trends in mentions across the time span of the study (2009 to 2020). To assess the statistical significance of the linear trends (i.e., decline or increase) in analytic method categories across the study time span, we used a logistic regression model. Specifically, for each analytic method, we modeled the log odds of an article mentioning that method conditional on an article’s publication year (2009 to 2020) and the article’s scientific discipline. To assess whether any research discipline exhibits a statistically significant deviation from the overall linear trend of a given analytic method category, interactions between the linear trend and discipline were added to the model. To account for the correlated/nonindependent structure of articles published within journals, the logistic regression model was estimated using a generalized estimating equation (GEE) approach. Full details of the model are provided in the Methods and materials section.
The trends in analytic method category mentions are plotted individually (blue) in . Note that y-axis scales are relative for each analytic method category, and caution should be taken in comparing trends across categories. The statistical significance (p-value) of the linear trend for each analytic method category is displayed by each title. Those disciplines that exhibit a statistically significant interaction (p < 0.05; corrected for multiple comparisons with the Holm–Bonferroni method)—i.e., exhibit a deviation from the overall trend—are displayed with the overall trend.
 While still dominant, there has been a marked decline in the proportion of articles mentioning parametric mean comparison tests (t test/ANOVA) over the course of 2009 to 2020. The same decline is observed for analysis of 2-way contingency or cross-tabulation tables, such as the chi-squared test and Fisher exact test. Other “introductory” statistical methods and concepts, such as linear regression and null hypothesis, have remained fairly constant in their proportion of mentions across the past decade. Interestingly, interval estimation methods, such as confidence intervals, have exhibited an increase in mentions over the past decade, perhaps reflecting the increased pressure from institutions and researchers [ – ] to report confidence intervals along with statistical significance tests and p-values in peer-reviewed research. As opposed to p-values, confidence intervals have the advantage of providing information regarding both the size and uncertainty of a point estimate.
In contrast, analytic methods covered in more advanced statistics and computer science courses have exhibited a marked increase in the proportion of mentions from 2009 to 2020. These analytic methods include dimension reduction/clustering analysis, machine learning classifiers (e.g., random forest classifiers, support vector machines, and artificial neural networks [ANNs]), nonparametric tests, partial least squares/discriminant analysis (PLS/DA), and regression subset selection methods (e.g., Lasso regression). Generalized linear models (GLIMs) (e.g., logistic regression, probit regression, and Poisson regression) have remained relatively constant over the past decade. However, analysis of the individual GLIM models belonging to this category shows that logistic regression, perhaps the most common GLIM model, has declined in mentions over the past decade ( ).
As illustrated in , not all research disciplines follow the overall trend in analytic method mentions over the past decade. Some research disciplines exhibit a trend opposite of that observed in the overall trend. For example, mentions of null hypothesis testing concepts in population/behavioral genetics (POPGENE) research articles have declined in mentions from 2009 to 2020, while the overall trend remains fairly constant during that time span. Other research disciplines exhibit a steeper trend in mentions than that observed in the overall trend. For example, mentions of machine learning classifier methods in engineering/biotechnology (ENG) research articles exhibit a much steeper exponential increase in mentions from 2009 to 2020 compared with the overall trend.

## Analytic method mentions by discipline
To examine analytic methods associated with each BLS discipline, we used a contingency table approach. Specifically, we modeled the difference in observed versus expected article counts based on the number of article counts for each discipline and analytic method across the corpus. We used the standardized Pearson chi-squared residuals as an effect size measure of the degree to which an analytic method is more prominently associated with a given discipline relative to other disciplines. In , we display the top 10 analytic methods per discipline as measured by the chi-squared residual value. The raw probability for each analytic method by discipline is provided in the Supporting information ( ).
 As can be observed from , each discipline is associated with a distinct set of analytic methods. Some analytic methods appear across more than 1 discipline—e.g., Fourier analysis in chemistry/material sciences and engineering/biotechnology. Others are unique to a given discipline. For example, mentions of independent component analysis (ICA) appear much more in neuroscience research articles than those of other disciplines. ICA is a common method for decomposing multivariate signals (typically time series) into an additive mixture of statistically independent latent sources, which has found common use in neuroimaging (e.g., functional magnetic resonance imaging and electroencephalography) for source separation, artifact removal and detection of brain networks [ , ]. Another example is survival analysis methods (e.g., Cox regression and log-rank test) in oncology. Survival analysis methods, such as Cox regression or Kaplan–Meier analysis, aim to model the time to an event of interest. For clinical trials in the discipline of oncology, survival analysis methods have been found useful in modeling the effect of treatment on time to death [ ]. Another example is the uniquely predominant use of PLS and PLS/DA in chemistry or chemometrics. PLS, a multivariate technique that predicts a set of response variables (Y) based on a set of predictor variables (X), is often used in chemometrics to relate properties of chemical samples (e.g., spectral properties) to their chemical composition (e.g., sample concentrations) [ ].

## Analytic method groupings
Analytic methods in the BLS sciences are rarely used in isolation. Rather, a set of methods are applied jointly, or in sequence, to understand a dataset. We term these frequently co-occurring analytic methods, “method groupings.” To directly extract coherent constellations of methods and understand how they vary across BLS disciplines, we applied a tensor decomposition approach to an analytic method (N = 250) co-occurrence by discipline (N = 15) tensor ( ; top left panel). For illustration, we displayed 11 components (method groupings) of a 20 component (i.e., 20 rank-one tensors) solution ( ). Visualization of all component weights is provided in . Each component is associated with separate weights for analytic methods and disciplines, indicating the analytic methods and disciplines most associated with the component, respectively.
 The method groupings revealed by the tensor decomposition can be roughly classified into cross-discipline and within-discipline method groupings (i.e., components). Cross-discipline method groupings include components with a broad representation across the BLS disciplines (relatively more even distribution of discipline weights). For example, components 2, 6, 15, 19, and 20 had nonzero weights for the majority of BLS disciplines. Component 2 included methods broadly related to Bayesian statistics and concepts, such as credible intervals and posterior/prior probability distributions (e.g., beta distribution). This component is prominent across all research disciplines with particular prominence in computer science, ecology, and clinical research disciplines. Component 6 included bioinformatic algorithms for DNA sequence alignment, phylogenetic tree construction, and bootstrap resampling. This component is more prominent in biological science disciplines, such as ecology and evolution, animal and plant sciences, immunology, and biochemistry and molecular biology. Component 15 includes a variety of machine learning algorithms/metrics, including random forest algorithms, support vector machines, ANNs, and classification accuracy metrics (e.g., ROC and area under the curve). This component is prominent in all research disciplines with a particular prominence in chemistry and material sciences, and computer science.
We subsequently focused attention on the discipline-specific method groupings: method groupings with almost exclusive use in 1 or a small subset of BLS disciplines. One example of a discipline-specific method grouping was component 11, a component exclusively represented in ecology and evolution and animal and plant disciplines. This set of methods included MDS, ANOVA-based methods, and distance matrix analyses (e.g., Mantel test). As noted above, manifold learning and distance matrix methods are uniquely suited to analyses of species composition and other types of data regularly collected in these disciplines. The appearance of ANOVA-based methods in this seemingly unrelated group of methods may seem surprising, but owes to the fact that variance partitioning of distance matrices is a historically common practice in ecological disciplines [ ]. Another discipline-specific method grouping is component 16 represented most prominently by computer science and engineering and biotechnology disciplines. The analytic method with the strongest weight for this component is ANNs. So-called “deep learning,” ANNs with many layers of nodes, have seen an explosion of interest in recent years due to the increase in computational power and big data sources. Consistent with these findings, computer science, bioinformatics, and engineering/biotechnology disciplines have been at the forefront of methodological development in this area [ ]. Another discipline-specific method grouping is component 5, consisting of latent variable models, including structural equation modeling (SEM) and confirmatory factor analysis (a subset of SEM). This component is most prominent in the discipline of psychology. Latent variable methods have found particular use in the field of psychometrics, where these models have been used to measure theoretical constructs, such as intelligence, personality, and attitudes [ ].

## Discussion
The data analytic landscape of the BLS sciences is subject to change. The democratization and commoditization of tools for quantitative analysis have grown exponentially in the 21th century and only accelerated in pace in the past decade. This tectonic shift is due to the increased accessibility of computational resources, open-source software and abundance of big data in more areas of human activity. When learning to conduct data analysis, the scientist in training is faced with a steep hill to climb. To make this climb easier, graduate and undergraduate education must reflect the current practices and trends in data analysis. We offer an automated 12-year survey of approximately 1.3 million open research papers to characterize the data analytic landscape of the BLS sciences. This study aimed to provide a snapshot of the ongoing methodological shifts across a variety of scientific communities.
We find that the analytic methods commonly taught in introductory research methods and statistics courses (e.g., t test and ANOVA) remain the most commonly mentioned methods in “Methods” and “Results” sections of research articles. However, while dominant, these methods have largely declined in prominence, or remained stable, over the time span of the study (2009 to 2020). On the other hand, multivariate statistics and machine learning methods have exhibited a consistent, sometimes exponential, increase in mentions over the time span of the study. Further, we find that certain analytic methods are not equally distributed across BLS disciplines, but have unique prominence in certain disciplines over others. We believe our results provide valuable insights into how university curricula should be designed to meet the urgent need for training a new generation of quantitatively literate scientists.
“Multivariate statistics and machine learning methods” is a broad label, referring to a wide variety of analytic methods. These methods are often taught in advanced statistics and computer science courses and include PCA, regression subset selection, PLS, support vector machines, random forest algorithms, and ANNs. While some of these methods are quite old (e.g., PCA was first developed in the early 20th century), others are relatively new and still developing (e.g., ANNs have only seen broad use in the past decade). This study made no attempt to examine the potential causal factors behind the observed trends. We speculate that they could be due to several reasons: (1) the collection of larger and more complex datasets; (2) the recent popularity of data science as a tool in academia and industry; or (3) an increasing realization among researchers that manuscripts containing advanced analytics are more likely to impress reviewers and editors. However, advanced analytic methods still only represent a minority of the mentions we observed across BLS research articles. Although on different rates of decline or stability, the statistical methods taught in introductory courses, such as mean comparison tests (e.g., t test/ANOVA), cross-tabulation/contingency table analysis (e.g., chi-squared test), and null hypothesis testing, represent a much more sizable percentage of mentions across BLS research articles.
Projecting these trends into the future, we would expect that multivariate statistics and machine learning methods will enjoy increasing usage relative to more traditional statistical testing frameworks. The traditional statistical tool stack—t test, ANOVA, z-test, etc.—taught in undergraduate and graduate statistics courses were largely developed in the first half of the 20th century [ ]. Since then, advances in computation and statistical computing software have revolutionized the analytic tools available to researchers. The application of advanced multivariate and machine learning analysis methods requires proficiency in statistical software and/or open-source programming languages that are largely absent from most traditional research methods and statistics curricula. Overall, these trends suggest that introductory research methods and statistics courses may benefit from incorporating a “data science” focus in their curricula [ , ].
Our survey demonstrates that methods for data analysis can vary widely across BLS disciplines. Several explanations can be offered for the distinct usage of data analysis methods between BLS disciplines. Perhaps the primary driver of a discipline’s adoption of research methods is the simple observation that the subject matter lends itself to the assumptions and goals of selected analytic methods. For example, consider the observed disproportionate use of SEM in the discipline of psychology (Figs and –component 5). Psychological research routinely relates observable behavior such as task performance or questionnaire responses to unobserved or latent variables. The desire to explore causal structure among these latent variables has led to the systematic adoption of SEM—a technique to specify and test causal structures among latent and observable variables [ ]. Similar explanations can be offered for other method–discipline pairs, such as survival models and oncology. Other differences may arise from historical contingency, with no necessary connection between an analysis method and the subject matter it is applied to. For example, consider the predominant use of Fisher exact test in immunology versus the chi-squared test in clinical research ( ). Both are statistical significance tests of the association between 2 categorical variables. The appropriate context for each test is controversial among statisticians, but Fisher exact test is commonly recommended over the chi-squared test with small sample sizes [ , ]. Despite this controversy, our analysis indicates the Fisher exact test is generally preferred over the chi-squared test in the field of immunology and vice versa in clinical research. Thus, one might hypothesize that either (1) the discipline of immunology works with smaller sample sizes on average than the discipline of clinical research; or (2) these differences arose for sociological or historical factors.
Differences in analytic method usage have concrete implications for the direction of research in each BLS discipline. The choice of experimental or observational design often entails the subsequent analytic method used to analyze the data, but a reverse influence occurs as well: The researcher’s knowledge of available analytic methods informs their experimental or observational design. For example, ANOVA models for analysis of group means have a historically close relationship with experimental design in social and life science research [ ]. In other words, the influence between the choice of data analysis method and how data is collected operates in both directions. This observation underlies the potential for cross-fertilization and mutual inspiration between BLS disciplines by the discovery of new methods for data analysis, as well as novel ideas around data collection. While many advocates of cross-disciplinary collaboration have emphasized the joining together of different theoretical and subject matter expertise [ ], our findings emphasize a further methodological benefit of collaboration, which affords practitioners access to novel methods of data analysis not yet widely known in their own disciplines.
It should be noted that the corpus and methods used in this analysis are limited in many respects. First and foremost, our study relies on mentions of an analytic method in a research article as an indicator for the usage of that analytic method in the article. However, the mention of an analytic method is not an unequivocal indication of its usage for data analysis in a research article. Therefore, we restricted our analysis of research articles to their “Methods” and “Results” sections, where mentions of an analytic method should be more closely associated with their usage. However, due to the infeasibility of spot-checking a large corpus (approximately 1.3 million articles) manually, there may be cases of analytic method mentions that did not imply their usage in our sample. Further, the entity recognition approach in our study requires that analytic methods are explicitly reported in methodology and results sections. However, inadequate and/or inaccurate reporting of protocols and statistical analyses is a known problem in the BLS sciences [ – ]. Thus, there are likely a number of research articles in our corpus where the full set of analytic methods employed was not captured by our analysis. Second, the usage of analytic methods does not imply that the method was applied appropriately or correctly. In fact, the inappropriate application of statistical methods may be a contributor to the replication crisis in the BLS sciences [ , , ]. Thus, the increase in usage of multivariate and machine learning methods should not be considered prima facie evidence that these methods are being used appropriately. Third, our corpus only contains open-access articles made available by an open-access journal or an NIH-funded author. Thus, a sizable collection of peer-reviewed research in the past decade is systematically missing from this analysis. However, we assume that the type of publisher—open access or subscription based—is not a significant determiner of the methods used within a discipline. Fourth, some scientific disciplines may be less well represented in this survey, including experimental and theoretical physics, anthropology, astronomy, cosmology, economics, sociology, and geology. Future studies with a more comprehensive corpus of scientific publications will provide deeper insight into the historical and cross-disciplinary trends in scientific data analysis. Fifth, our classification of scientific disciplines requires that an article is assigned to one, and only one discipline. While the majority of research articles in our corpus may fit into one scientific discipline over others, some will be multidisciplinary, particularly for those disciplines with similar research agendas and regular collaboration (e.g., oncology, clinical research, and immunology). We have provided the original Python code of all preprocessing and analytic pipelines for those who wish to improve or redesign this study’s algorithms for future use (https://github.com/tsb46/stats_history).
Our data-driven survey of peer-reviewed articles reveals that the analytic landscape of the BLS sciences has been transformed over the past decade. A comparable rate of change will be required in education of budding scientists in statistics and research methodology. Equally important is the observed analytic diversity of BLS sciences of the past 10 years. The diverse analytic tool sets across BLS disciplines promises large payoffs for cross-disciplinary collaboration. In this vein, the recent advent of big data and open-source science is at least as much an opportunity for adequately training the next generation of researchers, as a challenge.

## Methods and materials

## Peer-reviewed literature corpus
Two sources of peer-reviewed literature were used for this analysis: the PMC OAS (N = 3,300,810 articles at time of study) and the PubMed Central Author Manuscript (PMC AM) collection (N = 702,198 articles). The PMC OAS provides access to full texts from a total of 14,722 open access peer-reviewed journals (at time of study). The PMC AM collection provides access to full texts of manuscripts made available in PMC by authors in compliance with the NIH Public Access Policy. Both sources form part of PMC’s open access collection [ ] (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/tools/textmining/). Bulk downloads of the full OAS and AM collection articles were conducted using the PMC FTP service. Overall, a total of approximately 4 million articles were downloaded and screened for our analysis.

## Article parsing and method section identification
Both OAS and AM text corpora are openly available in a structured and standardized form to the public on PMC’s web page. Both corpora were downloaded in XML format. Each XML article file is organized into article metadata and article text separated into article sections (e.g., Introduction, Methods and Materials, Results, etc.). As the primary interest of this study was exploring usage patterns of analytic methods in this pool of articles, we retrieved sections of the XML articles that correspond to the methodology (e.g., “Methods and materials” section) and results section of the article. Given that methodology and results sections have no standardized title, we pulled any sections of text from each XML article that contained in any of the following sequence of strings: “method,” “material,” “measure,” “analysis,” “statistical,” “model,” “algorithm,” and “result.” As we were interested in original studies, XML articles not containing any of these section search strings were excluded from analysis, such as literature reviews, book reviews, commentaries, etc. Of the total XML articles in the peer-reviewed literature corpus, Ntext = 2,292,668 articles with the above section search strings were retrieved.

## Named entity recognition of analytic method entities
In the resulting corpus of methodology and results section texts, it would be infeasible to manually tag each analytic method phrase in every section text. Thus, we opted for an automated recognition method for the purpose of detecting analytic method phrases. We used a combined phrase matching/rule-based and machine learning approach. First, we developed a large list of phrases (Nphrase = 1,129) corresponding to commonly used analytic methods across BLS disciplines. These were used as a rule-based matching approach to detect analytic method phrases in the section texts. To generalize detection of analytic method phrases outside our manually created list, we selected 20,000 random method and results section texts with tagged phrases from our rule-based approach and fed them as training examples to a statistical NER algorithm. The objective of the NER algorithm is to utilize the rule-based training samples as context “clues” for detecting analytic method phrases more generally (i.e., those outside the original phrase list). To perform NER on our full corpus, we used the convolutional neural network (CNN) algorithm provided by the open-source spaCy python package [ ], with standard parameters for training (100 iterations, 0.2 dropout, and mini-batch training). The trained NER model was applied to the entire corpus of methodology and results section texts to generate the final list of detected analytic method phrases or entities. Of the total corpus of 2,292,668 methodology section texts, at least 1 analytic method entity was detected in over half of the texts (Ntext = 1,438,077). In the main text, we refer to the detected analytic method phrases from the trained NER model as analytic method entities, or simply, analytic methods. The total number of unique method entities (before pre-preprocessing) discovered from the NER algorithm was Nentity = 15,016.

## Analytic method entity preprocessing
The NER algorithm yielded a unique list of analytic method entities, which was represented as a distinct sequence of characters. Different entities can refer to the same analytic method, for example, one could refer to a t test as “t-tests,” “t test,” “ttest,” etc. To attempt to correct for small spelling differences such as these, each analytic method entity string underwent a sequence of preprocessing steps for harmonization: (1) lowercase characters; (2) removal of non-alphanumeric or non-Greek characters (e.g., hyphenations, quotes, and commas); (3) lemmatization of words of the tokenized (i.e., separated into words) entity strings; and (4) converting entity strings that occur rarely (N < 5) to more commonly used spellings (within a max difference of 2 characters) using the SymSpell algorithm implemented in https://github.com/wolfgarbe/symspell. As another measure of quality control, only preprocessed entities with a minimum of 10 occurrences were included in the final method entity vocabulary. The final quality control step was a manual entity disambiguation procedure. Most analytic methods can be referred to by different names. For example, an independent sample t test may be referred to as an “independent t-test,” “two-sample t-test,” “Student’s two-sample t-test,” and so forth. Cox proportional hazards regression may be referred to as “Cox regression,” “Cox PH regression,” “proportional hazards regression,” and so forth. To ensure that differences in analytic method counts across the corpus do not reflect different naming conventions, the authors conducted a thorough review of all preprocessed entity strings and categorized those strings into similar categories. In addition, “junk” entity strings that were mistakenly identified as analytic methods by the NER algorithm were thrown out in this stage. The final method entity vocabulary count after preprocessing was Nentity = 250. After preprocessing, the final pool of articles was Ntext = 1,364,517.

## Article classification into research disciplines
A primary objective of this study is to understand cross-disciplinary usage in analytic methods. This objective requires that the articles in the corpus are first classified into separable disciplines (e.g., biochemistry, epidemiology, psychology, etc.). A simple approach would be to manually classify each journal (or publication) in our corpus into a discipline, such that each article belonging to that journal would be classified with that discipline. While a much more manageable task than manually classifying each article, this approach runs into 2 problems: (1) not all articles in a domain-specific journal (e.g., PLOS Biology, Medicine, and EMBO Journal) can be easily classified into 1 BLS discipline; and (2) domain general journals (e.g., PLOS ONE, Nature Communications, and Science) cannot be classified into a single BLS discipline. Thus, we chose to use a machine learning text classification approach to classify each single article into a set of prespecified BLS disciplines. This approach allowed for more flexible classification at the level of each journal article—allowing for different article classifications within the same journal.
We chose a set of 15 BLS discipline categories for article classification: Biochemistry/Cellular Biology/Genetics (BIOCHEM), Clinical/Hospital Research (CLINIC), Computer Science/Informatics (CS), Chemistry/Material Sciences (CHEM), Environmental/Earth Science (ENVIRON), Evolution/Ecology (ECO), Immunology (IMMUN), Oncology (ONCO), Psychology (PSYCH), Neuroscience (NEURO), Public Health/Epidemiology (EPIDEM), Engineering/Biotechnology (ENG), Human Physiology/Surgery (PHYSIO), and Population Genetics (POPGENE). Importantly, we make no claim that this categorization represents the most optimal division of BLS disciplines—a potentially infinite number of categorizations could be more/less useful in certain contexts and overlap in research topics between the categories of any division will be prevalent. Rather, this categorization provides a useful/pragmatic division of BLS disciplines given the distribution of publications in our corpus. To classify articles in the corpus into the 15 BLS disciplines, we input a bag-of-words feature set (1-gram, 2-gram, and 3-gram tokens), generated from the article abstract, title, and journal title, to a multinomial naive Bayes (MNB) classification algorithm. We utilized a version of the MNB algorithm that corrects for an unequal number of instances across categories [ ], as was present in our corpus. To reduce the number of features input to the MNB algorithm and improve prediction accuracy, we applied a chi-squared feature selection approach. Specifically, we chose the top 15,000 features from the bag-of-words feature set, after ranking the full set of features based on their chi-squared statistic value with the 15 discipline categories. The chi-squared statistic is a measure of dependence between 2 categorical variables, and in our case, provides an indication of the degree to which a text token (e.g., 1-gram, 2-gram, or 3-gram) is associated with differences in scientific disciplines. The final MNB model for training involved 15,000 features, 15 discipline categories to be distinguished, and 1,470 training samples. We assessed the model accuracy using a repeated K-fold cross-validation approach (NFolds = 10, NRepeats = 10). The final MNB model achieved an accuracy of 74.9%. The accuracy achieved for each individual discipline are as follows: ANIMAL—71.2%, BIOCHEM—72.2%, CHEM—88.4%, CLINIC—77.6%, CS—79.2%, ECO—75.3%, ENG—67.4%, ENVIRON—67.8%, EPIDEM—65.6%, IMMUN—64.0%, NEURO—87.1%, ONCO—84.5%, PHYSIO—69.6%, POPGENE—60.0%, and PSYCH—69.2%. We found that the MNB approach performed better than other classification approaches (e.g., random forest decision tree classification, support vector machines, and logistic regression) on our dataset, in terms of classification accuracy.

## Discipline similarity analysis
To examine the similarity of analytic method mentions between disciplines, we used an MDS approach. First, we summed the counts of all analytic method entities (N = 250) per discipline. We then computed the Euclidean distance between all pairs of z-score normalized count vectors (1 vector per discipline). The distances were then projected to a two-dimensional space using a classical MDS algorithm.

## Analytic method trend analysis
In order to understand temporal changes in analytic method mentions across BLS sciences, we first manually categorized analytic methods into larger superordinate categories of conceptually similar methods (analytic method categories—e.g., t test/ANOVA, GLIMs, and survival analysis) (N = 34). We then computed annual counts of analytic method categories starting at the beginning of 2009 to the end of 2020 (N = 12 time points). We chose an annual time resolution for the following reasons: (1) some journals in our corpus are published at a limited time frequency (e.g., annually or biannually); and (2) it was reasoned that large-scale trends in analytic method usage within a discipline occur at a low frequency (i.e., over years, as opposed to months). We took a model-based approach to test the statistical significance of the linear trend of each analytic method category. Specifically, we modeled the log odds of an article mentioning an analytic method category across the 12-year time span using a logit model. The statistical significance of a (yearly) linear trend term was assessed at a p < 0.05 (corrected for multiple comparisons with the Holm–Bonferroni method). In addition, sum-coded (deviation-coded) variables were included for the discipline the article belonged to (N = 15 − 1, predicted from the classifier mentioned above), where clinical research was used as the omitted reference level. To examine whether any discipline’s linear trend for a given analytic method category deviated from the overall trend, we assessed the statistical significance of the interaction between each discipline-coded effect variable and the linear trend term. The coefficient of each discipline-by-linear trend interaction represents the degree to which that discipline significantly deviates from the overall linear trend. Our corpus contains a prominent multilevel structure with articles nested within journals, such that we would expect analytic method counts between articles within the same journal to be more similar than across journals. To account for this nested dependence structure in the corpus, we estimated the logit model using Generalized estimating equations (GEE). The GEE estimated model estimates a population-averaged linear trend correcting the standard errors for the nested dependence structure, as opposed to a within-journal effect (i.e., mixed-effects model).
The logit models for each analytic method category were used primarily to estimate the statistical significance of the linear trends and possible discipline–trend interactions. For the main text, time series for each analytic method are presented visually in line plots (Figs and ). The annual article count in our corpus increased at approximately a linear frequency from 2009 to 2020: 2009: 34,666; 2010: 45,915; 2011: 55,611; 2012: 70,008; 2013: 93,461; 2014: 109,828; 2015: 122,138; 2016: 134,136; 2017: 146,029; 2018: 159,920; 2019: 181,419; and 2020: 211,386. To account for this increase in article frequency, we normalized the raw frequency counts of each analytic method category by the total article counts per year—i.e., we computed the proportion of counts of each method category to the total article counts per year. Thus, all analytic method category trends are displayed as proportions of the total number of articles per year. To provide an estimate of uncertainty of the proportion of mentions for a given analytic method category and year, we obtained an estimate of the sampling variation by constructing 100 bootstrapped samples of all articles within a year and recalculated the proportion by total article count for that method category. Standard errors were estimated from the standard deviation across the 100 bootstrapped proportions and displayed as shaded regions around the observed proportion trends.

## Discipline by analytic method probability analysis
In order to understand the unique clustering of analytic method entities between disciplines, we used a chi-squared contingency table approach. This approach provides a straightforward way to identify those analytic methods that are used more frequently in a discipline relative to others. Specifically, we organized the data into a discipline by analytic method count matrix and calculated the Pearson chi-squared standardized residual for each cell (i.e., discipline and analytic method pair). The standardized residual is simply the Pearson residual (observed–expected frequency) divided by the square root of the expected frequency. The larger the positive value of the standardized residual, the greater than expected number of articles in a BLS discipline mentioning that analytic method (in its “Materials and Methods” or “Results” section). The top 10 standardized residuals for each BLS discipline are displayed in .

## Analysis of analytic method groupings
For any given study, a variety of analytic methods are typically used to understand a dataset. We refer to groups of frequently co-occurring research methods as analytic method groupings, or simply method groupings. We used a data-driven tensor decomposition approach to discover commonly used method groupings across BLS disciplines. The procedure was carried out as follows: (1) analytic method by analytic method co-occurrence matrices were computed by discipline; (2) co-occurrence values within each matrix were log-transformed to reduce the influence of positively skewed analytic method counts; (3) co-occurrence matrices for each discipline were L2 normalized to remove the effect of differing total article counts between disciplines; (4) the log-normalized co-occurrence matrices were arranged into a 3-way tensor (XN⋅N⋅D): analytic method (N = 250) by analytic method (N = 250) by discipline (D = 15); and (5) a nonnegative PARAFAC/CANDECOMP decomposition was applied to the analytic method co-occurrence by discipline tensor. The CANDECOMP decomposition factorizes a given tensor into a linear combination of R rank one tensors. In the present case, the 3-way entity co-occurrence by discipline tensor can be decomposed into a sum of R rank-one tensors, referred to as components, as follows (the sum of outer products of 3 vectors):

 X=∑r=1Rar∘br∘cr

For a given component, the elements of a and b correspond to the weights of each analytic method on the component (in the case of a symmetric co-occurrence matrix, a = b), and the elements of c correspond to the weights of each discipline on the component. As our analytic method co-occurrence matrices represent (log-normalized) counts, we add the additional constraint that the tensor is factorized as the additive sum of nonnegative components. This has the benefit of enforcing sparsity on the components, and thus, increases the interpretability of the solution. There are no universally agreed upon criteria for the choice of R, the number of components. Analogous to some matrix factorization approaches (e.g., NMF), the more components estimated, the finer details produced in the resulting solution. However, too many components estimated may result in redundancy and/or modeling of noise. We chose a solution of 20 components, as this solution produced the most interpretable solution. Solutions with components around this number yielded similar solutions.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## Analytic methods trends—all categories—part 1.
Time series of 21 analytic method categories from 2009 to 2020 (annual frequency). For each analytic method category, the time series represents the proportion of articles that contained a mention of that category in their “Methods/Materials” or “Results” section per year. The time series of each analytic method category is displayed in its own plot with different y-axis scales. Note that because each plot differs in y-axis scale, caution should be observed when comparing trends across categories. Proportion of article counts by year for all analysis methods are provided in . Python code for modeling trends of analysis methods is provided at https://github.com/tsb46/stats_history/blob/master/demo.ipynb.
(TIFF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Fig

## Analytic methods trends—all categories—part 2.
Time series of 11 analytic method categories from 2009 to 2020 (annual frequency). For each analytic method category, the time series represents the proportion of articles that contained a mention of that category in their “Methods/Materials” or “Results” section per year. The time series of each analytic method category is displayed in its own plot with different y-axis scales. Note that because each plot differs in y-axis scale, caution should be observed when comparing trends across categories. Proportion of article counts by year for all analysis methods are provided in . Python code for modeling trends of analysis methods is provided at https://github.com/tsb46/stats_history/blob/master/demo.ipynb.
(TIFF)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Fig

## Data-driven analysis of individual analytic method trends.
The trends in Figs and display trends in superordinate categories of conceptually similar in analytic methods. For the sake of completeness, we conducted a cluster analysis of individual analytic method trends (N = 250) (before categorization into superordinate categories). Hierarchical clustering was performed to separate 3 clusters of analytic methods with approximately positive (Cluster 1), negative (Cluster 3), and flat (Cluster 2) trends over the study time span. (A) Heatmap of pairwise correlations between analytic method trends sorted according to their cluster assignment. (B) The trends of each cluster over the study time span (2009–2020). (C) The cluster assignments of all analytic methods (N = 250). Cluster assignments for all analysis methods are provided in .
(TIFF)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Fig

## Tensor decomposition weights for all 20 components.
To understand what analytic methods are frequently used together in the same study, we conducted a tensor decomposition of an analytic method co-occurrence by discipline tensor. The tensor decomposition analysis simultaneously models the co-occurrence between analytic methods, as well as their frequency of mentions in each discipline. This figure displays the discipline and analytic method weights from the tensor decomposition analysis. Components from the tensor decomposition are referred to as “method groupings” or groups of analytic methods that frequently occur together in study method and results sections. For each component, or “method grouping,” a stem plot illustrates the weights for each discipline, as well as the top 10 analytic methods, in terms of their weights (sized by their weight). For each component, the discipline weights represent the frequency of usage of that component across each discipline.
(TIFF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Data

## Companion data to .
Excel spreadsheet containing 4 tabs: (1) the total number of article counts per discipline; (2) the count of mentions for all analysis methods by year; (3) the top 50 journal counts by discipline; and (4) the embedding coordinates of each discipline in the MDS space ( ). MDS, multidimensional scaling.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Data

## Companion data to Figs and .
Excel spreadsheet containing, for all analysis methods, the proportion of articles mentioning an analysis method out of the total article count by year. The code for generating the bootstrapped confidence intervals in is provided at https://github.com/tsb46/stats_history.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Data

## Companion data to .
Excel spreadsheet containing the standardized chi-squared residuals for each analytic method by discipline.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Data

## Companion data to .
Excel spreadsheet containing results from the “method grouping” tensor decomposition analysis in 2 tabs: (1) the analysis method weights for all 20 components; and (2) the discipline weights for all 20 components.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S5 Data

## Companion data to .
Excel spreadsheet containing the cluster assignments (N = 3) from the hierarchical clustering analysis of analysis method trends.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.

## Abbreviations
ANNartficial neural network
ANOVAanalysis of variance
BLSbiomedical, life, and social
CNNconvolutional neural network
GEEgeneralized estimating equation
GLIMgeneralized linear model
ICAindependent component analysis
MDSmultidimensional scaling
MNBmultinomial naive Bayes
NERnamed entity recognition
NMFnonnegative matrix factorization
PCAprincipal component analysis
PLS/DApartial least squares/discriminant analysis
PMC AMPubMed Central Author Manuscript
PMC OASPubMed Central Open Access Subset
ROCreceiver operating characteristic
SEMstructural equation modeling
 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001313.r001Decision Letter 0
RobertsRoland GSenior Editor© 2021 Roland G Roberts2021Roland G Robertshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
25 Nov 2020

Dear Dr Bolt, 
Thank you for submitting your manuscript entitled "Historical and cross-disciplinary trends in the biological and social sciences reveal an accelerating adoption of advanced analytics" for consideration as a Meta-Research Article by PLOS Biology.
Your manuscript has now been evaluated by the PLOS Biology editorial staff, as well as by an academic editor with relevant expertise, and I'm writing to let you know that we would like to send your submission out for external peer review.
However, before we can send your manuscript to reviewers, we need you to complete your submission by providing the metadata that is required for full assessment. To this end, please login to Editorial Manager where you will find the paper in the 'Submissions Needing Revisions' folder on your homepage. Please click 'Revise Submission' from the Action Links and complete all additional questions in the submission questionnaire.
Please re-submit your manuscript within two working days, i.e. by Nov 27 2020 11:59PM.
Login to Editorial Manager here: https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology

During resubmission, you will be invited to opt-in to posting your pre-review manuscript as a bioRxiv preprint. Visit http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/preprints for full details. If you consent to posting your current manuscript as a preprint, please upload a single Preprint PDF when you re-submit. 
Once your full submission is complete, your paper will undergo a series of checks in preparation for peer review. Once your manuscript has passed all checks it will be sent out for review. 
Given the disruptions resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, please expect delays in the editorial process. We apologise in advance for any inconvenience caused and will do our best to minimize impact as far as possible.
Feel free to email us at plosbiology@plos.org if you have any queries relating to your submission.
Kind regards,
Roli Roberts
Roland G Roberts, PhD,
Senior Editor
PLOS Biology
10.1371/journal.pbio.3001313.r002Decision Letter 1
RobertsRoland GSenior Editor© 2021 Roland G Roberts2021Roland G Robertshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
9 Jan 2021

Dear Dr Bolt,
Thank you very much for submitting your manuscript "Historical and cross-disciplinary trends in the biological and social sciences reveal an accelerating adoption of advanced analytics" for consideration as a Research Article at PLOS Biology. Your manuscript has been evaluated by the PLOS Biology editors, an Academic Editor with relevant expertise, and by four independent reviewers. Please accept my apologies for the delay; we closed the journal office for two weeks over the holiday period, and have been catching up.
You’ll see that the reviewers are all broadly positive about the research question, but they each raise a number of concerns (interpretation, data presentation, search criteria and other aspects of the methodology, relationship to pedagogy). Some of these issues will need some new analyses but we believe that they should all in principle be addressable, and you should endeavour to do so for further consideration.
In light of the reviews (below), we will not be able to accept the current version of the manuscript, but we would welcome re-submission of a much-revised version that takes into account the reviewers' comments. We cannot make any decision about publication until we have seen the revised manuscript and your response to the reviewers' comments. Your revised manuscript is also likely to be sent for further evaluation by the reviewers.
We expect to receive your revised manuscript within 3 months. 
Please email us (plosbiology@plos.org) if you have any questions or concerns, or would like to request an extension. At this stage, your manuscript remains formally under active consideration at our journal; please notify us by email if you do not intend to submit a revision so that we may end consideration of the manuscript at PLOS Biology.
**IMPORTANT - SUBMITTING YOUR REVISION**
Your revisions should address the specific points made by each reviewer. Please submit the following files along with your revised manuscript:
1. A 'Response to Reviewers' file - this should detail your responses to the editorial requests, present a point-by-point response to all of the reviewers' comments, and indicate the changes made to the manuscript. 
*NOTE: In your point by point response to the reviewers, please provide the full context of each review. Do not selectively quote paragraphs or sentences to reply to. The entire set of reviewer comments should be present in full and each specific point should be responded to individually, point by point.
You should also cite any additional relevant literature that has been published since the original submission and mention any additional citations in your response. 
2. In addition to a clean copy of the manuscript, please also upload a 'track-changes' version of your manuscript that specifies the edits made. This should be uploaded as a "Related" file type. 
*Re-submission Checklist*
When you are ready to resubmit your revised manuscript, please refer to this re-submission checklist: https://plos.io/Biology_Checklist
To submit a revised version of your manuscript, please go to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/ and log in as an Author. Click the link labelled 'Submissions Needing Revision' where you will find your submission record. 
Please make sure to read the following important policies and guidelines while preparing your revision:
*Published Peer Review*
Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out. Please see here for more details:
https://blogs.plos.org/plos/2019/05/plos-journals-now-open-for-published-peer-review/
*PLOS Data Policy*
Please note that as a condition of publication PLOS' data policy (http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/data-availability) requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions arrived at in your manuscript. If you have not already done so, you must include any data used in your manuscript either in appropriate repositories, within the body of the manuscript, or as supporting information (N.B. this includes any numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.). For an example see here: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5

*Blot and Gel Data Policy*
We require the original, uncropped and minimally adjusted images supporting all blot and gel results reported in an article's figures or Supporting Information files. We will require these files before a manuscript can be accepted so please prepare them now, if you have not already uploaded them. Please carefully read our guidelines for how to prepare and upload this data: https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/figures#loc-blot-and-gel-reporting-requirements

*Protocols deposition*
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/submission-guidelines#loc-materials-and-methods

Thank you again for your submission to our journal. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive thus far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Roli Roberts
Roland G Roberts, PhD,
Senior Editor,
rroberts@plos.org,
PLOS Biology
*****************************************************
REVIEWERS' COMMENTS:
Reviewer #1:
There are many things to enjoy in the manuscript of Bolt et al., including the scientific motivation, the approach taken, the findings, the writing, and the discussion toward graduate education.
In my view there might be few additions that could strengthen the manuscript further with seemingly little additional work.
First, to provide the frequencies of each method for every year in a table as supplemental material.
Second, to include an unbiased analysis of temporal trends. While I anticipate that the examples chosen for Figure 3 and 4 faithfully represent the main observations, they only represent individual methods. Adding an unbiased analysis (e.g.: a clustermap of all pairwise correlations of the frequencies of individual methods) with all methods could help readers to better grasp how prevalent individual temporal trends are, and which methods are more similar (the latter being something that the authors already partially address with Figure 6).
Third, to spell out the criteria used to define an entity as a method. While it is clear that the authors followed a reasonable rationale, the manuscript implies that only analytical methods relating to statistics, but not other methods such as domain-specific experimental approaches, were considered. If the latter group of methods was included in the training, its absence in the manuscript would warrant a comment on the provided data (see first point) being more extensive, and an explanation for why the manuscript only discussed one set of methods.
Other:
References to Fig 1A and Fig 1B within the text seem to point to the wrong figure.
The criteria for classifying a method into "traditional" or "advanced" could be stated out.
It is not clear why the authors chose "traditional" and "advanced". While I do not wish to impose my view on the manuscript, some clarifying words might be helpful. For instance, I would have regarded "PCA" as a "classical" method since it ultimately relates to variances and Euclidean spaces. Similarly, I would have seen "effect size" and "confidence interval" outside of "traditional" (even if not "advanced") as they would better align with non-parametric tests and data that does not follow a narrow set of characteristics that would allow the appropriate usage of t-tests or ANOVA etc.; Similarly, I would anticipate "effect size" and "confidence interval" to align with "big" data, where the size of the dataset would avoid the need to use some other "traditional" approaches to estimate the spread of the data. 
Possibly already addressed by my first main point, I would be curious on the temporal trends of those special cases of methods that can be used to evaluate whether other methods are suitable (e.g.: Lilliefors). 
Providing the accuracy of the classification of disciplines on a per-discipline level, rather than only in aggregate, could assist people from smaller disciplines to better asses the strength of the findings of this manuscript within their own discipline. 
It is unclear how the classification of disciplines would be affected by articles that do not fall into any of the 15 chosen classes - or if this could be a problem that could likely be safely ignored (e.g.: if only applicable to few publications).
Reviewer #2:
Review report for "Historical and cross-disciplinary trends in the biological and social sciences reveal an accelerating adoption of advanced analytics" by Bolt et al.
This paper explores the cross-disciplinary usage of different research methods by analyzing a large corpus of research publications largely in biological and social science fields. Specifically, the authors leveraged data-driven text-mining tools to identify research methods from publication texts and then analyzed the cross-disciplinary trends over the past 10 years. The authors reported several major findings: (1) The classical statistics and regression-based methods have declined in the past decade, while machine-learning approaches have seen a significant increase. (2) Research method categories are uniquely associated with each research discipline. (3) There are co-occurrence patterns in research method usage, where research groupings can be further decomposed into cross-discipline and within-discipline method categories. Lastly, the authors suggested some policy implications of their findings, for example, on cross-disciplinary collaboration, training of researchers, and education in research methods. 
The paper considers an interesting research question and reveals an important trend in research disciplines, showing the ongoing methodological shifts in a variety of scientific communities. In particular, as the development of novel research methods, computational tools, and large-scale datasets, there may be substantial shifts in the methodology and framework of doing research in many traditional fields. For example, the advances of deep learning in recent years have not only promoted the rapid development of computer science fields but also remarkably benefited other research fields in prediction and computation. Here, the Alpha Fold can be a nice example (Improved protein structure prediction using potentials from deep learning. Nature 577, no. 7792 (2020): 706-710). In this sense, I think this paper has its merit in providing some initial evidence on the adoption of advanced analytics across several fields. However, in my view, this paper still has room to improve before its consideration for publication. In the following, I would like to provide some comments and suggestions, which may be helpful for the authors to further strengthen their paper. 
General comments:
The authors observed that the usage of some traditional research methods (such as t-test, ANOVA, and regressions) has declined in the publications over the considered period, while the advanced analytics (such as machine learning methods) have seen an increase during the same period. The results are seeming obvious and the interpretation of these major observations remain largely limited in this paper. First, what are the driving forces behind these observations? These could be due to the publication landscape shifts towards computing and statistical fields, the changes of research tasks of traditional fields, and the availability of new types of data sources. For example, the use of LandScan satellite image data in the study of social and economic status inference requires image processing methods other than traditional regression methods based on survey and census data [Combining satellite imagery and machine learning to predict poverty. Science 353, no. 6301 (2016): 790-794]. Second, what was the baseline to understand the relatively share or the adoption of research methods across different methods? By definition, some research methods and tools are old and traditional, and some others are new and advanced. Even for new and advanced general-purpose methods/technologies, it takes some time for them to be used by many fields. Also, they will be replaced by more recent ones as technology advances. It is not clear enough how to compare the observed patterns with a baseline. Third, related to the first point, advanced analytics have been increasingly used, but it is not clear if they are used to address the same research tasks or new research tasks in one research field. In my view, without these further explorations and in-depth understanding of these observations, the contributions of this paper are best limited.
This paper relied on the entity recognition of research methods based on the description of Methods and Materials (method, material, measure, analysis, and statistical) in the publication texts. The authors first developed an initial list of 700 phrases that are commonly used research methods. Then, they applied a statistical named entity recognition algorithm to the entire corpus of methodology section texts to generate the final list of detected research method entities. Finally, they pre-processed the list of method entities and resulted in 1,218 final method entity vocabulary. There are several potential issues on the method. First, not all papers have the specific section of Methods and Materials. For many journals in social and economic journals, the method, material, measure, analysis, and statistical sections are also not standardized. It is not clear how the selection of the body of full text affect the results. Also, the mention of research method entity does not mean the use of them. For example, the Methods section of this paper (which includes many subsections, pages 13-18) mentioned a lot of research method entities, however, not all of them are used in this paper (If the authors apply their method to this paper, what can be extracted and identified?). The use of full text of Methods and Materials provides more information, while, at the same time, this may also introduce as much noises. Second, the recognition of research method entity is lack of independent validations. The used statistical named entity recognition algorithm and the convolutional neural network under the SpaCy package seem to be a black box. The 16,020 research method entities discovered by the algorithms could be very messy, and the resulting 1,218 final method entities seem to be only a very small portion (less than 10%). The used method and the list are lack of transparency. It remains unclear how the selection of entities affects the results, how to validate the recognized entries, and whether they are meaningful. Third, the author used data from Pubmed database, which covers mainly biological and social science fields. Meanwhile, the authors only included a random subset of Plos One articles in the corpus. It remains unclear how the sampling strategies affect the results. For example, whether the results are robust if using the full sample of publications such as Microsoft Academic Graph (MAG) data and Web of Science (WoS) data. Fourth, the authors used a machine-learning text classification approach to classify each single article into a set of disciplines. The method is not clearly presented, and it remains unclear whether the identified fields are well aligned with the MAG fields or WoS fields. Additional independent validations are necessary. 
Specific comments:
1. In the abstract section, the authors presented "At the same time, there is increasing concern that education in quantitative methods is failing to adequately prepare students for contemporary research. These trends have led to calls for educational reform to undergraduate and graduate quantitative research method curricula". However, I failed to find evidence or references in the introduction section that can support these claims. In my view, these sentences would be better to be placed in the discussion section or relocated to (after a revision) the end of the abstract as the implications of this paper. 
2. In the introduction section, it would be better to add some discussions on the motivation of this paper. In particular, it would be nice if the author can develop some hypotheses in this section and then test them using data. In other words, what would the readers anticipate after reading the introduction could be better covered. In addition, some references can be used to better support the authors' narrative, for example, the open science in the past decade [Foster, E. D., & Deardorff, A. (2017). Open science framework (OSF). Journal of the Medical Library Association: JMLA, 105(2), 203], and the use of large-scale data and interdisciplinary methods in social and economic fields [Computational socioeconomics. Physics Reports 817 (2019): 1-104]. Moreover, the core results of this paper could be embedded in the introduction section. The current introduction was too brief in my view. 
3. In the pre-processing workflow of research method entity, the granularity of the research entity should be justified. It seems that "statistically significant" is the same as "statistical significance", but they are two method entities in this paper (on page 4). Some methods are essentially the same but named differently, for example, Gaussian Process regression and kriging in geostatistics. How will these issues affect the results? In addition, the 15 research disciplines of publications should be cross-validated. The relationship between the classification of research fields and the grouping of method entities is not clear. It seems not necessary that "the pre-processed method entities before the entity disambiguation step were supplied to a third analytic pipeline". In addition, one paper can still belong to multiple research disciplines, correct? If one paper used Method A for 10 times and Method B for 1 time in a paper, does the entity recognition algorithm count them once each or different times?
4. On page 4 of this paper, the "Figure 1A" and "Figure 1B" should all be "Figure 2A" and "Figure 2B". Moreover, it is not clear how to interpret Figure 2B. The size of nodes shows the Discipline Article Counts, but they are not in the correct size. The authors presented that "This approach made apparent that four disciplines stood out as relative outliers in research method usage: Oncology, Population Genetics, Evolution/Ecology and Chemistry/Material Sciences. As we observe below, among all 15 candidates, these select disciplines revealed a unique profile of research method usage". However, from Figure 2B, I could not find these observations, for example, there seems no evidence showing "four disciplines stood out as relative outliers". In the caption of Figure 2, the author presented "The research disciplines with the highest article counts were primarily biomedical and clinical disciplines". Yet, the evidence is also missing. 
5. At the top of page 6, the authors presented that "Interestingly, the only classical statistical methods that we observed to gain in adoption over the past decade are effect sizes and confidence intervals. The increasing adoption of effect sizes and confidence intervals may reflect the increased pressure from institutions and researchers (10-12) to report effect sizes and confidence intervals along with significance tests in peer-reviewed research". In my view, the reason behind the increasing adoption of effect sizes remains unclear. I am wondering if the authors could provide some evidence to support these claims.
6. In Figure 3, the authors used different scales in the y-axis for research disciplinary categories. Yet, it is very hard to make the comparison across different categories. It would be also nice to show the figure that used 0 as the starting point for each panel, for example, in the online supplementary information. Moreover, there could be field differences, for example, the uses of neural networks are different in the computer science field and in the social science field. It would be interesting to explore more and include these new results in the supplementary information. 
7. In the section "Unique Method Usage by Discipline", the authors identified some method categories uniquely associated with each discipline. The word "unique" here is misleading because the same research method entity can still be present in multiple research disciplines. The authors used a contingency table approach (the Pearson chi-square standardized residual for each cell) to identify the associated the category. I am wondering if the approach is the same as the "revealed comparative advantage" [Trade liberalisation and "revealed" comparative advantage" The Manchester school 33, no. 2 (1965): 99-123], which is widely used in many fields such as [The product space conditions the development of nations." Science 317, no. 5837 (2007): 482-487]. Not sure if they are similar or the same but with different names.
8. In Figure 6, the authors only presented part of all 16 components. It would be better to present all of them, otherwise the reason of excluding some of them should be given. In the caption, the authors presented that "a stem plot illustrates the weights for each discipline, as well as the top 5 method entity strings". However, it seems that top 10 method entities were given, not top 5. Moreover, the author presented "Some sets of methods are represented across all BLS disciplines (e.g., component 2), while others are concentrated within one or two disciplines (e.g., component 15)". Yet, this observation is very tricky because the scale of the x-axis (discipline weight) is very different. The authors are suggested to use the same scale for the x-axis. 
9. In the Methods section (and the abstract section), the sample size is no longer a total of 3.5 million articles. Only 1,276,452 articles have the sections of Methods and Materials. I am wondering if this should be the starting point of the sample size. Moreover, it is not clear why the authors thought the PLOS ONE data is biased. It should not because it contained a disproportionate number of articles in the corpus. If so, all journal data is biased because they did not publish the same number of papers. In addition, the total number of method categories resulting from our manual classification was 126. It is not clear the granularity of the classification and the quality of the grouping. 
10. It seems that a majority of the Methods section can be relegated to the online supplementary information. In the reference section, some journals are abbreviated while others are not. The authors are suggested to use the same standard. 
Reviewer #3:
Overall, the study addresses a very interesting and a significant practical issue concerning the use of research methods. Text mining techniques are applied to the methods sections in a collection of open access publications in biomedicine and some other disciplines.
PLOS Biology may be a good venue to publish the work, but I am wondering whether PLOS One would be more appropriate, given that the work would be accessible to other disciplines as well as biology.
The organization of the presentation is not straightforward. It should follow the logical flow, i.e., your question, your method, results, discussions and conclusions. Currently, it reads like a montage of various descriptions.
What is commonly missing from the presentation is some minimal justifications of the choices you made, especially when multiple options are apparently available and even some of better alternatives are available as well. A large number of analytic techniques are used, MDS, tensor decomposition, CNN, Eucliedian-based similarity metric, etc. Is the wide variety of tools strengthening the study overall as opposed to using a small number of tools but each one digs deeper instead?
Some relatively minor issues are identified below:
The title is too complex and too long. Something like the short title would be much clearer.
Since the initial ~3.5 million was narrowed down to a subset and the methods section was the target, you should just mention the number of sections that satisfied your selection criteria.
Does the scope of BLS accurately reflect the study? It is not clear from the introduction.
'computer- or qualitative-based assessment of measured data points'
how about:
quantitative and qualitative assessments of data.
The Introduction section is immediatedly followed by the Results section. Since many concepts and operations are not yet explained, it is too soon to present the results.
What is described in the Results section is not really about results. Instead, they are the steps you take. More details
are necessary here. For example, "We used a named entity recognition algorithm trained specifically for this purpose."
What exactly does the algorithm do? What are the specific requirements to meet for this specific purpose?
Similarly, a supervised machine learning framework was used. More details and justifications should be provided. To create
15 research disciplines, you extracted information from titles, abstracts and journal names, why not from keywords,
which should be available from many of the articles and they are likely to improve the quality of your discipline identification and classification.
Figure 1: step 4 is not numbered in the pipeline. Perhaps you should include an example of how article-level information is
used for article classification.
The first mention of Figure 1A and 1B, do you mean Figure 2A and 2B?
"We deployed classical multidimensional scaling (MDS) ... (Figure 1B). You should give a brief justification of your
choice of using MDS. There are a few similar issues with the use of other methods and tools without a proper justification,
especially when multiple options are available, for example, tensor decomposition.
Plots in Figure 3 are not on the same scale, although they all represent proportion, or percentage. For example, the Summary
Statistics on the upper left ranges from 0 to 0.60, whereas Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) next to its right ranges from 0
to 0.125.
Figure 5 is very interesting. Methods at various levels of scope and abstraction are presented together, e.g., meta
analysis and Z Score normalization.
The Discussion section
'Either way, our finds reinforce the concern that statistics and research method education in the BLS science is falling
behind ...' It is not clear to me how you can draw this conclusion from your results since the education was never
part of the study.
goals of select research methods -> goals of selected research methods
'The appropriate context for each test is controversial among statisticians (33, 34).' It would be informative if you can
give us more information about the controversy so we can see the connection between the controversy and any patterns shown
in your results.
Methods
'To ensure ... not biased ..., we selected 2,625 random ...texts with tagged phrases ... and fed them to ... NER...' I
can see you may capture those that are similar to the 700 phrases with this process, but it is not clear how going
through this process will eliminate the bias if the 700 phrases are biased to begin with.
Discipline Similarity Analysis
The Euclidean distance: why did you choose this particular metric in this case? Is this the most appropriate metric to
use in this case?
Reviewer #4:
In this meta-research article, the authors propose that examining the frequency with which different statistical methods are used in the literature will allow scientists to tailor education in data analysis to the needs of students in particular field. They assess the statistical methods used in a large body of open access papers and conclude that use of conventional statistical methods is decreasing, while use of developing data science techniques is increasing. They further examine field specific patterns. While the idea is compelling, the authors consistently rely on small differences over time or between disciplines when interpreting their data, without consideration of baseline values or the magnitude of observed changes/differences. This creates the impression that they are consistently making choices when presenting the data to show that more training in data science is needed, rather than interpreting the data as a whole in an unbiased manner. Specific concerns are as follows:
1. Figure 1 is quite difficult to interpret. In panel A, the abbreviations are not always intuitive, forcing the reader to switch back and forth between the figure and legend so frequently that the message is lost. The small font in the figure exacerbates this. The figure is set up to show the proportion of papers in each journal that fall with in specific fields; yet many readers are likely more interested in what journals are represented in fields that are of interest to them. In panel B, there is no explanation of what the two dimensions represent. The legend on circle size isn't tied to specific numbers of articles, and the circles in the legend are generally much larger than those in the graphs. The legend provides no information that would help one to interpret panel B. In panel C, there is again no legend tying specific rows to entity counts. Readers are supposed to assess differences in counts based on font size, however this is not something that the human eye can accurately do. Groupings based on conceptual similarities between different entities are discussed in the text, but do not appear in the figure. This figure needs to be redesigned to convey a clear message.
2. The authors choose the term "method entities" to refer to statistical analysis methods throughout the paper. Given that their focus is on analytic methods, a more specific term may be beneficial. Many readers will assume that method entities refer to the complete range of laboratory and clinical methods used in their field.
3. Figures 3, 4: The legend of figure 3 suggests that the top panel is missing. Both figures use small multiples; yet the authors have violated a key rule of small multiples by using completely different scales in each graph. This makes it impossible to tell which methods are common vs. uncommon, and which increases/decreases are small vs. large. The authors have done this because some of the percentages and increases are so small that they would not be visible on a uniform scale. One has to look closely to see that many of the machine learning categories, for example, are used in less than 1% of papers. In contrast, the traditional method categories are generally used in 10-15% of papers. These observations illustrate the danger of drawing conclusions based solely on increasing or decreasing patterns, without reference to baseline values or the magnitude of the observed changes.
4. Similar concerns apply to figure 5 - the data presented focuses on differences between observed and expected, without consideration of how frequently each method is used within the given fields. The authors' hypothesis is that examining the frequency with which methods are used, and patterns of change, will allow us to tailor education within different disciplines. Yet, readers cannot use this figure for this purpose, as it doesn't consider the frequency with which methods are used. A data driven summary figure showing commonly used methods in each field, in addition to emerging techniques in which students would benefit from additional training, may be beneficial.
5. Validation and performance characteristics for the different methods used is lacking from the material and methods section. The authors describe how things were done, but they don't specify how well the algorithms work compared to gold standard ratings.
6. While the article includes a limitations section, it is limited in scope. Authors may be more likely to report details of new or complex methods, compared to commonly used methods like t-tests and ANOVA, which would lead to undercounting and bias. Statistical reporting is poor in many fields. The authors may be able to incorporate checks into their data to assess the frequency of completely inadequate reporting (i.e. p-values reported, but no methods that generate p-values are listed). 
7. The authors approach examines the frequency with which different methods are used; it cannot assess whether authors are using the appropriate method for the data that they are analyzing. It is likely that there is additional need for newer methods in many fields; yet uptake is limited by a lack of expertise. Differences in expertise and training for new methods across fields may also contribute to limited uptake in some fields compared to others, magnifying the field specific differences that the authors observe. Using data like those generated by the authors to set educational priorities could potentially exacerbate these problems. While data driven approaches are beneficial, one should not lose site of the fact that some of the excitement around these approaches is based on the potential of what could be achieved if they were well implemented on a broader scale. It may be too early to capture this using the approach described by the authors. Furthermore, a clear discussion of what poor vs. good implementation looks like is needed - a proliferation of poorly conducted studies using the latest popular methodology has hindered progress in many fields.
10.1371/journal.pbio.3001313.r003Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
12 Apr 2021

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Reviewer_Response_041221.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pbio.3001313.r004Decision Letter 2
RobertsRoland GSenior Editor© 2021 Roland G Roberts2021Roland G Robertshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
19 May 2021

Dear Dr Bolt,
Thank you for submitting your revised Meta-Research Article entitled "The Changing Landscape of Analysis Methods in the Biological and Social Sciences" for publication in PLOS Biology. I have now obtained advice from three of the original reviewers and have discussed their comments with the Academic Editor. 
Based on the reviews, we will probably accept this manuscript for publication, provided you satisfactorily address the remaining points raised by the reviewers. Please also make sure to address the following data and other policy-related requests.
IMPORTANT:
a) Please address the remaining requests from the reviewers, including the additional robustness checks for rev#3 and the presentational requests from rev #4.
b) The current title is fine, but it might be more appealing to readers if it mentions (in a few words) the implications of your findings, e.g. for education of future generations of biologists.
c) Please address my Data Policy requests below; specifically, please supply numerical values underlying Figs 2ABC, 3, 4, 5, 6, S1AB, S2AB, S3, and cite the location of the data clearly in each relevant Fig legend.
d) Please supply a blurb, following the instructions in the submission form.
e) Your financial declaration currently says that you had no specific funding for this work; can you just confirm that this is correct, or add appropriate funding information?
As you address these items, please take this last chance to review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the cover letter that accompanies your revised manuscript.
We expect to receive your revised manuscript within two weeks. 
To submit your revision, please go to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/ and log in as an Author. Click the link labelled 'Submissions Needing Revision' to find your submission record. Your revised submission must include the following:
-  a cover letter that should detail your responses to any editorial requests, if applicable, and whether changes have been made to the reference list
-  a Response to Reviewers file that provides a detailed response to the reviewers' comments (if applicable)
-  a track-changes file indicating any changes that you have made to the manuscript. 
NOTE: If Supporting Information files are included with your article, note that these are not copyedited and will be published as they are submitted. Please ensure that these files are legible and of high quality (at least 300 dpi) in an easily accessible file format. For this reason, please be aware that any references listed in an SI file will not be indexed. For more information, see our Supporting Information guidelines:
https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/supporting-information  
*Published Peer Review History*
Please note that you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out. Please see here for more details:
https://blogs.plos.org/plos/2019/05/plos-journals-now-open-for-published-peer-review/
*Early Version*
Please note that an uncorrected proof of your manuscript will be published online ahead of the final version, unless you opted out when submitting your manuscript. If, for any reason, you do not want an earlier version of your manuscript published online, uncheck the box. Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us as soon as possible if you or your institution is planning to press release the article.
*Protocols deposition*
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
Please do not hesitate to contact me should you have any questions.
Sincerely,
Roli Roberts
Roland G Roberts, PhD,
Senior Editor,
rroberts@plos.org,
PLOS Biology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DATA POLICY:
You may be aware of the PLOS Data Policy, which requires that all data be made available without restriction: http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/data-availability. For more information, please also see this editorial: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1001797 
Note that we do not require all raw data. Rather, we ask that all individual quantitative observations that underlie the data summarized in the figures and results of your paper be made available in one of the following forms:
1) Supplementary files (e.g., excel). Please ensure that all data files are uploaded as 'Supporting Information' and are invariably referred to (in the manuscript, figure legends, and the Description field when uploading your files) using the following format verbatim: S1 Data, S2 Data, etc. Multiple panels of a single or even several figures can be included as multiple sheets in one excel file that is saved using exactly the following convention: S1_Data.xlsx (using an underscore).
2) Deposition in a publicly available repository. Please also provide the accession code or a reviewer link so that we may view your data before publication. 
Regardless of the method selected, please ensure that you provide the individual numerical values that underlie the summary data displayed in the following figure panels as they are essential for readers to assess your analysis and to reproduce it: Figs 2ABC, 3, 4, 5, 6, S1AB, S2AB, S3. NOTE: the numerical data provided should include all replicates AND the way in which the plotted mean and errors were derived (it should not present only the mean/average values).
IMPORTANT: Please also ensure that figure legends in your manuscript include information on where the underlying data can be found, and ensure your supplemental data file/s has a legend.
Please ensure that your Data Statement in the submission system accurately describes where your data can be found.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DATA NOT SHOWN?
- Please note that per journal policy, we do not allow the mention of "data not shown", "personal communication", "manuscript in preparation" or other references to data that is not publicly available or contained within this manuscript. Please either remove mention of these data or provide figures presenting the results and the data underlying the figure(s).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
REVIEWERS' COMMENTS:
Reviewer #1:
The authors have addressed all my points.
As the new figure with the clustermap is referred to as Supplemental Figure 2 within their reply, but as Supplemental Figure 1 within the manuscript, they might verify that the placing of this Supplemental Figure within the manuscript is as intended.
Reviewer #2:
Review report for "The Changing Landscape of Analysis Methods in the Biological and Social Sciences" by Bolt et al.
I would like to thank the authors for considering my comments and suggestions on the previous version of the paper. In my view, the authors have tried to improve their work and they did a nice job. I am largely satisfied with their responses to my comments. In this round, I only have a few minor comments which may be helpful for the authors to further strength their paper.
1. The authors argued that the number of references to the same analytic method in a paper does not provide evidence for the frequency of its usage in the paper. Also, it is possible that some entities identified by the NER algorithm were not actually used in the paper. I am wondering what the results would look like if the authors do a weighted version of entities, i.e., the intensity of references to an analytic method by a research discipline. Maybe include some robustness checks in the supplementary.
2. The authors acknowledged that one paper can belong to multiple research disciplines, for simplicity here each paper was categorized into the dominant discipline. They have included this simplification as a limitation in the discussion section. Still, I am wondering if the multi-classification of papers would have a significant impact in the results considering the increasing trend of interdisciplinary papers especially in recent years. Maybe include some robustness checks in the supplementary. 
3. Besides the mention of a single method by different disciplines, it may be also interesting to consider the co-occurrence of two method entities across disciplines, or a group of entries that are co-occurred very often. In my view, this is another promising direction for future studies, and this can be mentioned in the discussion section.
4. I found the first few sentences of the abstract and the first paragraph of the introduction particularly interesting, considering that the changing use of methods across disciplines may lead to educational reform to undergraduate and graduate quantitative research method curricula. It may be good to echo these broad conservations in the discussion sections and suggest more policy implications of the findings in this paper. 
5. Some minor suggestions on figures:
(a) The x-axis in Figure 2A can be round to "int". 
(b) The legend of Figure 3 can be sorted by the result of the latest year 2020. This alignment will better guide the eyes of readers. 
(c) The resolution of Figure 4 should be largely enhanced. In addition, the legends in some panels are much overlapped with the curves. May consider a two-column legend layout when it helps. 
Overall, the authors did a great job. Good luck with the submission and publication. 
Reviewer #4:
Fig 3 - The legend has many colors; it will be difficult to make the color palette accessible to colorblind readers, and even readers with normal color vision will need to search through and color match to find what they are looking for. To enhance readability, the authors might consider labeling each line on the right hand side (where the legend is) next to the line. This would allow readers to quickly scan down and determine which methods are most common. Colored lines from the legends could still be used for cases when different lines are close together.
Fig 4 - The authors may want to consider providing a "y-axis location" legend; a small box or rectangle next to the legend of each figure sized so that the y-axis runs from the minimum to the maximum of any panel shown (0 to 0.65), on which the region encompassing the scale for the y-axis of the particular graph is highlighted. This would give readers a quick visual indicator to help with comparing across graphs. (For example, for NHST, the region from 0 to 0.25 would not be highlighted, whereas the region from 0.25 to 0.65 would be highlighted. For PLS/DA, the region from 0 to 0.02 would be highlighted).
10.1371/journal.pbio.3001313.r005Author response to Decision Letter 2
Submission Version3
4 Jun 2021

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Reviewer_Response_052321.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pbio.3001313.r006Decision Letter 3
RobertsRoland GSenior Editor© 2021 Roland G Roberts2021Roland G Robertshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version3
7 Jun 2021

Dear Dr Bolt,
On behalf of my colleagues and the Academic Editor, Ulrich Dirnagl, I'm pleased to say that we can in principle offer to publish your Meta-Research Article "Educating the Future Generation of Researchers: A Cross-Disciplinary Survey of Trends in Analysis Methods" in PLOS Biology, provided you address any remaining formatting and reporting issues. These will be detailed in an email that will follow this letter and that you will usually receive within 2-3 business days, during which time no action is required from you. Please note that we will not be able to formally accept your manuscript and schedule it for publication until you have made the required changes.
Please take a minute to log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/, click the "Update My Information" link at the top of the page, and update your user information to ensure an efficient production process.
PRESS: We frequently collaborate with press offices. If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper at this point, to enable them to help maximise its impact. If the press office is planning to promote your findings, we would be grateful if they could coordinate with biologypress@plos.org. If you have not yet opted out of the early version process, we ask that you notify us immediately of any press plans so that we may do so on your behalf.
We also ask that you take this opportunity to read our Embargo Policy regarding the discussion, promotion and media coverage of work that is yet to be published by PLOS. As your manuscript is not yet published, it is bound by the conditions of our Embargo Policy. Please be aware that this policy is in place both to ensure that any press coverage of your article is fully substantiated and to provide a direct link between such coverage and the published work. For full details of our Embargo Policy, please visit http://www.plos.org/about/media-inquiries/embargo-policy/.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing. We look forward to publishing your paper in PLOS Biology. 
Sincerely,
Roli Roberts
Roland G Roberts, PhD 
Senior Editor 
PLOS Biology