PLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLoS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC8009410PMC8009410.1800941080094103378437010.1371/journal.pone.0249177PONE-D-20-139371Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesWomen's HealthObstetrics and GynecologyContraceptionFemale ContraceptionMedicine and Health SciencesWomen's HealthObstetrics and GynecologyContraceptionMale ContraceptionSocial SciencesSociologySexual and Gender IssuesMedicine and Health SciencesWomen's HealthMaternal HealthPregnancyMedicine and Health SciencesWomen's HealthObstetrics and GynecologyPregnancySocial SciencesEconomicsHuman CapitalEconomics of MigrationEngineering and TechnologyTelecommunicationsMedicine and Health SciencesPharmacologyDrugsContraceptivesBiology and Life SciencesBioengineeringBiotechnologyMedical Devices and EquipmentContraceptivesEngineering and TechnologyBioengineeringBiotechnologyMedical Devices and EquipmentContraceptivesMedicine and Health SciencesMedical Devices and EquipmentContraceptivesSocial SciencesSociologyHuman FamiliesWhy women do not use contraceptives: Exploring the role of male out-migration
Reasons for contraceptive non-useMukherjeeSaradiyaConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationWriting – original draft – ]. During this journey multiple strategic approaches have been adopted, including a target specific approach, contraceptive-specific incentives, and FP camp approach [ , ]. Nonetheless, with over half of its population in the reproductive age group and the majority of its population living in villages, opportunities for FP progress in India are abundant but come with lots of challenges [ ]. Despite decades of investments made in FP programs in India, a significant proportion of women, particularly, in states like Bihar and Uttar Pradesh, do not use modern contraceptive methods [ ]. Moreover, a decline in contraceptive use was noted in the Bihar in the last decade. Even among those who used modern contraceptives, female sterilization was the most dominant method. Of the 86% women who were sterilized, 44% had it before they turned 35 years old [ ]. Empirical research in Bihar and other parts of India suggests a variety of reasons for non-use of contraceptives, such as side effects, difficulty in accessing FP methods, and husband’s opposition [ – ]. While these reasons are more or less true across various population groups in the country, they need to be examined with proper contextual understanding to have more nuanced understanding of the FP behaviours and decision making among women and couples.
Migration can be one such contextual factor that may help understand the reasons for non-use in Bihar. Empirical research examining effects of migration on various health issues has indicated that male out-migration is negatively associated with utilization of reproductive health services and contraceptive use among women in developing countries [ – ]. A recent study in Nepal has shown that women with migrant husbands had significantly lower contraceptive use than women who had non-migrant husbands [ ]. Some of these studies have also shown that migration of husbands leads to poor spousal communication on FP issues, which adversely affects use of contraceptives [ , , ]. In Bihar, specifically, there has been no research examining FP issues in the context of migration, though there have been studies examining effects of male out-migration on HIV, and utilization of maternal health services. Studies also reported significantly higher prevalence of HIV among men with a history of migration and among women, whose husband had a history of migration [ – ]. One of these researches has shown that migrating men carried HIV infection from destination areas (high HIV prevalence states) to rural areas of Bihar [ ]. A study conducted in Bihar to understand the impact of male out-migration on the reproductive health status of the wives left behind, showed that wives left behind by migrants were more likely to have reported the symptoms of reproductive morbidity compared to the wives of non-migrants [ ]. Given this history of linkages between migration and health behaviours in Bihar, it is important to examine how FP behaviours are influenced by migration. Specifically, how do reasons for contraceptives non-use could be viewed from the lens of migration. In this backdrop, this study aimed to understand the reasons related to contraceptives non-use in the context of male out-migration in Bihar and explored how the reasons interacted with each other.

## Methods

## Study setting
The study was conducted in two high male out-migration districts of Bihar: Gopalganj and Nawada. The two districts were chosen as they have very high levels of male out-migration (Nawada: 36%, Gopalganj: 33% [ ]), as well as one represents northern Bihar (Gopalganj) and the other is located in southern Bihar (Nawada). According to the 2011 census, major out-migration destinations for men from Nawada were West Bengal, Jharkhand, and Uttar Pradesh; whereas, Maharashtra, Gujarat and Punjab remained major migration destinations for men migrating from Gopalganj. Long distance migrant returns once in a year whereas short distance ones return more frequently. Most of the migrant men return to their native place during key festival seasons such as Chhath, Holi and Dushera. Depending on the type of migrant, long or short distance, husbands stay for 15–45 days when they visit home. Socio-economically, these two districts were similar. Almost half (47%) of the women in Nawada and slightly lower than one-third (57%) women in Gopalganj were found to be literate [ ]. More than two-fifths of the household in both the districts (44% in Gopalganj, 47% in Nawada) belonged to the poorest wealth quintile [ ]. The use of modern contraceptives was lower in Gopalganj (9%) than in Nawada (29%) [ ].

## Study design
Qualitative data collection in the form of focus group discussions (FGD) was conducted during April-June 2019. FGDs were conducted to understand the perspectives on contraceptive use and FP in communities affected by migration. Compared to in-depth interviews, FGDs were preferred to bring out divergent views which helped to understand the community all together. The other objective of conducting FGDs was to inform the quantitative survey in developing study tools tuned for the context of study. In each district, four blocks (two high male out-migration and two low male out-migration) were selected. The blocks were selected after consulting with the district statistical office and district labour office, that keep track of male out-migration from the districts. Based on the information provided, blocks in the districts were arranged in ascending order of volume of male out-migration. The top two and bottom two male out-migration blocks were selected from the list. Next, the study team visited the selected blocks and conducted key informant interviews with 4–5 individuals at block level to identify village clusters (groups of 4–5 villages) with high volume of male out-migration. Two such clusters from each block were selected for conducting FGDs. A total of 25 FGDs were conducted with currently married women with migrant husbands, currently married men (both migrant and resident) and Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHA) across the selected blocks of the study districts. The study conducted one FGD each with women and ASHAs in each study block. Similarly, for men, one FGD was conducted in each block except for one where separate FGDs were conducted for migrant and non-migrant men.

## Selection of women and men
The study team planned to conduct at least one FGD with each respondent group in each block. Overall, eight FGDs were conducted covering 70 currently married women. Similarly, nine FGDs were conducted with 77 currently married men. On an average, woman were 27 years old and men were 32 years old ( ). For selection of respondents, lists of eligible women (currently married, aged 15–45 years, have migrant husband) and eligible men (currently married and aged 15–45 years) were prepared in consultation with village heads and ASHAs in each village. The study team then approached the eligible participants and requested them to participate in the study. Individuals who provided their verbal consent were asked to reach the venue where the FGD was scheduled to take place.
 

## Selection of ASHA
One FGD was conducted in each of the selected block. Each selected block had one Primary Health Center (PHC). Around 80 ASHAs worked under one PHC. In order to select ASHAs for FGDs, ASHA facilitators were contacted for each PHC and the list of ASHAs currently working was obtained. From the list, 10 ASHAs were selected randomly and contacted for their participation in the FGDs. Those who verbally agreed to participate were asked about their availability on the upcoming ASHA divas (monthly meeting of ASHAs working under a PHC conducted at the PHC). As ASHAs belonged to different villages, FGDs were conducted on those days when PHCs conducted ASHA divas. A total of eight FGDs were conducted consisting of 72 ASHAs ( ).

## Interview procedure
All the respondents who provided verbal consent, were again explained about the study procedures, objectives, harms, benefits and voluntariness of their participation at the interview venue. After that, a written consent was taken from all respondents. A copy of the signed consent form was given to the respondents as well. All the FGDs were conducted in private places. The study rented a place in the village to conduct the interviews with men and women. The ASHA interviews were conducted in a room in the PHC compound. Women FGDs were conducted in women-only environment, men FGDs were conducted in a men-only environment and all the interviews were conducted by gender-matched research investigators. For FGDs with men and women, semi-structured guides focussing on participants’ perception of contraceptive methods, social norms, use of contraception, communication and decision-making on contraceptive use were used. No monetary compensation was provided to participants of the study. The discussion guides for AHSAs were focused on perception in community about contraceptive methods, social norms on fertility and contraceptive use, ASHAs’ role and challenges in FP service delivery, decision making and use of contraceptive methods among migrant and non-migrant households. The FGDs were facilitated by individuals whose native language was Hindi and had a graduation degree in a social science subject with prior experience of conducting qualitative and quantitative interviews. For conducting FGDs, study teams were formed where each team had three members: one each for facilitating the discussion, taking notes and coordinating with respondents, and ensuring privacy. In addition to the note taking, interviews were also audio-recorded. At the end of each interview, the study team listened to the audio and prepared the final notes in Hindi. The notes were later translated into English for coding and analysis.

## Ethical approval
Approvals for the study were obtained from the Institutional Review Board of the Population Council. Written consent was taken from all study participants.

## Data analysis
All textual data were analysed by using an inductive and iterative process. Initial codes were developed according to predetermined categories and organized into various themes and subthemes using a thematic approach [ ]. Next, the coding lists were expanded and further reviewed and summarised. A summary of categories was developed for every category of respondents by contrasting and synthesizing information across all themes and subthemes. All data from the translated notes from women, men and ASHAs were coded and analysed separately. Coding was done by two researchers independently. After the coding were completed, they were compared, and a consolidated coded file was created. Analysis was performed in Atlas.ti-6.2, a computer-based text search program that allows multiple codes to be searched and linked simultaneously.

## Results

## Contraceptive use
Contraceptive use, specifically of modern methods was low in the study community. Both men and women regardless of their age and parity, were reluctant to use contraceptives. Majority of participants across all interviews alluded that FP was not a matter of concern for them; moreover, they were very eloquent in opposing family planning.
“FP is very bad. I had two sons and a daughter, after birth of my daughter my wife underwent an operation [tubectomy]. Last year my daughter passed away, tell me if I want to have a daughter now, how I can undo the operation [tubectomy]–Married resident man, Age 39, FGD1, High male-out migration area.
“I have never used any FP method. We do not keep sexual contact at the time of menstruation for 10–15 days if my husband visits home during that time. For the rest, [we have sex] without using anything. We keep control on ourselves.”- Woman with migrant husband, Age 20, FGD 2, High male-out migration area.
“Using FP methods is not good for health, that is why we do not prefer to use. Self-control is the best form of contraceptive method.”–Married migrant man, Age, 31, FGD 3, High male-out migration area.
In this community, children are considered as god’s gift which manifests into the popular notion in that area that one should have as many children as they want, number does not matter. The idea of FP and contraceptive use is not considered important, as it appeared during the discussions.
“Use of method [contraceptives] is very low in villages. Many women [in this area] still say that children are given by God. If God gives a child, why to stop that by using anything [contraceptives].”–Woman with migrant husband, Age 25, FGD 2, High male-out migration area.
Analysis of the reasons for contraceptive non-use suggested that they can be grouped into two broad areas: (i) reasons pertaining to husband’s out-migration, and (ii) reasons pertaining to migration environment. The factors identified ( ) had multifaceted influence on women and men’s decision to use or not use contraceptives. In the following section, each of these reasons for non-use are detailed out.
 

## Reasons pertaining to husband’s migration
A majority of respondent agreed that women did not use contraceptives when husbands were away. Non-use of contraceptives among women with migrant husbands was mostly driven by their own perception and the experience of other women in the community.

## Low perceived need for modern contraceptive methods
Given that husbands stayed in a different location, most of the women did not feel the need for using contraceptives. Husband’s migration was a form of natural contraception for them. Nevertheless, it was not only women who perceived the low need, even ASHAs discouraged them from using any contraception. Women during the discussion narrated that ASHAs advised them to procure contraceptives at the time of husbands’ return. Households where the husband was usually away for work for a long period of time were not considered mainstream users of contraceptives by the ASHAs. ASHAs only considered it relevant to talk to a woman with a migrant husband about contraceptive use only when her husband was at home.
“Why to use any method when husbands are away, when they come, we refrain from having sex on the specific days [on unsafe days].”- Woman with migrant husband, Age 23, FGD 7, High male-out migration area.
“Some women with migrant husband ask about what contraceptive method they should use, but I tell them, not to worry and ask them to meet us when husbands come back.”- ASHA, Age 35, FGD 5, High male-out migration area.

## Lack of preparedness to procure contraceptives during husband’s visit
The low perceived need for contraceptive use might have led to poor preparedness to procure contraceptive methods before husband’s arrival. Women who intended using contraceptives waited until husbands’ arrival. However, once husbands arrived home women got busy and did not get time to procure contraceptives from PHCs or ASHAs. In some circumstances when migrant husband came home unannounced women could not use any contraceptive method.
“Some women with migrant husbands would wait until their husbands reach home. After that, these women do not get time to consult ASHAs or get opportunity to procure methods.”—Woman with migrant husband, Age 30, FGD 7, High male-out migration area.
“When husband is away women do not use anything and if husband comes back without informing, then they have no methods with them to use.” ASHA, Age 38, FGD 8, High male-out migration area.

## Fear of side effects
Women with migrant husbands were concerned that using contraceptives may result in side effects and they may fall sick. Commonly reported side effects included headache, body ache, disturbance in menstruations, weight gain/loss, nausea caused by oral pills, and other medical problems after long use of intrauterine devices (IUD). In some cases, women complained about stomach pain, unusual heavy bleeding after insertion of IUD or after usage of injectables (called Antara injection in Bihar). The fact that women were the primary caregivers for their children and were responsible for household duties during husband’s absence, they were worried about who would take care of their children and other household responsibilities if they fell sick by using contraceptive methods.
“Some women are afraid to try contraceptives. They are afraid to fall sick. If they fall sick who will take care of all the children when their husbands do not stay at home?”—Woman with migrant husband, Age 27, FGD 6, High male-out migration area.

## Inability to procure contraceptive methods
For multiple reasons, accessing contraceptive methods was difficult for a woman when her husband was away. Women expressed their inability to travel to PHCs alone. Women in the study areas were allowed to visit limited places and were mostly accompanied by escorts; a role often played by the husband. Therefore, her movement was further restricted in his absence.
“I cannot go to PHC alone, it’s far from my village, so I have to ask other women [as husband is a migrant] to come with me, but everyone has their own work, who would come with me?”—Woman with migrant husband, Age 28, FGD 6, High male-out migration area.
Sometimes stigma was attached to procuring of contraceptives from local pharmacies. Women who wanted to buy contraceptives from local pharmacies or shops could not do so due to the anticipated stigma attached to procuring of contraceptive methods. Fear of being judged as a promiscuous woman (who uses contraceptives in husband’s absence) by the pharmacists/shop keeper restricted women from procuring contraceptive methods from private stores. Some women were apprehensive about family members and neighbours finding out about their contraceptive use if they procured contraceptives when husbands were not at home. Women with migrant husbands felt hesitant to discuss FP issues with ASHAs during husband’s absence, fearing that their families may become suspicious. Women were anxious that their families might label them as bad women if they found them conversing on FP issues with ASHAs.
“How can we go to medical stores and ask for contraceptives? Storekeepers might think, what will we do with contraceptives when husband is away?—Woman with migrant husband, Age 25, FGD 3, High male-out migration area.
“If husbands find out that we are using contraceptives when they are away working, they might suspect us of having affair with other men. That’s why we do not use any method when they are away.”- Woman with migrant husband, Age 29, FGD 7, High male-out migration area.

## Pregnancy as a contraceptive
Migrant men remained away from home for most part of the year. Some men who migrate internationally usually come home once in a year. The suspicion that wives might engage in extra-marital affairs when they are away existed among most married migrant men. Men felt that if their wife was pregnant, she would not engage in any extramarital sexual relationship during their absence. Driven by this suspicion men refrained from using any contraceptive when they were at home.
“Some men in the village do not use any contraceptive methods to make sure their wife gets pregnant each time they visit home. If wife is pregnant while husband is away there is no chance of having extramarital relationships with other man.”–Married Migrant man, Age 29, FGD 1, High male-out migration area.
“Every time migrant men visit home, their wives become pregnant, they deliberately do so to prevent wives from having affairs with other men behind their back”.—ASHA, Age 37, FGD 5, High male-out migration area.

## Reasons pertaining to migration environment
There were several migration environment related factors that acted as barrier to contraceptive use. These included supply side impediments and deep-rooted community norms.

## Low ASHA outreach on family planning
ASHAs are considered as key persons from the health system in the FP supply chain as they directly reach out to women at the village level. ASHAs were the only influencers and providers of contraceptives in the villages. However, they perceived migrant women were not conventional users of contraceptives. Outreach by ASHAs in villages with high male out-migration was poor. Almost all women and men across the discussions reported that ASHAs made limited number of visits and such visits were mainly for the purpose of child immunization and/or accompanying pregnant women for institutional delivery. Their limited reach to contraceptive users in high out-migration areas reduced women’s timely access to contraceptives. Contraceptive use is conditioned upon decisions of both husband and wife. Therefore, it is important to counsel both men and women regarding the use of contraceptives. However, ASHAs did not talk to men in the villages about contraceptive use.
“ASHA sometimes comes to our village, but she only talks about immunization. She does not talk to me on contraceptives, maybe she thinks why to talk to us on contraceptive use since my husband is a migrant. She never talks to my husband [on FP] even when he visits home”—Woman with migrant husband, Age 28, FGD 5, High male-out migration area.
The discussion with ASHAs on the issues of contraceptive was also limited as women perceived ASHAs would not keep their conversations confidential, especially if they discussed contraceptive issues when their husbands were away for work. ASHAs belonged to the same village and had close ties with most of the women, which made discussions around contraceptive use uncomfortable for women.
“We do not feel comfortable to talk to ASHAs on contraceptive use as they are native women; what if they tell everything we ask [when husbands were away] to our family and to other women in the community.”—Woman with migrant husband, Age 27, FGD 7, High male-out migration area.

## Preference of male child
Preference of a male child was another important factor for non-use of contraceptives. Migrant families do not possess land or any other resources in their village. Their desire for male child is driven by the economic reasons. Many prefer a male child as it would mean more hands available to earn for the family.
Other reasons for preferring a male child are widely recognised in rural settings. Both women and men considered having a male child as a matter of family pride, since only sons could carry forward the family name. They also viewed having a male child was as support in their old age, as daughters would move to their husband’s house after marriage. As a result, people did not want to use any contraceptive methods until they had a son.
“We are poor people, and we do not have any land, so if we have a son, he can go out like us and earn for the family.”—Migrant man, Age 40, FGD 8, High male-out migration area.
“Even after having five daughters, the preference for a son is so high that they [couples] do not use anything [contraceptive method] and keep on having more children till they get a son.”—ASHA, Age 40, FGD 4, High male-out migration area.

## Need to prove fertility
Majority of young married couples did not use contraceptives owing to social pressure of bearing children soon after getting married, or else being labelled as infertile. This pressure is heightened among migrant families as men stay at home for a shorter period of time during the year and these couples get limited window of opportunity for reproduction. The unique issue of contraceptive non-use among newlywed couples is well established in the social setting. Even ASHAs refrained from visiting newly married women anticipating their mothers-in-law would not allow any talk on FP before the first pregnancy.
“No one uses any method until the first birth, if we do not have a child soon after marriage, people might think us infertile.”- Woman with migrant husband, Age 18, FGD 3, High male-out migration area.
“We do not visit the houses of newly-weds for FP related issues; they would not listen to us before they have their first child. Moreover, we do not want to get into fights with the mother-in-law for that [talking on FP].”- ASHA, Age 45, FGD 4, High male-out migration area.

## Myths and misconceptions about contraception
Limited knowledge about contraceptive methods resulted into myths and misconceptions which ultimately led to non-use of contraceptives by many women. Some of the myths and misconceptions about using contraceptive methods included infertility, long term health consequences, loss of stamina, damage of womb, cancer and even fear of death.
“Women are afraid these [spacing] methods will harm the uterus and make future births risky.”—ASHA, Age 31, FGD 4, High male-out migration area.
“There are so many women who do not want to use any contraceptive methods, they are worried about side effects. This does not necessarily mean that they have used and experienced personally, most of the side effects are experienced by someone else.”—ASHA, Age 36, FGD 3, High male-out migration area.
“In our neighbourhood one women died few days after getting operated [tubectomy], now other women are so frightened that no one in the village wants to go for the same”.—Woman with migrant husband, FGD 3, High male-out migration area.

## Poor couple communication on contraceptive use
Poor couple communication around contraceptive use was evident across all interviews and among all couples. The discussions showed the communication on FP issues took a backseat in cases where husbands were migrants. Couples who stayed apart had limited talks over phone and mostly conversed on household needs, children and other family issues. Both migrant men and women felt that contraceptive use was not relevant to discuss over phone. Further, when husbands visited home during their break, FP remained a distant topic of discussion. Women did not want to bring up FP issues fearing they may antagonise men and would bring marital conflicts. Women rather preferred to act obedient and followed what men asked them to do.
“We do not bring up FP issues when husbands are at home, this might bring unnecessary conflict. We only do what they ask us to do.”—Woman with migrant husband, Age 20, FGD 8, High male-out migration area.
“We don’t talk to husband on these [FP] issues on phone, we mainly discuss household stuff.”- Woman with migrant husband, Age, 28, FGD 7, High male-out migration area.

## Discussion
This study examined the reasons for non-use of contraceptives in the context of male out-migration. The barriers to contraceptive use are multifaceted, complex and reflect contraceptive use experiences of women and their peers. Reasons pertaining to both husband’s migration and migration environment worked alone or in conjunction with the other factors that dissuaded women from using contraceptives. At the individual level, low perceived need for modern FP methods, lack of preparedness for contraceptive use during husband’s visit, fear of side effects, inability to procure contraceptives, pregnancy perceived as a contraceptive were all reasons identified as barriers to contraceptive use. Whereas, at the system and community level, low ASHA outreach on FP, need to prove fertility, preference of male child, myths and misconceptions about contraception, poor couple communication on FP were listed as deterrents to contraceptive use. The reasons for contraceptive non-use identified in the study pointed out that migration as a context is important to explain the FP behaviours of couples, particularly in communities with high male out-migration. This is also supplemented by the recent evidence published by the study team which documented a lower rate of modern contraceptive use among women in areas with high volume of male out-migration than those in areas with low volume of out-migration [ ]. The study further gives an indication on how some of the commonly believed reasons for non-use may have different meaning in the context of migration. While reasons for non-use among women with migrant husbands reflected their own experiences as well as experiences of other women in the community, the reasons identified in high out-migration area reflected community norms and supply side factors.
While multiple reasons contribute to the non-use of contraceptives in a migration environment, three reasons stood out. First is the poor outreach of ASHAs, second is preference for a male child and third is poor couple communication. ASHAs are the central pillar of India’s FP program. Poor outreach by ASHAs, specifically in high out-migration areas is concerning. As the study findings suggested, ASHAs did not perceive the need for FP among women having migrant husbands and as a result the regular visits to homes of women did not take place. Notably, not only the women having migrant husbands were neglected, but even those having resident husbands were neglected in this process. This was an important supply side barrier to the non-use of contraceptives in the study area which might manifest individuals’ resistant to contraceptive use hence to be addressed by the programmers and policy makers. The other factor that was widely discussed was the preference of male child. Study participants, specifically men, did not feel the need to use modern contraceptives unless they had the desired number of sons in the family [ – ]. Family size and decisions about use of contraceptives often depend upon the sex of the first child, with contraception being less likely until the birth of a male child [ , ]. The preference of male children among migrant families also had an added economic connotation attached to it, as male children were viewed as future income guarantee for the family. Male children unlike females could migrate to other areas and become the economic pillar for the family. Similar findings were also identified in other Indian studies as well [ , ].
Another factor that amplified the influence of other factors was poor couple communication. For example, poor spousal communication and limited conversations around FP could result in low perceived need of contraceptive use and low preparedness with procurement of contraceptives during husband’s home visit. Both women with migrant husbands and migrant men mentioned that they did not discuss contraceptive use as it was not considered as important and relevant to discuss over limited conversations during telephone calls. Prior research examining poor couple communication on contraceptive use in India and elsewhere suggested that talks on reproduction were limited as conversations on sex and contraceptives were considered as taboo [ , , ]. Blanc et al (2001) suggest that gender-based power inequities contribute to poor spousal communication [ ]. The imbalanced distribution of power between couples and the added societal pressure to prove fertility, specifically among young couples, jeopardizes women’s intention to use contraceptive.
Among the individual factors, the inability to procure contraceptive methods reflected the accessibility to FP services in rural Bihar. Women in the discussion mentioned that they could not access contraceptive methods as they had no one to escort them to the facility in absence of their husband. In rural India, women need permission from family members for their movement to outside the house. The NFHS-4 study suggested that only 8% of women in Bihar could move without any restriction [ ]. Restriction in mobility negatively affected women’s health seeking behaviour [ ]. Mobility restrictions could be more among women with migrant husbands as their companions were away for work. In addition to the restrictions, the stigma attached to procurement of contraceptives during husbands’ absence was a key deterrent. Stigma as a barrier to women’s access to several health services including sexual and reproductive health (SRH) has been documented in studies. These studies mentioned that several women in rural areas compromise in seeking SRH services due to their perceptions of how community members felt about such issues [ – ]. The other factors important from the individual perspective was low perceived need for contraceptive use and lack of preparedness with contraceptive method and among women with migrant husband Women with migrant husbands not perceiving the need to use contraceptive when the husband was away for work seemed to be natural. However, this likely led to a situation where women did not get sufficient time to procure methods when their husbands visited them. Also, as a result of low perceived need, communication of women with ASHAs on FP issues remained a distant topic to discuss. The study also noted that some migrant men use wives’ pregnancy to safeguard wives’ chastity during their absence and hence, avoided using any contraceptives. This was particularly true in the case of long-distance migrants who suspected that their wives might engage in an extramarital affair during their long absence. These men thought that if their wife was pregnant in their absence, she will be busy with caring of the child and hence, would not be engaged in extramarital sex. While each of the reasons identified in this research have their own importance, it may be possible that they are inter-dependent and may be triggered by another set of factors. Synthesis of the study findings and review of existing evidence on reasons for contraceptive non-use suggested that some of the reasons may be inter-connected and one may be aggravating the other ( ). For example, low outreach of ASHAs in high out-migration areas may have a cascading effect on multiple individual level reasons, like low perceived need for contraceptives, which could further jeopardize the preparedness among women to procure contraceptives before husbands’ visit home. Further, since in villages ASHAs were the primary providers of contraceptives, their low outreach to women on FP issues, deprived several women of correct knowledge on modern contraceptives and the ways to access those methods. It may also be hypothesized that this can lead to myths and misconceptions among women. Empirical evidence suggested only 25% of women in Bihar were met by an ASHA in a period of three months; of these, only 16% of women were informed on FP [ ]. This suggested that within the limited number of women reached by ASHAs, even with them the discussion on FP was missing. Women in this study also reported that ASHAs’ visit was mostly related to addressing maternal and child health issues.
 Myths and misconceptions around modern contraceptives may have instilled fear of using contraceptives among women with migrant husbands. Studies from India and other developing countries have also shown fear of side effects as an important impediment to contraceptive use [ , – ]. Negative experiences of contraceptive use were often talked in neighbourhoods which affected the willingness of others in the community to try contraceptive methods, exacerbating fears of potential long-term negative health impacts [ , ]. During data collection, the study team also observed that there had been a couple of sterilization failure cases in the study area. As a result, several women preferred undergoing hysterectomy (assuming that is the safest way to stop bearing children). While myths and misconceptions around contraceptives are prevalent in the communities, the fear of sickness that stemmed from past use was another deterrent to contraceptive use. This study found that women with migrant husband did not use contraceptives due to their previous experience of falling sick (heavy bleeding, stomach pain) after using injectables or IUD. This was in line with prior studies which have also documented women discontinuing contraceptive methods as they fall sick once they start using contraceptive methods such as implants, injectables, IUDs and, oral pills. Being a primary caretaker of their households, women refrain from using contraceptives assuming if they fall sick who will take care of their children and other family members.
The study also found that the views of migrant and resident men on contraceptive use was mostly similar. Both groups of men did not perceive the need to use contraceptive methods. Driven by the belief that only men should decide the numbers and timing of the children, both groups also did not discuss contraceptive use and FP issues with their wives. However, the intention behind specific reasons for non-use of contraceptives differed between resident and migrant men. For example, while both reported preference of a male child, the intention for that was distinctly different between the two groups. The underlying reason behind resident men’s preference for a male child was to carry forward family lineage or just a matter of pride in the community. However, migrant men preferred to have a male child for economic benefits. Since most migrant men were landless and belonged to the disadvantaged socio-economic stratum of the society, they thought that male children unlike female children, could being economic stability to the families by out migrating like them. Given the differing migration patterns in the two study districts, the study also explored if the reasons for non-use differed between the study districts. However, not many w differences were found in respondent’s reporting of reasons for not using contraceptives.
The study highlighted some pertinent reasons related to non-use of contraceptives. However, the study findings need to be treated cautiously to avoid over generalization due to some limitations. First, the study conducted interviews with women with migrant husbands, married men (both migrant and resident) and ASHAs. There could have been other respondents such as women with resident husband and female migrants. While interviewing them could have provided a wider understanding of contraceptive non-use, there is already ample information available on women with resident husbands. Even this study reflected some of the reasons (such as preference of a male child, myths and misconceptions, low ASHA outreach) identified in earlier studies. Second, the study did not conduct any in-depth interviews which would have helped in more in-depth understanding of each identified reason. Participants of the FGDs may not have talked openly in the group to certain sensitive topics. It is recommend that future research exploring similar issues should use a combination of FGDs and in-depth interviews for better exploration. The study recommends that future research studies should examine the root causes which may help FP programs in developing solutions to address those reasons.
Despite these limitations, this study provided important pointers for FP programs in Bihar and other areas affected by migration. Given that the reasons for non-use among women with migrant husbands are distinct from other women, FP programs need to devise appropriate strategies to address the gaps in existing programs. In addition, the reasons identified in the study in context of the migration environment provided a platform to work more effectively towards contraceptive non-use. Therefore, FP programs in areas affected by migration need to be more innovative and strategic in addressing barriers to contraceptive use. The reasons for non-use such as need to prove fertility, preference of male child and stigma attached to procuring contraception emerge from deep-seated social and cultural norms, which cannot be uprooted overnight. It is imperative to strategize effectively to work with communities to influence social and cultural norms. Findings of non-use around poor couple communication, and fear of side-effects reinforce the need for male involvement in contraceptive use, and FP improvement in couple dynamics and increase in knowledge of contraception methods. Moreover, efforts to strengthen community health workers to regularly visit and counsel on contraceptive use will improve FP communications in the community, encourage them to use contraceptives and help couples prepare themselves for the use of contraceptive methods. All such efforts would require sincere and shared responsibility of all FP gatekeepers—individuals, community and health system—to act together to build a conducive FP environment for men and women living in high out-migration areas.

## Conclusion
In conclusion, the study conducted in two high male out-migration areas of Bihar suggested that reasons for contraceptive non-use are multifaceted and inter-linked. The research revealed in-depth understanding of cultural, social and interpersonal contexts of contraceptive use behaviour in the context of migration. Programs working towards improving contraceptive use need to address issues at individual, community and system levels. While supply side factors like ASHA outreach need to be strengthened, prevailing social norms such as need to prove fertility, preference of male child, poor couple communication on contraceptives in the community also need to change. Finally, the migration environment needs to be considered while designing FP programs to address special needs of women and couples living in the high out-migration setting.

 10.1371/journal.pone.0249177.r001Decision Letter 0
ZimmermanLinnea AAcademic Editor© 2021 Linnea A Zimmerman2021Linnea A ZimmermanThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
7 Sep 2020

PONE-D-20-13937
Why women do not use contraceptives: Exploring the role of male out-migration
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Mahapatra,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please closely review the comments from reviewers 1-3, particularly 1 and 3, regarding the expansion of the results and discussion.  Additionally, both the editor and Reviewer 1 indicated that more thought and justification is needed regarding the conflation of reasons related to migration and reasons that are not (e.g. experience of side-effects). 
The comments from the editor, in terms of checklists and additional language around disclosure statements, must be addressed. 
Please submit your revised manuscript by Oct 22 2020 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Linnea A Zimmerman, Ph.D, MPH
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2.We note that you have indicated that data from this study are available upon request. PLOS only allows data to be available upon request if there are legal or ethical restrictions on sharing data publicly. For more information on unacceptable data access restrictions, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions.
In your revised cover letter, please address the following prompts:
a) If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially sensitive information, data are owned by a third-party organization, etc.) and who has imposed them (e.g., an ethics committee). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent.
b) If there are no restrictions, please upload the minimal anonymized data set necessary to replicate your study findings as either Supporting Information files or to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. For a list of acceptable repositories, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-recommended-repositories.
We will update your Data Availability statement on your behalf to reflect the information you provide.
Additional Editor Comments (if provided):
Because the research study is qualitative, the authors need to reframe their paper to ensure that it aligns with qualitative reporting guidelines. From the author guidelines: "Qualitative research studies should be reported in accordance to the Consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative research (COREQ) checklist or Standards for reporting qualitative research (SRQR) checklist." I suggest the COREQ checklist. Please ensure that the revised manuscript meets these guidelines and submit the guidelines, indicating where approximate revisions were made.
Many of the macro and micro influences that are named are non-specific to migration. There needs to be greater justification about why you consider these to be related to migration in both the introduction and discussion or separate these out as a separate category that is NOT specific to migration.
The results section needs considerable revision. Rather than presenting multiple quotes without much context, more work should be done to synthesize the themes, provide some general interpretation in terms of patterns within the themes and then provide 1-2 quotes as examples.
Data availability - more justification is needed on why data are unavailable.
Funding - Please ensure that the funding disclosure aligns with journal requirements (https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/disclosure-of-funding-sources). The draft indicates that the work was supported by Packard, but the funding disclosure says that there was no specific funding. Please clarify.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Partly
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: N/A
Reviewer #2: N/A
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: N/A
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: No
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: PONE-D-20-13937
Thank you for the opportunity to read this important and interesting paper. There are many exciting findings, which I think need to be published and with some work this paper should be published. Some of the findings are things that people suspect and talk about, but there have not been good studies actually documenting, so this is an important contribution. One of the most critical findings is the role of ASHAs in actually discouraging women from taking up a method when their husband is away! This has important programmatic implications. Also, the section on not wanting to use family planning before the first birth (for newly weds) is really important and helpful, I would cite this paper right now in another paper if I could! I have some larger comments here, and then more detailed comments about each specific section below.
Larger
1. Overall, your results need a little more interpretation/discussion. Right now its mostly a list of quotes with very little in between, but I think a little more context, helping us understand why you choose each quote, making sure that its more than a list of quotes is necessary. Please add some more discussion and contextualization to this section.
2. I do not quite understand why you have two separate sections, one about “fear of sickness” and one about “myths and misconceptions”—I think that these are probably the same topic, that there are perceptions of side effects, and I understand that the first set specifically mention migration, but I think people are talking about the same thing and that it would make sense to combine into one section. Also, since that first section just has people talking about “fear of sickness” with out us really knowing what they mean by that it is not very rich, so I would recommend just using 1 of the quotes in that section and merging with the other section which is richer.
3. The discussion and conclusion need the most work. Related to my point below (about knowing more about previous studies/findings), try to focus your discussion and conclusion especially on the new findings in your study, because I think there are important new findings and have big programmatic and policy implication, and that add to the literature, but right now they are lost in findings that we already know and that others have discussed. You can discuss these past findings and highlight what’s different for migrating couples, but I urge you to really reorganize and think through what your value add is, and highlight that.
4. The authors need to do another review of the literature, especially for the discussion, as many of their findings have been found by other authors (including myself, sorry for the self promotion). But look at these papers, and the papers they cite, and also do a literature search for others
a. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22390371/
b. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18821352/
5. A major limitation which needs to be discussed is that the men were not migrants, and in fact you were probably missing the migrant men since they were away. So this is really about the experiences of women with migrant husbands, and the perceptions/views of men and ASHA’s living in the same community. It's a difference between lived experiences and perceptions. Make this clear and discuss how this biases your results.
a.
6. Finally, this needs editing by a native English speaker. I have pointed out some things in the beginning, but common issues like this are pervasive throughout the paper.
7.
Watch switch between family planning and contraceptives—be consistent throughout your manuscript (example in the first paragraph)
Ln 49: “..and majority of..” should be “..and the majority of..”
Ln 65: “A recent research in Nepal..” should be “A recent study in Nepal..”
Ln 67: “Some of these studies..” should be cited
Ln 79: “moderated” sounds like you are doing a quantitative study, please use another word
Ln 80: “shape out” is not scientific and also not clear, please use a more scientific term
Ln 93: Identical? That seems like a very strong word to use, I doubt the are “identical”, replace with “very similar” , your next sentence also shows that there are differences
Ln 99: remove “the” before “qualitative data collection…”
Selection
• Was the recruitment done before the FGD and then the FGD arranged for a later time? What I am asking is if the respondents did the consent in a private location and then met later for the FGD or if the consenting was done at the time of the FGD? Please clarify in the text
• Where did the FGDs with men and women take place? How was privacy and confidentiality ensured (within the group members?)
• Couples were not linked right? (husband and wife both interviewed?)
• When were the ASHA’s consented? How did this process work? Add to the text. How did you ensure that they did not feel pressured to participate give the recruitment approach through their groups?
• Info about the consent should be earlier ( what is in the section about ethical approval should be moved up).
Data analysis
• How many people participated in the coding and analysis process?
• How did you deal with the fact that there are FGDs from three different groups? Were they analyzed by respondent type or all together? More detail is needed.
Results
• Ln 170: are these actual quote selections or your own interpretation? Make it clear.
• Might be useful to add respondents age and educational status too to the info after each quote
• Ln 172: “distorted” is a judgmental and charged word, also, it is incorporating analysis into the results, please rewrite this section
• Make sure not to sure contractions (such as “didn’t”) in formal academic writing
• Ln 205: I do not think you have defined PHC previously in the paper
• Any idea what women mean by “fall sick”, did you get any details about what sickness they are referring to?
• Ln 251: “They expressed if their wife was pregnant, they would not engage in any extramarital sexual relationship during their absence.” I had to read this a few times to figure out what you are trying to say, since its unclear who the various “they”’s are. I suggest re-writing as “Men felt that if their wife was pregnant, she would not engage in any extramarital sexual relationship during their absence.”
• Quote on ln 253: is this saying that they want their wife to become pregnant when they are home? I think you need some clarification/translation here otherwise it sounds like they want her to be pregnant while he is home, but I think its that they want her to be pregnant while he is away?
• Ln 261 “There were several macro-level factors, either directly or indirectly—through the micro level factors, acted as barrier to contraceptive use.” Re-write as ““There were several macro-level factors that acted as barrier to contraceptive use, either directly or indirectly through micro level factors. ”
• Can remove quote in line 315.
• Also, I would recommend removing the next two quotes and just saying “Respondents noted fears of infertility and cancer as reasons for non-use of family planning”
• Ln 329: I don't think that your first quote here is reflective of what you say in this paragraph about men thinking FP is “woman’s business” –this seems like he is saying that the husband decides about the number of children because he earns the money.
• Ln 348: I think you mean antagonize not “agonise”
Discussion
• In general, your discussion needs to be more specific and better situated in the literature. Especially for the part where you make recommendations, look for other studies of interventions or program/policies that might have worked to address your specific issues, even from other countries.
• You say that “aspiration to have smaller families” was universal, however, you have not mentioned that at all in the results, so you either need to mention that above or not mention it. Also, some of the quotes talked about people continuing to have children until a son, so it didn't seem that this was universal.
• Ln 370: I don't think your findings show anything about differences between men and women, or between migrants and non-migrants, since you only interviewed migrant wives. So I think this should be rephrased to only focus on your findings related to reasons for FP non-use/barriers to use among couples living in high migration areas
o This relates to the next sentence too—don’t extrapolate to non-migrants. I think many of your findings are similar to non-migrants (son preference, fear of side effects, proving fertility, fear of talk/social stigma, poor communication etc.). You could say that barriers that exist for other couples/women might be heightened among the migrant population.
• Ln 402: I really don't think that lack of communication is leading to son preference (debatable about the other too), and I am not sure about your point here. You have not shown evidence that couples did not understand each others preferences and therefore had more births than desired. Please be careful about your interpretation and making sure its reflective of your findings.
• Paragraph starting line 424: you present results in this paragraph, these should go in the results section. Or you should take out this part, its rather confusing, but maybe would be less confusing if you had presented these findings earlier. I am also still struggling with the “fear of sickness” being separate from “fears of side effects”
• Limitations: A main limitation is that the men were not all migrants, in fact, migrant men were probably less likely to be in the study because they were away, right? This is something that needs to be discussed in detail. Also, I don't think that the couples were linked, right? This is a limitation and would have given you much richer data.
• Ln 451: the reasons for non use are NOT distinct between women whose husbands migrate and those that do not. There are some different reasons, but many of the reasons are simply magnified by migration.
• Ln 453: The sentence starting “In addition..” is not clear, I do not know what you are trying to say.
Conclusion
• Ln 476: “prevailing fertility norms in the community also need to change” this is not a very specific and helpful comment, can you be more specific about what you mean and how this can happen?
Reviewer #2: This study aims to document the contraceptive use among women in a region of high male out-migration. This is a very interesting question to help discover new means to improve contraceptive uptake in this region. Nonetheless, I found that the methodology adopted to respond to the question is not adequate. First, contraceptive use is an intimate reality that many women will not want to discuss in group. While using focus group approach to discuss this sensitive event, the research question focus should not be on the individual but on the context. The results are presented as individual response to the research question. Therefore, it is not clear why the authors used focus group discussion for their study instead of individual in-depth interview.
The results presented are related to the specific context study (what the authors call macro) or to the husband’s migration (micro) whereas they are situation that is found in many other places. For instance, the “inability to procure contraceptive methods” have nothing to do with the fact that the husband is away or because of the migration area. This is a fact that many women lack the opportunity to get their methods in pharmacies or store. At the end, very few results are related to the specific context studied.
Finally, this study lacks to present the context of the study. How long do husbands in the village reside outside? Is it a long-term migration or a circular one? The experience of each woman is not similar even if they lived in a place of high out-migration. As the authors said before, an in-depth interview is more appropriate to understand women behaviour than the Focus Group discussion on individual and sensitive topics.
Reviewer #3: Thank you for the opportunity to review this interesting, thoughtful qualitative analysis of reasons for non-use of contraception among populations with high out-migration of males in Bihar, India. Please see my comments below for suggested revisions.
ABSTRACT
Line 29-30: This sentence implies that reasons for contraceptive non-use differed among women who had migrant husbands vs. resident husbands, and women who lived in high migration environments vs. those who did not. This does not reflect my understanding of the findings of the paper, as the methods section indicated that sampling was done solely in high-migration village clusters (so everyone lived in a high migration environment), and the results did not differentiate findings for migrant vs. resident husbands. Perhaps this could be rephrased to something like “The reasons for contraceptive non-use in areas with high male out-migration were complex, including reasons unique to high-migration settings and reasons commonly found in other settings.”
INTRODUCTION
-It might be helpful to offer a brief definition of “family planning” up front – i.e. a set of purposeful behaviors (timing and spacing/limiting of births through contraceptive use -- modern or traditional) undertaken to achieve desired family size.
Lines 54-55: “Even among those who used modern contraceptives, female sterilization was the most dominant method” – Can the authors elaborate briefly on why this is problematic? (i.e. a healthy contraceptive method mix should consist of a balance of short-acting, long-acting and permanent contraceptive methods. Skewed method mixes, particularly in younger populations, typically indicate issues with contraceptive services and/or uptake).
Lines 64-65: “male out-migration is associated with utilization of reproductive health services and contraceptive use among women in developing countries”. Suggest to say “negatively associated” to make it clear that the association is negative.
METHODS
Please add a brief paragraph on data collection specifying: Were the FGD guides structured, semi-structured, or unstructured? Who were the FGD facilitators (what were their qualifications, what training did they receive in FGD facilitation)? Was there a note-taker? Were FGDs recorded and transcribed, or was the analysis done using notes?
In the data analysis section (lines 147-153), please specify the following: was the coding done on full transcripts vs. notes? Was any double-coding done (two different people code the same transcript) to check inter-coder reliability?
Line 99: please correct to “focus group discussions”, not focused group discussions. Can the authors also briefly explain the rationale for selecting FGDs rather than in-depth interviews, given that discussing contraception could potentially be culturally sensitive in areas of Bihar with low contraceptive use rates? If FGDs were chosen for efficiency’s sake / budgetary reasons, that is fine. If the authors chose FGDs for additional reasons (e.g. they expected group discussions would elicit more interesting insights as respondents discussed experiences together), it would be helpful to specify this.
Lines 100-101: Can the authors briefly explain why they selected 2 blocks with high male out-migration and 2 blocks with low out-migration in each district? This is a bit confusing since the authors then say in lines 106-107 that they identified village clusters with high volume of high male out-migration. The results section does not distinguish between findings in high migration vs. low migration blocks, so it is unclear why this stratification was done.
Lines 108-110: Can the authors briefly explain the rationale for the sample size of 25 FGDs? For example, was this based on the expected likelihood of reaching saturation of themes after 8 or 9 FGDs per respondent type (women, men, ASHAs)? This would be helpful to clarify since line 112 says “the study team planned to conduct at least one FGD with each respondent group in each block” – which I take to mean 4 FGDs per respondent type (women / men), and the final count was twice that number (8 or 9 per respondent type).
RESULTS
Overall comment: Given the focus of this paper on contraceptive use in the context of high out-migration, I would suggest to restructure the results section to start with / emphasize the “reasons related to male out-migration” category. For the “reasons related to the migration environment” category, I would suggest to focus on reasons that are specific to a high out-migration setting (e.g. ASHAs tend not to do outreach since they don’t perceive a need for contraception when so many husbands are away; wives prioritize other issues to discuss / want to keep the peace during limited times when migrant husbands are home). I would suggest to cut back on the text describing other reasons for non-use that are already well documented in rural India and other settings (preference for male child, needing to prove fertility, myths/misperceptions about contraception). It should be sufficient to briefly describe these other reasons and state that even in a high out-migration environment, these common reasons persist as important barriers to use of contraception.
-There is little analysis of whether the results differed for the male FGD sub-types: married migrant men vs. married resident men. I would recommend to explore this further – did migrant men predominantly focus on their prolonged absence / lack of need for FP, vs. resident men focusing primarily on cultural/religious objections? If so, it would help nuance the paper’s main message – i.e. high out-migration settings experience same supply/demand challenges as other settings, but they also have unique challenges affecting all couples in the area (like ASHAs not doing outreach there) as well as challenges unique to migrant families (prolonged absence the common barriers to contraceptive uptake (supply/demand).
-It would be helpful to note whether/how the results differed in Gopalganj vs. Nawada. While their levels of out-migration are similar (approx. 1/3 of males), there is a considerable difference in contraceptive prevalence rate between these two districts (9% vs. 29%), so readers might be interested to know whether reasons for non-use differed.
Line 170-172: please clarify whether the words in italics are quotes from a respondent, or the authors’ interpretation. Also, the term “extremely distorted” seems pejorative -- I would suggest to replace this with a more neutral term like “founded in religious beliefs”.
Table 2: The terms “micro” and “macro” seem confusing here. These terms usually distinguish individual vs. higher-level factors (i.e. community/structural factors), and that’s not quite the case here. Both categories in Table 2 include a mix of individual, community, and structural factors. I would suggest deleting the terms “micro” and “macro”, and simply name these categories 1) Reasons pertaining to husband’s out-migration; 2) Other reasons (individual, community, structural).
DISCUSSION
In general, I would recommend being more cautious about the inferences drawn in the Discussion section. For example, lines 384-387 argue that the lack of ASHA outreach was responsible for several factors affecting contraceptive non-use (including low perceived need for contraceptives and myths/misperceptions about contraceptive methods), and lines 402-404 state that poor couple communication on FP may have led to son preference, need to prove fertility etc. -- but the Results section does not present data explicitly making these connections. In the absence of definitive evidence about these linkages in this study, I would recommend to either 1) cite the existing literature demonstrating these causal pathways; or 2) use more speculative language like “we hypothesize that lack of ASHA outreach may have contributed to…”
Lines 372-374: “The study suggests that reasons for contraceptive non-use when the husband was a migrant could be very different than when the husband was a resident and staying in a high out-migration environment.” I am not clear on how the study data supports this statement, since findings are not presented separately for migrant males vs. resident males, and the study did not interview women whose husbands were residents. Also, several reasons cited for non-use (cultural norms, misinformation, etc.) are common across other LMIC settings without high out-migration. I think it would be fair to say that the study demonstrates some reasons for contraceptive non-use that are unique to the high out-migration environment, and others that are common across multiple settings.
Figure 1: I appreciate that the authors are attempting to visually show the complex relationships among factors contributing to non-use of contraception. However, the indirect pathways shown in this figure are not fully supported by the data. For example, there is a dotted line (indirect link) from “poor couple communication” to “pregnancy as a contraceptive”, “need to prove fertility”, and “male child preference”, but the results section does not provide data indicating these factors are related in some way. If the authors decide to include this figure, I would suggest to clarify that the indirect pathways reflect the authors’ understanding of causal relationships/pathways in the existing literature, rather than empirical data from this study. Alternatively, I think this figure could be removed and the authors could simply state that the factors influencing contraceptive use in high-migration settings a) may differ in some ways from other settings, and b) are complex/nuanced (as is the case in most settings).
CONCLUSION
Line 472: add the word “contraceptive” before “non-use”.
Line 477-78: This final sentence feels a bit confusing. How would one put migration at the center of FP programs? Perhaps this could be reworded to say “the unique context of high out-migration settings needs to be considered and addressed in FP programs”
-See above comment about use of the terms “micro” and “macro” – this feels confusing, as these terms usually distinguish individual vs. community/structural factors, and that’s not quite the case here.
Reviewer #4: Methodology is sound, well-explained, thorough, with very good sample size. A couple of items where clarifications are needed: (1) The introduction comments on HIV as a problem among those not using any contraception, but results and conclusion do not discuss barrier methods vs other methods that would not protect against sexually-transmitted disease. (2) There is also not enough comment in the results or discussion on permanent or longer-term (tubal ligation, IUD) vs temporary contraception. Given inability to procure on time before husband's arrival is an issue, one would assume most of the discussions revolved around temporary contraception (pill, condom, etc), but there are mentions of tubal ligations and some fears of IUDs causing health issues. This needs further discussion or clarification.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: Nadia Diamond-Smith
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
Reviewer #4: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0249177.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
18 Nov 2020

Manuscript title: Why women do not use contraceptives: Exploring the role of male out-migration
Manuscript ID: PONE-D-20-13937
Dear Dr. Zimmerman,
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Thank you for giving us an opportunity to revise our paper based on reviewers’ suggestions. We thank all the reviewers for their thoughtful comments, which undoubtedly have helped improve the quality of the manuscript. We have made the necessary changes to the manuscript. Following is our response to the reviewers' comments, as required. 
Journal requirements
1. If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially sensitive information, data are owned by a third-party organization, etc.) and who has imposed them (e.g., an ethics committee). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent.
Reply: Given the data comes from focus group discussions with women. At certain instances, the identifiers are part of the data itself. Therefore, it would be possible to de-identify them thoroughly. In this backdrop, the data used cannot be shared publicly. In case, someone wants to use the data, they write individually to Dr. Bidhubhusan Mahapatra, study principal investigator (bbmahapatra@popcouncil.org) to access the data. 
Response to the Editor
1. Because the research study is qualitative, the authors need to reframe their paper to ensure that it aligns with qualitative reporting guidelines. From the author guidelines: "Qualitative research studies should be reported in accordance to the Consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative research (COREQ) checklist or Standards for reporting qualitative research (SRQR) checklist." I suggest the COREQ checklist. Please ensure that the revised manuscript meets these guidelines and submit the guidelines, indicating where approximate revisions were made.
Reply: Thanks for the suggestion. We have gone through the COREQ checklist and made necessary modifications in the paper. 
2. Many of the macro and micro influences that are named are non-specific to migration. There needs to be greater justification about why you consider these to be related to migration in both the introduction and discussion or separate these out as a separate category that is NOT specific to migration.
Reply: Some of the reasons may sound non-specific to migration. But, when viewed from the context of migration environment, these reasons make more sense. For example, the son preference seems like to be generic reason for non-use. However, when one puts this in migration context, the son preference has a different meaning in areas affected by migration than not. In migration affected areas, the economic dependency on male child is distinctly different from low migration areas where son preference is more for lineage. In the revised manuscript, we have included justifications on these lines to make it more relevant. 
3.The results section needs considerable revision. Rather than presenting multiple quotes without much context, more work should be done to synthesize the themes, provide some general interpretation in terms of patterns within the themes and then provide 1-2 quotes as examples.
Reply: Thanks for the suggestion. We have made changes in the result section as per the suggestion. 
4. Data availability - more justification is needed on why data are unavailable.
Reply: Given the data comes from focus group discussions with women. At certain instances, the identifiers are part of the data itself. Therefore, it would be possible to de-identify them thoroughly. In this backdrop, the data used cannot be shared publicly. In case, someone wants to use the data, they write individually to Dr. Bidhubhusan Mahapatra, study principal investigator (bbmahapatra@popcouncil.org) to access the data.
5. Funding - Please ensure that the funding disclosure aligns with journal requirements (https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/disclosure-of-funding-sources). The draft indicates that the work was supported by Packard, but the funding disclosure says that there was no specific funding. Please clarify.
Reply: The data collection was supported by Packard. However, for the paper analysis and publication, Packard has not provided any support. 
Response to the reviewer #1: 
1. Overall, your results need a little more interpretation/discussion. Right now, it’s mostly a list of quotes with very little in between, but I think a little more context, helping us understand why you choose each quote, making sure that its more than a list of quotes is necessary. Please add some more discussion and contextualization to this section.
Reply: Thank you for the feedback. As suggested, we have tried to contextualize the results to make it more understandable. 
2. I do not quite understand why you have two separate sections, one about “fear of sickness” and one about “myths and misconceptions”—I think that these are probably the same topic, that there are perceptions of side effects, and I understand that the first set specifically mention migration, but I think people are talking about the same thing and that it would make sense to combine into one section. Also, since that first section just has people talking about “fear of sickness” without us really knowing what they mean by that it is not very rich, so I would recommend just using 1 of the quotes in that section and merging with the other section which is richer.
Reply: We agree to the reviewer’s view to a certain extent that fear of sickness may be arising out of myths and misconceptions and this is something already depicted in the conceptual diagram as well. However, we disagree that they reflect the same issue. Fear of sickness is not only an outcome of myths and misconception but is a result of multiple factors. While fear of sickness is mostly based on women’s own experience, myths and misconception is a reflection of poor knowledge about contraceptive in the community. For example, our study found that women had used IUCD or injectables had experienced vaginally bleeding. As a result, they stopped using contraceptive going forward. This is fear of sickness based on their own experience. What we observed is that the sense of fear was particularly high among women having migrant husband, who thinks that if they experience something similar again, who will take care of them and their family in husband’s absence. 
3. The discussion and conclusion need the most work. Related to my point below (about knowing more about previous studies/findings), try to focus your discussion and conclusion especially on the new findings in your study, because I think there are important new findings and have big programmatic and policy implication, and that add to the literature, but right now they are lost in findings that we already know and that others have discussed. You can discuss these past findings and highlight what’s different for migrating couples, but I urge you to really reorganize and think through what your value add is and highlight that.
Reply: Thank you for the suggestion. As suggested, we have re-worked on the discussion and conclusion to highlight new findings that can have programmatic implications. 
4. The authors need to do another review of the literature, especially for the discussion, as many of their findings have been found by other authors (including myself, sorry for the self-promotion). But look at these papers, and the papers they cite, and also do a literature search for others: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22390371/;
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18821352/
Reply: Thank you for highlighting and sharing the link to very interesting papers. We re-examined the existing literature and included them as appropriate. 
5. A major limitation which needs to be discussed is that the men were not migrants, and in fact you were probably missing the migrant men since they were away. So this is really about the experiences of women with migrant husbands, and the perceptions/views of men and ASHA’s living in the same community. It's a difference between lived experiences and perceptions. Make this clear and discuss how this biases your results.
Reply: Thanks for the suggestions. The FGDs with men included both migrant (who were visiting the villages that time) and resident men. Since the study included both migrant and resident men, the perceptions of non-use of contraceptives were a mix of own experiences and viewpoints of resident men. However, the purpose of the study was to understand the reasons for contraceptive non-use in high male out-migration areas and how the perceptions on contraceptives influenced by virtue of living in such areas. Therefore, we also included resident men in the FGDs. Given this, we don’t think the results are biased from this perspective. 
6. Finally, this needs editing by a native English speaker. I have pointed out some things in the beginning, but common issues like this are pervasive throughout the paper.
-Watch switch between family planning and contraceptives—be consistent throughout your manuscript (example in the first paragraph)
- Ln 49: “..and majority of..” should be “..and the majority of..”
- Ln 65: “A recent research in Nepal..” should be “A recent study in Nepal..”
- Ln 67: “Some of these studies..” should be cited
Reply: We have carefully reviewed the language used in the paper and corrected wherever appropriate. 
7. Ln 79: “moderated” sounds like you are doing a quantitative study, please use another word
Reply: We have replaced the word “moderated” and used “influenced” in the text. 
8. Ln 80: “shape out” is not scientific and also not clear, please use a more scientific term
Reply: We have replaced the word “shape out” and used “could be viewed from the lens of migration” in the text.
9. Ln 93: Identical? That seems like a very strong word to use, I doubt the are “identical”, replace with “very similar”, your next sentence also shows that there are differences
Reply: We have replaced the word “identical” and used “similar” in the text
10.Ln 99: remove “the” before “qualitative data collection…”
Reply: We have removed “the” before “qualitative data collection” in the revised manuscript. 
11. Was the recruitment done before the FGD and then the FGD arranged for a later time? What I am asking is if the respondents did the consent in a private location and then met later for the FGD or if the consenting was done at the time of the FGD? Please clarify in the text
Reply: Yes, first oral consent was taken at a private location before individuals met together for the FGDs. 
12. Where did the FGDs with men and women take place? How was privacy and confidentiality ensured (within the group members?)
Reply: All the FGDs were conducted in a place where the discussion cannot be heard by outsiders. Women FGDs were conducted in women-only environment, men FGDs were conducted in a men-only environment. In villages, we mostly rented out village clubs (hall where village meetings are held) or temple premise to conduct these interviews. 
13. Couples were not linked right? (husband and wife both interviewed?)
Reply: Yes, couples were not linked. 
14. When were the ASHA’s consented? How did this process work? Add to the text. How did you ensure that they did not feel pressured to participate give the recruitment approach through their groups?
Reply: Like women, ASHAs also consented in two stages: first, verbally before coming to the interview; second, written after coming to the venue of FGD. As described in the manuscript, we selected 10 ASHAs from each PHCs approached them individually for their participation. ASHAs who provided verbal consent were again asked to provide written consent on the day of FGDs. There was no pressure on ASHAs to participate in the study as the research investigator clearly explained the voluntary nature of participation and information that will be sought from them. The absence of pressure can be also seen from the fact that some of the ASHAs actually refused to participate in the FGDs. 
15. Info about the consent should be earlier (what is in the section about ethical approval should be moved up).
Reply: In the revised manuscript, we have moved the text as suggested. 
16. How many people participated in the coding and analysis process?
Reply: Codes were developed by two researchers independently. Once the list of codes were prepared, researchers discussed amongst themselves and prepare a draft list of codes. The draft list was reviewed by the principal investigator of the study, who made final decisions on coded list.
17. How did you deal with the fact that there are FGDs from three different groups? Were they analyzed by respondent type or all together? More detail is needed.
Reply: All data from the interviews with women, men and ASHAs were coded and analysed separately. We have amended this in the revised manuscript.
18. Ln 170: are these actual quote selections or your own interpretation? Make it clear.
Reply: Thank you for highlighting this. They are our own interpretations. We have taken out the quotation marks to make it clear. 
19. Might be useful to add respondents age and educational status too to the info after each quote
Reply: We have added the age of the respondents after each quote. 
20. Ln 172: “distorted” is a judgmental and charged word, also, it is incorporating analysis into the results, please rewrite this section
Reply: Thank you for highlighting this. We have changed the word “distorted” to “not considered important” in the revised manuscript.
21. Make sure not to sure contractions (such as “didn’t”) in formal academic writing
Reply: Thank you. We have corrected these in the revised manuscript. 
22. Ln 205: I do not think you have defined PHC previously in the paper 
Reply: Yes, we already defined PHC in the method section. 
23. Any idea what women mean by “fall sick”, did you get any details about what sickness they are referring to? 
Reply: During the discussion women mentioned that they suffered from heavy vaginal bleeding after using injectables (called Antara injection in the study area). Some of the women also complained about bleeding due to IUD insertion.
24. Ln 251: “They expressed if their wife was pregnant, they would not engage in any extramarital sexual relationship during their absence.” I had to read this a few times to figure out what you are trying to say, since its unclear who the various “they”’s are. I suggest re-writing as “Men felt that if their wife was pregnant, she would not engage in any extramarital sexual relationship during their absence.”
Reply: Thanks for the suggestion. We have re-written as suggested. 
25. Quote on ln 253: is this saying that they want their wife to become pregnant when they are home? I think you need some clarification/translation here otherwise it sounds like they want her to be pregnant while he is home, but I think its that they want her to be pregnant while he is away?
Reply: Yes, men want their wives to be pregnant when they were away. We have updated the text as below. 
“Men felt that if their wife was pregnant, she would not engage in any extramarital sexual relationship during their absence. Driven by this suspicion men refrained from using any contraceptive when they were at home so that their wives become pregnant when they were away from home”.
26. Ln 261 “There were several macro-level factors, either directly or indirectly—through the micro level factors, acted as barrier to contraceptive use.” Re-write as ““There were several macro-level factors that acted as barrier to contraceptive use, either directly or indirectly through micro level factors.”
Reply: Suggested changes have been made in the text.
27. Can remove quote in line 315.
Reply: We have delated the quote in the revised manuscript.
28. Also, I would recommend removing the next two quotes and just saying “Respondents noted fears of infertility and cancer as reasons for non-use of family planning” 
Reply: We feel they are important quotes relevant to myths and misconceptions. Therefore, we have decided to keep those in the manuscript. 
29. Ln 329: I don't think that your first quote here is reflective of what you say in this paragraph about men thinking FP is “woman’s business” –this seems like he is saying that the husband decides about the number of children because he earns the money.
Reply: Thank you for highlighting this. We have removed the suggested quote. 
30. Ln 348: I think you mean antagonize not “agonise”.
Reply: Yes, we have updated that in the revised manuscript.
31. In general, your discussion needs to be more specific and better situated in the literature. Especially for the part where you make recommendations, look for other studies of interventions or program/policies that might have worked to address your specific issues, even from other countries.
Reply: As suggested, we have made changes in the discussion part. We would like to highlight that migration specific family planning interventions do not exist in India currently. We found some relevant ones from Nepal and our recommendations are keeping those in mind. 
32. You say that “aspiration to have smaller families” was universal, however, you have not mentioned that at all in the results, so you either need to mention that above or not mention it. Also, some of the quotes talked about people continuing to have children until a son, so it didn't seem that this was universal.
Reply: Yes, rightly pointed out, hence we have deleted the statement from the revised manuscript. 
33. Ln 370: I don't think your findings show anything about differences between men and women, or between migrants and non-migrants, since you only interviewed migrant wives. So I think this should be rephrased to only focus on your findings related to reasons for FP non-use/barriers to use among couples living in high migration areas
Reply: As suggested, we have re-phrased to the sentence to indicate the study shows reasons for non-use among couples in high outmigration settings.
34. The reasons for contraceptive non-use identified in the study pointed out that migration as a context is important to explain the FP behaviours of women and men, particularly, in communities with high male out-migration. This relates to the next sentence too—don’t extrapolate to non-migrants. I think many of your findings are similar to non-migrants (son preference, fear of side effects, proving fertility, fear of talk/social stigma, poor communication etc.). You could say that barriers that exist for other couples/women might be heightened among the migrant population.
Reply: We would like to disagree with the reviewer here. We are not extrapolating it to non-migrants. We are referring to the migration environment which included both non-migrant and migrant. It is not true that only women having migrant husband were part of the study, but also included both resident and migrant men as well as ASHA. Many of the environment related factors emerged from discussion with all three and hence, we feel the statement is relevant.
35. Ln 402: I really don't think that lack of communication is leading to son preference (debatable about the other too), and I am not sure about your point here. You have not shown evidence that couples did not understand each other’s preferences and therefore had more births than desired. Please be careful about your interpretation and making sure its reflective of your findings.
Reply: Your suggestion is much appreciated. We have removed the suggested part from the sentence. 
36. Paragraph starting line 424: you present results in this paragraph, these should go in the results section. Or you should take out this part, its rather confusing, but maybe would be less confusing if you had presented these findings earlier. I am also still struggling with the “fear of sickness” being separate from “fears of side effects”
Reply: Thank you for highlighting this. We have re-written the part of the sentence to bring clarity on this. We did not include it as part of result as they were observations by the study team and not from the respondents directly. 
37. Limitations: A main limitation is that the men were not all migrants, in fact, migrant men were probably less likely to be in the study because they were away, right? This is something that needs to be discussed in detail. Also, I don't think that the couples were linked, right? This is a limitation and would have given you much richer data.
Reply: We had both migrant and non-migrant men in the study and almost in equal proportions. Further, we don’t think having linked couples would have provided rich data. Given that there are FGDs, participation of couple would not be providing any additional information that what is presented in the study currently. 
38. Ln 451: the reasons for non use are NOT distinct between women whose husbands migrate and those that do not. There are some different reasons, but many of the reasons are simply magnified by migration.
Reply: We feel they are distinct, specifically, the individual specific reasons, Yes, the migration environment specific reasons are not distinct, but, heightened by the migration environment. We have re-written the part of bring clarity around this. 
39. Ln 453: The sentence starting “In addition..” is not clear, I do not know what you are trying to say.
Reply: We have modified the sentence for better understanding in the manuscript.
40. Ln 476: “prevailing fertility norms in the community also need to change” this is not a very specific and helpful comment, can you be more specific about what you mean and how this can happen?
Reply: We have changed “prevailing fertility norms” to prevailing social norms and updated the text in the manuscript. Prevailing social norms such as need to prove fertility, preference of male child, poor couple communication on contraceptives in the community also need to change. These norms could be changed through implementation of behaviour change intervention.
Response to the reviewer #2: 
1. This study aims to document the contraceptive use among women in a region of high male out-migration. This is a very interesting question to help discover new means to improve contraceptive uptake in this region. Nonetheless, I found that the methodology adopted to respond to the question is not adequate. First, contraceptive use is an intimate reality that many women will not want to discuss in group. While using focus group approach to discuss this sensitive event, the research question focus should not be on the individual but on the context. The results are presented as individual response to the research question. Therefore, it is not clear why the authors used focus group discussion for their study instead of individual in-depth interview.
Reply: While in-depth interviews could have provided finer nuances on reasons for not using contraceptive; however, it is not true that FGDs are not able to unravel the issue. We agree that the issue has to be discussed based on the context. Group discussions could elicit interesting insights as respondents discussed experiences together about the contraceptive use of their experiences and general practices about other women of the area. We disagree that results are presented as individual response. Yes, in some instances, during the discussions a few women mentioned their own experiences and we decided to keep these quotes while writing the results.
2.The results presented are related to the specific context study (what the authors call macro) or to the husband’s migration (micro) whereas they are situation that is found in many other places. For instance, the “inability to procure contraceptive methods” have nothing to do with the fact that the husband is away or because of the migration area. This is a fact that many women lack the opportunity to get their methods in pharmacies or store. At the end, very few results are related to the specific context studied.
Reply: While we agree some of the reasons identified looks generic in nature when looked from an overview perspective, the reasons have a different meaning when examined in migration specific context. If we take reviewer’s example on “inability to procure contraceptive methods”, yes, women lack opportunities to get their methods in pharmacies or store. But, it has different meaning for women having migrant husband. The mobility of women having migrant husband is limited when husband is away. She cannot go alone to a health centre to procure contraceptive. Moreover, since in villages procuring contraceptive is a sign of sexual activity, and women often fear that they would be judged as “promiscuous” if they procure contraceptives from shops or pharmacists while their husbands were away. 
3. Finally, this study lacks to present the context of the study. How long do husbands in the village reside outside? Is it a long-term migration or a circular one? 
Reply: We have already included the study context as part of the methodology. We have included a few more sentences to provide a better idea about the migration pattern in the revised version. 
4. The experience of each woman is not similar even if they lived in a place of high out-migration. As the authors said before, an in-depth interview is more appropriate to understand women behaviour than the Focus Group discussion on individual and sensitive topics.
Reply: We agree that the experiences can be diverging and that’s where FGD can bring those divergent experiences and still provides a coherent summary of the situation in the community. 
Response to the reviewer #3: 
1. Line 29-30: This sentence implies that reasons for contraceptive non-use differed among women who had migrant husbands vs. resident husbands, and women who lived in high migration environments vs. those who did not. This does not reflect my understanding of the findings of the paper, as the methods section indicated that sampling was done solely in high-migration village clusters (so everyone lived in a high migration environment), and the results did not differentiate findings for migrant vs. resident husbands. Perhaps this could be rephrased to something like “The reasons for contraceptive non-use in areas with high male out-migration were complex, including reasons unique to high-migration settings and reasons commonly found in other settings.”
Reply: Thank you for the suggestion. We made the suggested change in the revised manuscript. 
2.It might be helpful to offer a brief definition of “family planning” up front – i.e. a set of purposeful behaviors (timing and spacing/limiting of births through contraceptive use -- modern or traditional) undertaken to achieve desired family size.
Reply: We have included briefly on definition of family planning in the revised manuscript. 
3. Lines 54-55: “Even among those who used modern contraceptives, female sterilization was the most dominant method” – Can the authors elaborate briefly on why this is problematic? (i.e. a healthy contraceptive method mix should consist of a balance of short-acting, long-acting and permanent contraceptive methods. Skewed method mixes, particularly in younger populations, typically indicate issues with contraceptive services and/or uptake).
Reply: We have explained the problem with sterilization in the revised manuscript. 
4.Lines 64-65: “male out-migration is associated with utilization of reproductive health services and contraceptive use among women in developing countries”. Suggest saying “negatively associated” to make it clear that the association is negative.
Reply: Thanks for suggestion. We have updated in the revised manuscript.
5. Please add a brief paragraph on data collection specifying: Were the FGD guides structured, semi-structured, or unstructured? Who were the FGD facilitators (what were their qualifications, what training did they receive in FGD facilitation)? Was there a note-taker? Were FGDs recorded and transcribed, or was the analysis done using notes?
Reply: The details on interview procedure for conducting FGDs has been included in the revised manuscript in a separate heading called “interview procedure”.
6.In the data analysis section (lines 147-153), please specify the following: was the coding done on full transcripts vs. notes? Was any double-coding done (two different people code the same transcript) to check inter-coder reliability?
Reply: As suggested, we have included the details in the revised manuscript. 
7. Line 99: please correct to “focus group discussions”, not focused group discussions. Can the authors also briefly explain the rationale for selecting FGDs rather than in-depth interviews, given that discussing contraception could potentially be culturally sensitive in areas of Bihar with low contraceptive use rates? If FGDs were chosen for efficiency’s sake / budgetary reasons, that is fine. If the authors chose FGDs for additional reasons (e.g. they expected group discussions would elicit more interesting insights as respondents discussed experiences together), it would be helpful to specify this.
Reply: Thank you for this comment. We have included a couple sentence on the rationale behind going for FGDs. In summary, the FGD was preferred as they help in understanding a broader view of the situation in a community. Also, FGDs were done so that they can inform tool development for quantitative study. 
8. Lines 100-101: Can the authors briefly explain why they selected 2 blocks with high male out-migration and 2 blocks with low out-migration in each district? This is a bit confusing since the authors then say in lines 106-107 that they identified village clusters with high volume of high male out-migration. The results section does not distinguish between findings in high migration vs. low migration blocks, so it is unclear why this stratification was done.
Reply: When we started the study, we assumed that there may be some differences in pattern of contraceptive use between low and high migration blocks. However, at the analysis stage, we did not find such differences and hence, results were presented without any further segregation. However, such segregation helped us in picking the migration environment specific reasons and the finer nuances that differentiates the reasons of non-use between high out-migration and low out-migration communities.
9. Lines 108-110: Can the authors briefly explain the rationale for the sample size of 25 FGDs? For example, was this based on the expected likelihood of reaching saturation of themes after 8 or 9 FGDs per respondent type (women, men, ASHAs)? This would be helpful to clarify since line 112 says “the study team planned to conduct at least one FGD with each respondent group in each block” – which I take to mean 4 FGDs per respondent type (women / men), and the final count was twice that number (8 or 9 per respondent type). 
Reply: There is some confusion here. We conducted one FGD for each study group in each of the eight blocks. For men, we had to conduct an additional FGD in a block to capture the diverging views across population groups in that block. 
10. Overall comment: Given the focus of this paper on contraceptive use in the context of high out-migration, I would suggest to restructure the results section to start with / emphasize the “reasons related to male out-migration” category. For the “reasons related to the migration environment” category, I would suggest to focus on reasons that are specific to a high out-migration setting (e.g. ASHAs tend not to do outreach since they don’t perceive a need for contraception when so many husbands are away; wives prioritize other issues to discuss / want to keep the peace during limited times when migrant husbands are home). I would suggest to cut back on the text describing other reasons for non-use that are already well documented in rural India and other settings (preference for male child, needing to prove fertility, myths/misperceptions about contraception). It should be sufficient to briefly describe these other reasons and state that even in a high out-migration environment, these common reasons persist as important barriers to use of contraception.
Reply: In the original manuscript, the results are already presented first for “reasons related to male out-migration” and then for the “migration environment” related reasons which is line with the suggestion. On the second suggestion to cut back text for some of the migration environment related reasons, we have a different viewpoint. While some of the reasons may sound like already discussed in prior literature, it is important to present them in the migration context. Each of the reasons presented in the paper has their own relevance when discussed from migration perspectives. For example, son preference is very common in any rural setting in India. However, some preference in a non-migration setting has a different connotation than that in migration affected settings. In migration affected settings, men and women preferred son over a daughter due to economical reasons. In contrary, in a low out-migration setting, family lineage is the primary reason for son preference.
11. There is little analysis of whether the results differed for the male FGD sub-types: married migrant men vs. married resident men. I would recommend to explore this further – did migrant men predominantly focus on their prolonged absence / lack of need for FP, vs. resident men focusing primarily on cultural/religious objections? If so, it would help nuance the paper’s main message – i.e. high out-migration settings experience same supply/demand challenges as other settings, but they also have unique challenges affecting all couples in the area (like ASHAs not doing outreach there) as well as challenges unique to migrant families (prolonged absence the common barriers to contraceptive uptake (supply/demand). 
Reply: Thank you for suggesting this. In the revised manuscript, we have highlighted whether the results referred to migrant or resident men. Also, in the discussion, we have included briefly how the responses varied between resident and migrant men.
12. It would be helpful to note whether/how the results differed in Gopalganj vs. Nawada. While their levels of out-migration are similar (approx. 1/3 of males), there is a considerable difference in contraceptive prevalence rate between these two districts (9% vs. 29%), so readers might be interested to know whether reasons for non-use differed. 
Reply: Thanks for the suggestion. We have discussed the differences between Nawada and Gopalganj in the revised manuscript. 
13. Line 170-172: please clarify whether the words in italics are quotes from a respondent, or the authors’ interpretation. Also, the term “extremely distorted” seems pejorative -- I would suggest to replace this with a more neutral term like “founded in religious beliefs”.
Reply: Thank you for highlighting this. The words in italics were our interpretation. So, we have made the corrections in the revised version. 
14. Table 2: The terms “micro” and “macro” seem confusing here. These terms usually distinguish individual vs. higher-level factors (i.e. community/structural factors), and that’s not quite the case here. Both categories in Table 2 include a mix of individual, community, and structural factors. I would suggest deleting the terms “micro” and “macro”, and simply name these categories 1) Reasons pertaining to husband’s out-migration; 2) Other reasons (individual, community, structural).
Reply: Thanks for the suggestion. We understand that some of the factors included under macro are not actually at macro level. As suggested, we have removed the word macro and micro and have divided the reasons into two groups: reasons pertaining to husband’s out-migration and reasons pertaining to migration environment. 
15. In general, I would recommend being more cautious about the inferences drawn in the Discussion section. For example, lines 384-387 argue that the lack of ASHA outreach was responsible for several factors affecting contraceptive non-use (including low perceived need for contraceptives and myths/misperceptions about contraceptive methods), and lines 402-404 state that poor couple communication on FP may have led to son preference, need to prove fertility etc. -- but the Results section does not present data explicitly making these connections. In the absence of definitive evidence about these linkages in this study, I would recommend to either 1) cite the existing literature demonstrating these causal pathways; or 2) use more speculative language like “we hypothesize that lack of ASHA outreach may have contributed to…” “For lines 402-404 state that poor couple communication on FP may have led to son preference, need to prove fertility etc”.
Reply: Thanks for highlighting this. We have removed the sentence linking poor couple communication to son preference and need to prove fertility. Also, as suggested, we have re-articulated the language to make it look hypothesized. 
16. Lines 372-374: “The study suggests that reasons for contraceptive non-use when the husband was a migrant could be very different than when the husband was a resident and staying in a high out-migration environment.” I am not clear on how the study data supports this statement, since findings are not presented separately for migrant males vs. resident males, and the study did not interview women whose husbands were residents. Also, several reasons cited for non-use (cultural norms, misinformation, etc.) are common across other LMIC settings without high out-migration. I think it would be fair to say that the study demonstrates some reasons for contraceptive non-use that are unique to the high out-migration environment, and others that are common across multiple settings.
Reply: Thank you for pointing this out. We have re-written the sentence to make sure it reflects our study findings. 
17. Figure 1: I appreciate that the authors are attempting to visually show the complex relationships among factors contributing to non-use of contraception. However, the indirect pathways shown in this figure are not fully supported by the data. For example, there is a dotted line (indirect link) from “poor couple communication” to “pregnancy as a contraceptive”, “need to prove fertility”, and “male child preference”, but the results section does not provide data indicating these factors are related in some way. If the authors decide to include this figure, I would suggest to clarify that the indirect pathways reflect the authors’ understanding of causal relationships/pathways in the existing literature, rather than empirical data from this study. Alternatively, I think this figure could be removed and the authors could simply state that the factors influencing contraceptive use in high-migration settings a) may differ in some ways from other settings, and b) are complex/nuanced (as is the case in most settings).
Reply: Thank you again for your guidance on this. We have re-articulated to make it clear that the indirect relationships are based on empirical evidence and synthesis of findings. 
18. Line 472: add the word “contraceptive” before “non-use”.
Reply: Suggestion incorporated in the revised manuscript. 
19. Line 477-78: This final sentence feels a bit confusing. How would one put migration at the center of FP programs? Perhaps this could be reworded to say “the unique context of high out-migration settings needs to be considered and addressed in FP programs”
Reply: Thanks for the suggestion. We have incorporated this in the revised manuscript.
20. See above comment about use of the terms “micro” and “macro” – this feels confusing, as these terms usually distinguish individual vs. community/structural factors, and that’s not quite the case here.
Reply: Yes, we have removed them as suggested. 
Response to the reviewer #4: 
1.Methodology is sound, well-explained, thorough, with very good sample size. A couple of items where clarifications are needed: (1) The introduction comments on HIV as a problem among those not using any contraception, but results and conclusion do not discuss barrier methods vs other methods that would not protect against sexually-transmitted disease. (2) There is also not enough comment in the results or discussion on permanent or longer-term (tubal ligation, IUD) vs temporary contraception. Given inability to procure on time before husband's arrival is an issue, one would assume most of the discussions revolved around temporary contraception (pill, condom, etc), but there are mentions of tubal ligations and some fears of IUDs causing health issues. This needs further discussion or clarification.
Reply: Thank you for highlighting some important points. We like to clarify on the two points: (1) In the introduction, we did not discuss HIV among those not using contraceptive. Rather, we provided existing evidence on how migration has been an important factor in Bihar in explaining health situation; (2) Given our interest was to explore the reasons for contraceptive non-use, we feel discussion on use of spacing and limiting method seems to beyond the scope of the paper. On a related note, tubal ligation is a permeant method and women prefer to go for it once they had completed their family size. Moreover, women would prefer to go for sterilization when their husbands would visit home. 
We again thank the reviewers and you for giving us this opportunity and will be happy to provide further clarification if required.
With warm regards
Bidhu
bbmahaptra@gmail.com
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Comments 10. 11.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0249177.r003Decision Letter 1
ZimmermanLinnea AAcademic Editor© 2021 Linnea A Zimmerman2021Linnea A ZimmermanThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
8 Feb 2021

PONE-D-20-13937R1
Why women do not use contraceptives: Exploring the role of male out-migration
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Mahapatra,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please review the concerns raised by Reviewer 3  The majority of the comments are minor and can be easily addressed.  In addition to addressing the substantive comments, please ensure that the manuscript is carefully reviewed for language, grammar, and punctuation.  Plos One does not provide these services and thus authors are responsible for final editing. 
Please submit your revised manuscript by Mar 25 2021 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Linnea A Zimmerman, Ph.D, MPH
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: N/A
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #3: No
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Thank you for addressing my comments, this is much improved and will be a valuable contribution to the literature.
Reviewer #3: Thank you to the authors for responding to the reviewer comments and revising the manuscript. I have a few additional comments on the revised manuscript:
Overall: since PLOS One does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, the authors need to copyedit the manuscript carefully. This is particularly applicable to text that was added in this revision -- there are some missing articles ("a", "the", etc) and typos.
Study design:
1) The justification for using FGDs still seems unclear, as divergent views can also emerge by interviewing people individually (in fact, IDIs may be more likely to elicit divergent views on sensitive topics because people are more likely to speak freely). Do the authors mean to say that they wanted to capture broader community perceptions and norms on contraceptive use rather than people's individual contraceptive practices?
2) Can the authors please clarify the following statement: "The other objective of conducting FGD was to inform the quantitative survey in developing study tool tuned for study context." What quantitative survey? How would FGD findings be preferable to in-depth interview findings in informing development of a quantitative tool?
3) In their response to the reviewers, the authors explained why they selected two high male out-migration and two low male out-migration blocks in each district, and indicated that this stratification was dropped in the analysis phase as no major differences in themes emerged. However, this explanation was not added to the manuscript text. Please add this explanation.
4) The following sentence is unclear, please revise: "At the end of the study, while from each study group, one FGD was conducted in each block, for men in one block, an additional FGD was conducted to capture the diverging views of population." Are the authors saying that the FGDs didn't elicit many divergent views, so they conducted one additional FGD at the end of the study to try to elicit divergent views?
Results:
1) I am a bit confused about why "poor couple communication on FP" is categorized as a characteristic of the migration environment. This seems directly related to the husband's outmigration, since it means that couples talk infrequently and need to reserve those conversations for essential topics. Perhaps this could be recategorized?
2) "Fear of sickness due to side effects" -- suggest to rename this simply "Fear of side effects", and move the content on side effects up to this section (see next comment).
3) The first paragraph under "myths and misperceptions" describes legitimate side effects that can be experienced with contraceptive method use, as well as misperceptions (i.e. contraceptive methods cause cancer). I would suggest to move the content about fear of side effects to the section above "Fear of sickness due to side effects", and reserve this section for true myths/misperceptions.
Discussion:
1) Page 15: "Whereas, at the system level, low ASHA outreach on FP, need to prove fertility, preference of male child, myths and misconception about contraception, poor couple communication on FP were listed as deterrents to contraceptive use." -- The term "system level" seems appropriate when talking about ASHA outreach and lack of accurate communication on contraception, but the other factors don't quite fit under this term. Suggest to use a more comprehensive term like "system-level and community/cultural factors".
2) Limitations: I recommend that the authors acknowledge the potential drawbacks of using FGDs to discuss sensitive topics like contraception -- namely that people may not feel comfortable to openly express their views in a large group, particularly if their opinion differs from others / the loudest voices in the group.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: Nadia Diamond-Smith
Reviewer #3: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0249177.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
17 Feb 2021

Response to the reviewer # 3: 
Overall: 
Since PLOS One does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, the authors need to copyedit the manuscript carefully. This is particularly applicable to text that was added in this revision -- there are some missing articles ("a", "the", etc) and typos.
Response: Thank you. We have done a thorough editing of the manuscript. 
Study design:
1. The justification for using FGDs still seems unclear, as divergent views can also emerge by interviewing people individually (in fact, IDIs may be more likely to elicit divergent views on sensitive topics because people are more likely to speak freely). Do the authors mean to say that they wanted to capture broader community perceptions and norms on contraceptive use rather than people's individual contraceptive practices?
Response: Yes, we wanted to capture the broader community perceptions.
2. Can the authors please clarify the following statement: "The other objective of conducting FGD was to inform the quantitative survey in developing study tool tuned for study context." What quantitative survey? How would FGD findings be preferable to in-depth interview findings in informing development of a quantitative tool?
Response: Thank you for highlighting this. FGDs were not only informed in framing the right questions for migration context but also guided the analysis of quantitative survey data. In terms of survey tool development, it helped in framing the questions in local language and picking the right terms to be used in question framing and response categories. In case of In-depth interviews, terms prevalent at community level may not have emerged so clearly.
The quantitative survey was followed by the qualitative phase where the objective was to examine if the contraceptive use behaviours of women in migration affected areas were linked to migration of women’s husband. A paper based on quant data has been published and can be accessed here: https://bmcpublichealth.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12889-020-09906-9
3. In their response to the reviewers, the authors explained why they selected two high male out-migration and two low male out-migration blocks in each district, and indicated that this stratification was dropped in the analysis phase as no major differences in themes emerged. However, this explanation was not added to the manuscript text. Please add this explanation.
Response: Thank you for pointing this out. We have included a sentence to this effect in the revised manuscript.
4. The following sentence is unclear, please revise: "At the end of the study, while from each study group, one FGD was conducted in each block, for men in one block, an additional FGD was conducted to capture the diverging views of population." Are the authors saying that the FGDs didn't elicit many divergent views, so they conducted one additional FGD at the end of the study to try to elicit divergent views?
Response: Thank you for point this out. In one of the blocks FGDs for migrant and non-migrant men were collected separately. We meant that the view of these groups was very different. In the revised manuscript, we have clarified this. 
Results:
1. I am a bit confused about why "poor couple communication on FP" is categorized as a characteristic of the migration environment. This seems directly related to the husband's outmigration, since it means that couples talk infrequently and need to reserve those conversations for essential topics. Perhaps this could be recategorized?
Response: Poor couple of communication on FP was prevalent across all couples residing in the migration affected areas irrespective of whether women had migrant and resident husband. Couples generally refrained from discussing about contraceptives amongst themselves. This was emerged from discussion with men and ASHAs as well. We have made some revision to the text to bring more clarity around this.
2. "Fear of sickness due to side effects" -- suggest to rename this simply "Fear of side effects", and move the content on side effects up to this section (see next comment).
Response: We have changed the “Fear of sickness due to side effects” to “Fear of side effects” in the revised manuscript. 
3. The first paragraph under "myths and misperceptions" describes legitimate side effects that can be experienced with contraceptive method use, as well as misperceptions (i.e. contraceptive methods cause cancer). I would suggest to move the content about fear of side effects to the section above "Fear of sickness due to side effects", and reserve this section for true myths/misperceptions.
Response: Thank you again for bringing this to our attention. As suggested, in the revised manuscript we have moved the content about fear of side effects to the section "Fear of side effects” and revised the text on myths and misperceptions section to make it more relevant.
Discussion:
1. Page 15: "Whereas, at the system level, low ASHA outreach on FP, need to prove fertility, preference of male child, myths and misconception about contraception, poor couple communication on FP were listed as deterrents to contraceptive use." -- The term "system level" seems appropriate when talking about ASHA outreach and lack of accurate communication on contraception, but the other factors don't quite fit under this term. Suggest to use a more comprehensive term like "system-level and community/cultural factors".
Response: Thanks for highlighting this. We have made the suggested change in the revised manuscript. 
2. Limitations: I recommend that the authors acknowledge the potential drawbacks of using FGDs to discuss sensitive topics like contraception -- namely that people may not feel comfortable to openly express their views in a large group, particularly if their opinion differs from others / the loudest voices in the group.
Response: We have included the limitation with FGDs in the revised manuscript.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0249177.r005Decision Letter 2
ZimmermanLinnea AAcademic Editor© 2021 Linnea A Zimmerman2021Linnea A ZimmermanThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
15 Mar 2021

Why women do not use contraceptives: Exploring the role of male out-migration
PONE-D-20-13937R2
Dear Dr. Mahapatra,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Linnea A Zimmerman, Ph.D, MPH
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0249177.r006Acceptance letter
ZimmermanLinnea AAcademic Editor© 2021 Linnea A Zimmerman2021Linnea A ZimmermanThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
17 Mar 2021

PONE-D-20-13937R2 
Why women do not use contraceptives: Exploring the role of male out-migration 
Dear Dr. Mahapatra:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Linnea A Zimmerman 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE