440plosonePLoS ONEPLoS OnePLOSPMC8110178811017881101783397092910.1371/journal.pone.0249877Comprehensive approach to HIV/AIDS testing and linkage to treatment
among men who have sex with men in Curitiba, Brazil
da CruzMarly MarquesConceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review &
editing CotaVanda LúciaConceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review &
editing LentiniNenaConceptualization, Funding acquisition, Supervision, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review &
editing BinghamTristaConceptualization, Supervision, Visualization, Writing – review &
editing ParentGregoryConceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Methodology, Validation, Writing – review &
editing KansoSolangeFormal analysis, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Writing – review &
editing RossoLiza Regina BuenoConceptualization, Project administration, Writing – review &
editing AlmeidaBernardoProject administration, Supervision, Writing – review &
editing Cardoso TorresRaquel MariaData curation, Formal analysis, Writing – review &
editing NakamuraCristiane YumiData curation, Formal analysis, Writing – review &
editing SantelliAna Carolina Faria e SilvaFunding acquisition, Writing – review &
editing do Rosário Oliveira MartinsMariaEditor 1Sergio Arouca National School of Public Health, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation,
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil2Revolving Fund for Vaccine Procurement, Pan American Health Organization,
Washington, DC, United States of America3Division of Global HIV and TB (DGHT), Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC), Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America4Municipal Health Secretariat of Curitiba, Curitiba,
Brazil5Department of Hospital Epidemiology, Federal University of Paraná,
Curitiba, Brazil6Division of Global HIV and TB (DGHT), Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC), Country Office in Brasília, Brasília, Brazil7Universidade Nova de Lisboa Instituto de Higiene e Medicina
Tropical, PORTUGALCompeting Interests: All authors have declared that no competing interests exist.
✉* E-mail: vanda.cota@ensp.fiocruz.br
#Contributed equally.
1052021165e0249877e02498772152021This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be
freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or
otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available
under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain
dedication.

## Abstract

## Introduction
The Curitiba (Brazil)-based Project, A Hora é Agora (AHA),
evaluated a comprehensive HIV control strategy among men who have sex with
men (MSM) aimed at expanding access to HIV rapid testing and linking
HIV-positive MSM to health services and treatment. AHA’s approach included
rapid HIV Testing Services (HTC) in one mobile testing unit (MTU); a local,
gay-led, non-governmental organization (NGO); an existing government-run
health facility (COA); and Internet-based HIV self-testing. The objectives
of the paper were to compare a) number of MSM tested in each strategy, its
positivity and linkage; b) social, demographic and behavioral
characteristics of MSM accessing the different HTC and linkage services; and
c) the costs of the individual strategies to diagnose and link MSM to
services.

## Methods
We used data for 2,681 MSM tested at COA, MTU and NGO from March 2015 to
March 2017. This is a cross sectional comparison of the demographics and
behavioral factors (age group, race/ethnicity, education, sexually
transmitted diseases, knowledge of AHA services and previous HIV test).
Absolute frequencies, percentage distributions and confidence intervals for
the percentages were used, as well as unilateral statistical tests.

## Results and discussion
AHA performed 2,681 HIV tests among MSM across three in-person strategies:
MTU, NGO, and COA; and distributed 4,752 HIV oral fluid tests through the
self-testing platform. MTU, NGO and COA reported 365 (13.6%) HIV positive
diagnoses among MSM, including 28 users with previous HIV diagnosis or on
antiretroviral treatment for HIV. Of these, 89% of MSM were eligible for
linkage-to-care services. Linkage support was accepted by 86% of positive
MSM, of which 66.7% were linked to services in less than 90 days. The MTU
resulted in the lowest cost per MSM tested ($137 per test), followed by
self-testing ($247).

## Conclusions
AHA offered MSM access to HTC through innovative strategies operating in
alternative sites and schedules. It presented the Curitiba HIV/AIDS
community the opportunity to monitor HIV-positive MSM from diagnosis to
treatment uptake. Self-testing emerged as a feasible strategy to increase
MSM access to HIV-testing through virtual tools and anonymous test kit
delivery and pick-up. Cost per test findings in both the MTU and
self-testing support expansion to other regions with similar epidemiological
contexts.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2020 May 14; Accepted 2021 Mar 29; Collection date 2021.

## Introduction
Although the number of new HIV infections is declining globally, the number of people
living with HIV (PLHIV) is still high. Over 37 million people are estimated to be
living with HIV around the globe, while 1.7 million new infections and 770,000
AIDS-related deaths were reported in 2018 [ ]. Continued progress in treatment has
resulted in decreased AIDS-related mortality and increased life expectancy among
PLHIV. However, late HIV diagnosis remains as a key challenge to epidemic control.
In 2017, an estimated 16% of PLHIV were unaware of their serological status [ , ]. Thus, periodic HIV testing services (HTC)
and early linkage of positive cases to the health system [ ] are critical prevention and treatment
strategies to strengthen the global epidemic response.
Brazil has become a model in HIV control thanks to adoption of progressive policies
and continued investments in prevention and treatment over the past 35 years.
However, the country’s ability to control the epidemic among men who have sex with
men (MSM) remains a challenge given an increasing trend in HIV diagnoses among males
ages 15 to 24 years [ , ]. AIDS detection rates in
Brazil in 2019 was 17.8 cases per 100,000 inhabitants and it varies widely among
state capitals. Among men, the AIDS detection rate was 25.2 cases, and an increase
was observed in the groups mainly between 15 and 19 years and 20 to 24 years, which
were, respectively, 64.9% and 74.8% [ ].
Studies conducted in the past 20 years indicate that MSM report higher HIV detection
rates when compared to the general population [ ]. Thus, MSM became the key population for HIV
control by the Government of Brazil (GOB), which recognized that HIV-infected MSM
who know their status are able to initiate treatment early to reduce forward
transmission [ – ].
Curitiba is the capital of the southern Brazilian state of Paraná. With an estimated
population of 1.9 million (approximately 500,000 between 18 to 29 years, 79% White),
Curitiba ranks 5th in terms of per capita income among
Brazilian municipalities and reports average schooling completion of 12 years [ ]. The local basic health
care network includes 113 facilities.
The AIDS detection rate in Curitiba was 13.8 cases per 100,000 inhabitants and the
sex ratio was 4.0 (M:W) 40 men for every 10 women. Curitiba has observed increased
detection of HIV among men ages 20 to 29 years and a higher proportion of all HIV
cases attributed to male-to-male sexual transmission [ , ]. In 2014, with the goal to contain the
epidemic among MSM, the Curitiba Health Secretariat (SMS), Ministry of Health’s
Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (Fiocruz), Federal University of Paraná (UFPR), and Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Office in Brazil partnered to launch an
implementation science project called “A Hora é Agora—The Time is Now” (AHA). AHA’s
specific objectives were to increase MSM’s access to HTC through a range of testing
venues, and to support linkage to care for MSM who tested HIV positive through
treatment uptake. AHA’s diverse approaches were deliberate in their promotion of
integrated services that were free from stigma and discrimination with a focus on
recruiting young MSM, aged 16 to 28 years, for services using a dynamic health
communications plan.
This article describes the implementation of, and comparison between the number of
MSM tested in each strategy, its positivity and linkage; and the social, demographic
and behavioral characteristics of MSM accessing different HTC and linkage services.
In addition to assessing client characteristics across service delivery platforms,
we provide cost data per MSM diagnosed with HIV and per MSM who accepted linkage
services to HIV treatment, aimed at improving the understanding of resources
required to scale-up testing strategies throughout Brazil.

## Methods
This research was approved by the local (Curitiba) and national ethics committees in
Brazil: Ethics Committee of the Municipal Health Secretariat of Curitiba; Ethics
Committee of the National School of Public Health Sergio Arouca and the National
Ethics Committee. Also, this project was reviewed in accordance with CDC human
research protection procedures and was determined to be non-research, public health
program activity.
All patients have provided informed written consent to have their data used in the
research.

## Target population and subgroups

## Curitiba municipal HTC clinic (COA); Non-Governmental Organization (NGO);
HTC Mobile Testing Unit (MTU)
MSM, at least 14 years of age, who signed the informed consent form and MSM,
at least 14 years of age, recently diagnosed HIV-positive who accepted
linkage support and lived in Curitiba.

## Self-testing
Men, at least 18 years of age, living in Curitiba.

## Setting and location
Curitiba, Parana, Brazil.

## Study perspective
It´s a cross-sectional analysis of programmatic data collected for each of AHA’s
HTC strategies as well as from the MSM who accepted linkage support. Those
excluded from analysis include transgender women, and MSM who did not sign the
informed consent form.
The cost study adopted an ingredients-based approach [ ], collecting cost data incurred by each
element of the AHA´s HTC strategies.

## Description of the strategies
AHA’s strategies were implemented at both fixed and mobile testing outlets. Fixed
service sites were the COA and the local lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender
(LGBT) NGO “Grupo Dignidade”. In addition, AHA deployed a mobile outlet–MTU
operating after business hours. HIV-positive MSM diagnosed at COA, the NGO and
the MTU were offered the support of a trained professional
(“linkador”, roughly translating as “linker”) to facilitate
enrollment into Curitiba’s health system for doctor’s appointments, exams, and
antiretroviral treatment (ART). AHA’s most innovative approach was the
self-testing program that delivered HIV self-test kits using an Internet-based
platform (https://www.ahoraeagora.org/). Curitiba males meeting
eligibility criteria (at least 18 years of age, living in Curitiba) were able to
request self-administered, oral-fluid tests for home delivery or anonymous
pick-up in pre-established outlets. Each of the HTC strategies were advertised
online, in physical venues mainly frequented by men, virtual gay meeting sites,
and in person through a multi-layered communications strategy.
A team of trained professionals was assigned to each outlet according to the
venue’s characteristics and needs ( ). Self-testing required a logistics
team to pack, mail and distribute self-test kits. Another team mentored,
supervised, trained, and verified activities developed by the linkers. Finally,
a monitoring and evaluation team oversaw data collection, conducted data quality
assessments, and led scientific and programmatic reporting. AHA professionals
were selected competitively and received training in project goals and
objectives, the Curitiba HIV epidemic, stigma and discrimination, and data
collection and analysis.
 The design of AHA’s self-testing strategy is described in a stand-alone study
protocol that covered issues specific to the introduction of HIV self-testing
(HIVST) in Brazil and the establishment of a virtual platform. MSM accessing the
web-based platform were able to request HIV self-testing kits anonymously and to
return their test results only if they were comfortable doing so. Users with a
reactive self-test result were encouraged to obtain a confirmatory, finger-prick
rapid test at COA. The self -testing strategy is not being compared with the
other three strategies (COA, NGO and MTU), as showed in Tables – .
 AHA offered linkage to HIV treatment to MSM who: i) tested HIV positive in one of
the project’s outlets offering diagnostic testing and those who had a reactive
self-test result and went to COA to confirm, ii) resided in Curitiba; and iii)
signed both an informed consent form as well as an authorization for the project
team to conduct linkage services ( ). Follow up was performed by a linker and recorded in a excel
spreadsheet. The Curitiba medicine logistics database was also used for
monitoring purposes. The user was considered "linked to services" when started
on ART. Self-testing users with a positive confirmatory test at COA were also
offered linkage services. One-on-one and short messaging services (SMS) were
available for up to three months following enrollment in linkage services. At
any time along the process, clients were free to decline linkage support while
retaining their right to access public health services in Curitiba.
 The AHA team developed and implemented a communications plan to increase outreach
to gay men and other MSM and encouraged service uptake through virtual tools,
e.g., Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, WhatsApp, Grinder, and the AHA website. The
project mapped out public venues where MSM gather to socialize [ ], including bars, cafés,
nightclubs, movie theaters, and public restrooms. This mapping facilitated
partnerships with LGBT-friendly businesses, resulting in tailored messaging for
each HTC environment and type of client.
The data for the cost study were collected from each of the testing strategies
across sites participating in the intervention and evaluation, and across two
dimensions for each testing strategy: cost component (personnel, test kits,
medical supplies, other supplies, building use, travel & transport,
utilities, training, other equipment, vehicles and trailer); and intervention
(e.g., testing services, individual counseling, linkage to care, recruitment
& communications, and capacity building. Data on allocation of shared
resources were collected from key personnel in each testing outlet to aid in the
allotment of costs across intervention components and programmatic activities.
For cost data analysis, information on the number of people tested, participants
that tested positive, and cost per MSM in linkage services. Costs were collected
in local currency and the conversion was made over 2016 USD (1USD = R$3.2).

## Time horizon
Data were collected between March 2015 and March 2017 at COA, MTU, NGO and
self-testing. For the cost study data were collected retrospective from each
testing outlet covering a 12-month period (March 2015 to February 2016).

## Choice of health outcomes
AHA collected socio-demographic and behavioral data through a client registration
form required at every AHA testing outlet for inclusion in routine HIV case
surveillance and were entered into EpiInfo 7.0 and processed with SPSS 17.0.
These data were used periodically by Curitiba’s Health Secretariat to flag
opportunities to adjust HTC and ART service delivery. Self-testing users filled
in the registration form electronically. The system verified inclusion criteria
through an anonymous questionnaire, containing socio-demographic and behavioral
questions, completed by users prior to placing the self-test kit request.
Data on MSM who tested positive for HIV and accepted linkage support were
collected through a standard form and spreadsheet, and compiled for inclusion in
health information systems, including: The National Disease Notification System
(SINAN); Lab Test Control System (SISCEL); Drug Logistics Control System
(SICLOM); and SMS electronic medical records. Linkage data were entered and
processed in Excel 15.0.
Participants’ socio-demographic and behavioral characteristics in this analysis
were: age group (18 to 29 years, 30 years and more); race/ethnicity (White,
non-White); education (completion of high school, attended higher education);
condom use (never, occasionally, always); history of sexually transmitted
infections (STIs) (yes, no); knowledge of AHA services (friends/partner
recommendation, AHA communication materials, health facilities, other); and
previous HIV test (yes, no).
Cost data sources were accounting and financial records, equipment inventory, and
stocks of materials and consumables. Additional data were collected through key
informant interviews aimed at describing the structure and operational flow of
project activities. Cost results presented here cover 12 months between March
2015 and February 2016.
The cost analysis covered all AHA´s strategies, including the communications
component. Annual cost per testing strategy was estimated for the total number
of tests and the total number of HIV-positive tests, coupled with the number of
HIV-positive users accepting linkage for each HTC strategy.

## Statistical analysis
In the analyzes, absolute frequencies, percentage distributions and confidence
intervals for the percentages were used, as well as unilateral statistical tests
for the difference in proportions—z test and/or Fisher test, depending on the
number of expected observations per cell.
The objective was to verify whether the differences, greater or lesser, in the
proportions were significant by comparing the strategies in the populations
“eligible for linking” and “linked in less than 90 days”. The tests were carried
out comparing the strategies two by two within each of the two populations, as
follows: COA x NGO, COA x MTU and NGO x MTU.
Other analyzes used absolute, relative frequencies and median in each of the
strategies according to some sociodemographic and behavioral characteristics.
For two of the characteristics, whites and some college or higher, unilateral
statistical tests were also performed for the difference in proportions—z-test
and Fisher’s test comparing within the strategies.

## Estimating resources and costs
The idea of the cost analysis was to understand the costs of all the components
needed to identify a positive and link them to treatment. All of the activities
are interrelated, but they were defined as separate buckets for the process of
data collection. While the dollars spent to build capacity for HCW would improve
the delivery of testing services or linkage activities, they are very different
activities that require different inputs. In order to identify a positive,
support for activities within each of those buckets is needed, the survey and
enumerators were given instruction on how to differentiate resources that would
fall under each activity bucket. Testing services were activities that were
directly related to the testing of the individual, such as staff time to perform
the test, etc. Linkage activities were activities that were identified as being
directly related to linking an HIV positive individual to treat (included costs
such as personnel). Capacity building of HCW were any activities that supported
the development or delivery of trainings or materials (such as training
personnel, material printing, venue costs, per diems to attend training, etc.).
Significant effort in survey material and training was spent to ensure items
were not double counted and were properly tagged to the correct bucket.

## Results
Over two years of implementation, AHA enrolled 9,268 males into both fixed, mobile
testing strategies and self-testing. Results are presented in two parts: 1) fixed
and mobile strategies; 2) self-testing.

## Fixed and mobile strategies
Men who reported sex with other men were stratified by AHA testing strategy and
by number and proportion of positive test results, eligibility for linkage, and
acceptance of linkage support. shows 2,681 HIV tests among MSM, of which 365 (13.6%) tested
positive. Of these, 28 had either had a previous HIV diagnosis or were already
in ART; 300/337 (89%) were eligible for linkage; 258/300 accepted linkage
support (86%); 172/258 (66.7%) were linked to services in less than 90 days. In
addition, 61/258 MSM (23.6%) were linked to care in more than 90 days; and
25/258 (9.7%) were not linked to services.
 According to the linker´s records, the main barriers to delayed initiation of
treatment and non-linking are related both to individual users (difficulty to
progress in the process, missed appointments and denial of diagnosis);
communication difficulties (user does not respond or takes too long to respond),
as well as to the care network (delay or difficulties in getting an appointment,
and date and time conflicts with the appointment.
Among MSM tested for HIV, the majority did so at the MTU (54.1%), followed by COA
(27.9%) and the NGO (18%) ( ). COA recorded the highest HIV positivity (33.8%) among the AHA
strategies, followed by the MTU (5.9%) and NGO (5.6%). COA also registered the
highest proportion of MSM accepting linkage support (97.9%), followed by the NGO
(68.2%) and the MTU (67.5%).
 reports the
socio-demographic and behavioral characteristics of AHA participants by
strategy. The median age was 25 years old. Two thirds of MSM were white, and
55.8% attended or completed higher education. In general, social and demographic
characteristics were similar across strategies, with the exception of COA. As
compared to other strategies, COA registered the higher percentage of white MSM
(77.3%) and the lowest percentage of MSM who had some college or higher
(47.5%).
The majority (66.4%) of MSM reported irregular condom use and 12.8% reported STI
diagnosis in the past 12 months.). Over three quarters (75.8%) reported at least
one previous HIV test. The MTU had the lowest proportion of users with STI
diagnosis in the past 12 months (9.3%). The highest percentage (78.9%) of users
with at least one previous HIV test was observed at COA.

## Internet-based HIV self-testing
A total of 7,352 HIV self-tests were requested over 24 months of which 4,752
(65%) were delivered to the home, or picked up at the pharmacy. The reason for
this difference is mainly that people requested to pick up the kits at the
pharmacy but it did not occur (57%); also, there were missing information in the
addressee field (e.g. ZIP code) for the home kits deliver, and cancelation of
requests. The majority (72%) of test kits distributed were mailed to the address
indicated by the user, while 27% were picked up at the government-run pharmacy
[ ].
The availability of confirmatory testing and health system navigation for those
who self-reported a positive screening (oral) test in the self-testing platform
and mobile application were critical components of the comprehensive project.
Although not mandatory, 34 individuals voluntarily reported a reactive test
result on the project website (De Boni et al., 2018), and 44 sought confirmatory
testing in COA. However, in order to guarantee confidentiality, there is no way
to know if these users are the same ones who reported the result on the
platform. Of those who went to COA, 42 where eligible and 40 accepted linkage
support to HIV services. Thirty-two (80%) of those were linked to service in
less than 90 days (average 51 days).

## Cost analysis
The costs per test among participants by AHA strategy varied from US$ 43 for the
MTU to US$ 377 for the COA ( ). Costs per tested positive ranged from US$ 867 at COA to US$ 3,311
at the NGO. Since it was not possible to have accurate information on positive
tests for self-testing, this strategy was excluded from cost analysis of
HIV-positive results. Costs per MSM tested ranged from US$ 137 to US$ 386, with
mobile testing reporting the lowest cost and COA reporting the highest. The cost
per positive MSM ranged from US$ 884 for COA to US$ 4,870 for the NGO, and the
cost per MSM that accepted linkage to HIV services ranged from US$ 1,194 for COA
to US$ 13,798 for NGO.
 The distribution of cost components per HIV test was concentrated in personnel
costs ranging from 42% in self-testing to 70.5% in the COA to ( ). Per the table
below, the strategies are similar in cost structure per individual tested, with
the exception of self-testing, which had a much greater share of costs allocated
to HIV test kits (21.1%), other supplies (14.7%), and travel and transportation
(10.2%). Because self-testing relies on mailed tests, it is less labor intensive
for healthcare providers, and costs depend mostly on the price of test kits, and
shipping fees per individual screened. It is worth mentioning that the costs
associated with in-person confirmatory screening is included in the COA
unit.
 Linkage-related activitities at COA accounted for 37.9% of the unit cost per
test, followed by counseling, at 28.7% ( ). The NGO had linkage activities
accounting for 27.6%, recruitment and communications accounting for 22.7%, and
22.4% falling within counseling activities. Mobile testing also reported a
relatively even distribution across intervention components, with linkage at
26.9%, testing services at 23.5%, and counseling at 20.7%. Self-testing
presented a different cost distribution when compared to the other strategies,
with testing services accounting for 49.5% of the cost, owing to the high cost
of importing test kits. Recruitment and communication activities accounted for
46.5% of the cost. This was particularly high due to initial investments needed
in the outreach campaign and website development. Self-testing´s longterm
operational costs are expected to lower with time, as this initial investment
will not be needed on an annual basis.
 

## Discussion
AHA successfully provided a variety of HIV testing options to a population of MSM,
nearly a quarter of whom had never previously tested. The combination of AHA
strategies yielded an HIV prevalence of 13.6% in a concentrated HIV epidemic marked
by growing infections among young MSM with little knowledge of HTC, who identify
stigma and discrimination as barriers to accessing HIV/AIDS care [ , ]. According to BRITO et al. (2015) the
response to increasing HIV testing rates among MSM requires service availability in
friendly, stigma- and discrimination-free facilities. TERTO (2015) states that
comprehensive programs involving easy access to rapid testing, health care and ART,
in addition to adherence and retention-enhancing mechanisms, are essential for the
success of combination prevention strategies.
Between March 2015 and March 2017, AHA performed 2,681 HIV tests among MSM across
in-person strategies. The absolute number of tests and the number of MSM tested was
greater in the MTU. AHA’s strategies engaged mostly white MSM, with average age of
25 years, who had some college or higher education, with at least one previous HIV
test and no self-reported recent STI diagnosis. This cut is in line with the profile
of Curitiba’s residents [ ].
The higher prevalence among testers at COA may have been inflated by MSM who
screened reactive in the self-testing strategy and looked for a confirmatory test at
COA.
According to a 2015 study in Curitiba [ ], HIV risk related to sexual exposure is
more frequent among young people, who must be mobilized to engage in HIV testing
early on in their sexual lives. Outreach to, and awareness-raising among this group
presents greater challenges, requiring diversified and expanded service access
strategies. AHA sought to meet these requirements through innovative, stigma- and
discrimination-free services in numerous HTC outlets available in alternative
shifts, and active and supportive linkage of positive cases to care and
treatment.
The introduction of linkage services in testing sites builds a much-needed bridge
between diagnosis and treatment for stigmatized MSM. Linkage acceptance rates were
high (86%) among eligible MSM. The linkers provided key assistance and support
throughout the linkage-to-care process using approaches, language and communication
tools that appeal to gay men and MSM, besides ensuring an environment that is free
from stigma and discrimination for MSM in the public health care network. Linkers
in-depth understanding of the health system mechanics and operations assisted in
successfully link users to services. Capacity building was fundamental to build that
knowledge. Another positive outcome was high acceptance of AHA-introduced
technological innovations in HIV/AIDS testing and care. In particular, Self-Testing
emerged as a feasible strategy to increase MSM access to self-testing through
virtual means, as the demand far exceeded AHA’s foreseen distribution of oral
self-test kits.
Self-testing ranked second in terms of cost by MSM tested and has proven highly
effective in reaching gay men and MSM, being the strategy that had the largest
number of tests distributed for this key population (n = 1,910). It is important to
highlight that the cost analysis was done in the first year of the project, when a
low quantity of tests was purchased at higher cost. HIV self-tests costs have
dropped since project inception with economies of scale. Internet-based HIV
self-testing has the potential to become a public health strategy for HIV/AIDS
control in concentrated epidemics. In addition, it may be easily adapted to other
settings and key populations, e.g., sex workers. With regards to positivity, COA
ranked first and consequently had the lowest cost for positive test in MSM, what
could be explained by the self-testing confirmatory tests that was referred to that
unit.
AHA activities also contributed to expanded knowledge about existing health services
and facilities in Curitiba by virtually disseminating information about addresses,
working hours and services available, and building the capacity of selected
facilities to provide quality services to MSM. Lastly, AHA strengthened Curitiba’s
HIV/AIDS surveillance system and supported HIV/AIDS service decentralization to the
basic health care network.

## Conclusions
Although challenges persist in sustaining alternative HTC and HIVST strategies, AHA
implemented and assessed the comparative feasibility and acceptability of various
novel approaches to encourage HIV testing uptake among MSM in Curitiba. Innovative
strategies implemented by AHA, and particularly the self-testing and linkage-to-care
strategies were well accepted by users and providers.
Sustaining these services requires restructuring strategies to reduce associated
costs and promote public health network ownership of procedures, processes and
functions. This task demands flexibility in the absence of mechanisms and/or
resources to include new functions in traditional health services, including peer
educators and linkers.
Despite implementation barriers and challenges inherent to an intervention the size
and complexity of AHA, the project achieved considerable success. Lessons learned
will assist others in adapting these strategies to other settings. AHA’s
contribution to Brazil’s ability to respond specifically to an epidemic concentrated
among MSM is considered as AHA’s main achievement.

## Acknowledgments
Aristides Barbosa Júnior, Juliane Villela, David Harrad, Adriane Wollmann, Elina
Sakurada, Roberto de Jesus, Leonardo Linconl; Raquel De Boni, Renato Lima, Renato
Girade Corrêa, Raquel Lima Miranda; the peer educators, the
linkators and the whole team.

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the manuscript.

## Funding Statement
This publication was supported by the Cooperative Agreement
Number NU2G GH001152, funded by the United States President’s Emergency Plan for
AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) through the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC). Its contents are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the official views of the CDC or the Department of Health
and Human Services (HHS).

## References
 

PLoS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0249877.r001Decision Letter 0
McDonaldNatashaStaff Editor© 2021 Natasha McDonaldThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License,
which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
6 Jan 2021

PONE-D-20-13677
Comprehensive approach to HIV/AIDS testing and linkage to treatment among men who
have sex with men in Curitiba, Brazil
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Cota,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we
feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it
currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the
manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
The reviewers felt that a number of issues should be resolved before the manuscript
can be further considered for publication. In particular, several concerns arose
about the presentation of the methodology, the discussion and the reporting
methods/criteria that should be used in the study. The reviewers' comments can be
viewed in full below.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Feb 19 2021 11:59PM. If you will need more
time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact
the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When
you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions
Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic
editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file
labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the
original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled
'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You
should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your
updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure
files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in
protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns
your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the
future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Natasha McDonald, PhD
Associate Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional
requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including
those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf
and
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2. ‘In ethics statement in the manuscript and in the online submission form, please
provide additional information about the patient records used in your retrospective
study. Specifically, please ensure that you have discussed whether all data were
fully anonymized before you accessed them and/or whether the IRB or ethics committee
waived the requirement for informed consent. If patients provided informed written
consent to have data from their medical records used in research, please include
this information.
3. Please include a separate caption for each figure in your manuscript.
4. Thank you for stating the following in your Competing Interests section: 
"All authors declare that they have no significant competing financial, professional,
or personal interests that might have influenced the performance or presentation of
the work described in this manuscript."
Please complete your Competing Interests on the online submission form to state any
Competing Interests. If you have no competing interests, please state "The authors
have declared that no competing interests exist.", as detailed online in our guide
for authors at http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submit-now
 This information should be included in your cover letter; we will change the online
submission form on your behalf.
Please know it is PLOS ONE policy for corresponding authors to declare, on behalf of
all authors, all potential competing interests for the purposes of transparency.
PLOS defines a competing interest as anything that interferes with, or could
reasonably be perceived as interfering with, the full and objective presentation,
peer review, editorial decision-making, or publication of research or non-research
articles submitted to one of the journals. Competing interests can be financial or
non-financial, professional, or personal. Competing interests can arise in
relationship to an organization or another person. Please follow this link to our
website for more details on competing interests: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/competing-interests
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with
data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously,
with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be
drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: Partly
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed
appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the
findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all
data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without
restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in
the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or
its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in
addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance
measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing
data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be
specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible
fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted
articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical
errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors
here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may
also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual
publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as
an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: This is a useful study looking at various HIV testing/screening methods
in Brazil. However, additional clarification around each strategy and the
methodology would help the reader more accurately assess the effectiveness of each.
The economic evaluation could be enhanced.
Introduction
Paragraph starting with line 101:
The incidence rates cited are now 6 years old. How have trends changed more recently
with the introduction of PrEP?
Methods
The methods would be more clear if the three comparisons were stated straight away.
It is not clear what is being compared. From table 1, it appears that the MTU is
being compared with fixed services at the COA and NGO. However, the text then
introduces self-testing. How does the self-testing fit? Is it a separated comparison
group or is it a function of one or all of the aforementioned groups?
Other relevant information that needs to be more clear: did all strategies occur at
the same time, or were they simultaneous? Did all allow all ages? Did all recruit
MSM equally, or did particular strategies target a more general LGBT audience?
Cost study-did the cost study cover different dates/time period than the testing
data? If not, please clarify (the dates appear to overlap in table 4, but this is
not mentioned in the methods). If so, I suggest revising to have costs and test
dates align.
Results
Self-testing
Was there an attempt to record the results from these test?
Discussion
The discussion about cost seems to be missing text? Line 425 introduces this topic by
saying that self-testing is ranked second. There is no other discussion of costs.
This should be added. Also, the conclusion that self-testing is effective is not
supported by the data in this analysis since we don’t know how many people actually
used the tests that were delivered.
Reviewer #2: The paper must be substantially improved in order to be published.
Please see specific the comments in the attach file.
The paper must follow some EQUATOR guidelines; in my opinion the CHEERS is the most
adequate.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer
review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will
include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be
made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For
information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our
Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be
attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your
account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View
Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight
Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps
ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as
a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you
will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues
or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting
Information files do not need this step.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: REVIEW_PLOSdec2020.docx
Click here for additional data file.
PLoS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0249877.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
1052021165e0249877e0249877Collection date 2021.

19 Feb 2021

Reviewer #1: 
This is a useful study looking at various HIV testing/screening methods in Brazil.
However, additional clarification around each strategy and the methodology would
help the reader more accurately assess the effectiveness of each. The economic
evaluation could be enhanced.
Introduction
Paragraph starting with line 101: The incidence rates cited are now 6 years old. How
have trends changed more recently with the introduction of PrEP?
Response: the reference has been updated.
Methods
The methods would be more clear if the three comparisons were stated straight away.
It is not clear what is being compared. From table 1, it appears that the MTU is
being compared with fixed services at the COA and NGO. However, the text then
introduces self-testing. How does the self-testing fit? Is it a separated comparison
group or is it a function of one or all of the aforementioned groups?
Response: this section was re-written. The self -testing strategy is not being
compared with the other three strategies (COA, NGO and MTU).
Other relevant information that needs to be more clear: did all strategies occur at
the same time, or were they simultaneous? Did all allow all ages? Did all recruit
MSM equally, or did particular strategies target a more general LGBT audience?
Response: please see time horizon and target population. All strategies targeted the
same population equally – MSM, however the e-testing (self-testing) targeted MSM
aged 18 and above and the other three strategies, target MSM aged 14 and above.
Cost study-did the cost study cover different dates/time period than the testing
data? If not, please clarify (the dates appear to overlap in table 4, but this is
not mentioned in the methods). If so, I suggest revising to have costs and test
dates align.
Response: please see time horizon. The cost study collected retrospective from each
testing outlet covering a 12-month period (March 2015 to February 2016).
Results
Self-testing
Was there an attempt to record the results from these tests?
Response: the results were collected and reported however there is no comparison with
the other three strategies
Discussion
The discussion about cost seems to be missing text? Line 425 introduces this topic by
saying that self-testing is ranked second. There is no other discussion of costs.
This should be added. Also, the conclusion that self-testing is effective is not
supported by the data in this analysis since we don’t know how many people actually
used the tests that were delivered.
Response: this paragraph has been re-written
Reviewer #2: 
The paper must be substantially improved in order to be published. Please see
specific the comments in the attach file.
The paper must follow some EQUATOR guidelines; in my opinion the CHEERS is the most
adequate.
General Observations
1.I had some difficulties in order to understand the main objective of the paper and
its specific objectives; in the abstract there are objectives defined but related to
the project AHA, not to this paper; then, in the introduction (last paragraph) it is
stated another different objective. Also these objectives are not related to the
Title. 
Reading the paper, I get the impression that the main objective of this paper is to
compare the cost-effectiveness of several interventions/strategies used in Curitiba
to expand access to HIV rapid testing in MSM and to improve the linkage of HIV
positive MSM to health services and treatment. If it is the case, then the title
should be different, namely it must reflect the type of approach used by the authors
(health economic evaluation/ cost/ cost-effectiveness, etc..).
Response: revisions made
2. I had some difficulties in finding the most adequate Equator Guideline to review
the article; however, I think that it should be the CHEERS Checklist- Items to
include when reporting economic evaluations of health interventions. Consequently,
the paper must be revised according to this Guideline.
Response: revisions made
Specific Commentaries
Abstract
Introduction. The authors must write in a very clear way the aim and the specific
objectives of the paper (and not the objectives of the AHA)
Methods. Specify the type of study, the participants and statistical tests used to
compare participant’s characteristics between groups. 
Results. They should respond to specific objectives; it is not the case.
Response: the abstract was rewritten.
Introduction
In line 117 it will be interesting to have some figures about the prevalence/
incidence of HIV in Curitiba population if possible by sex and age and compared with
the whole country.
Response: information added to the manuscript
In line 130, aim and specific objectives must be clearly defined (in order to be then
compared with the results). If possible, specify the research question.
Response: the aims and objectives were rewritten. 
Methods
This section must be reorganized, ideally following the structure bellow:
• Target population and subgroups
• Setting and location 
• Study perspective and its relation to the costs being evaluated.
• Description of the interventions or strategies being compared and
state why they were chosen.
• Time horizon 
• Choice of health outcomes
• Measurement of effectiveness
• Estimating resources and costs
• Statistical Analysis (with the tests used) and why they were chosen
Response: This section has been re-written
In lines, 138-141, separate the type of study, from the variables.
Response: it was re-written
In lines 235-241 the description of variables is not a statistical analysis. 
Response: correction made – description was moved to “Choice of health outcomes”
within methods section
In line 241 the authors stated they used frequencies and medians; its ok; however, in
the results (footnotes in Tables 2 and 3) they refer to statistical tests; these
tests must be described in the statistical analysis section.
Response: has been rewritten and is in the statistical analysis section within
methods section
Lines 242-245 are not related to statistical analysis.
Response: correction made – description was moved to “Choice of health outcomes”
within methods section
Results
The Results section must follow CHEERS guidelines and must be coherent with the
specific objectives. 
Response: revision was made in both sections in order to adjust coherency with the
objectives. We did not follow Cheers guidelines as this paper is not an economic
evaluation, even though there is cost analysis included in it.
Table 2 in footnote 6 it is stated that: Statistical tests were performed for the
difference of proportions (z test and Fisher's test) in pairs for the strategies -
COA and NGO; COA and MTU; NGOs and MTU - only for COA and NGO, the result was not
significant.
The sentence: the result was not significant is not adequate; what result? What is
being compared? What is the significant level? 
Tests must be described in Methods section; and in the results we have to understand
which result was not significantly different from another one. Because we are
comparing groups. More rigour is needed.
Response: the footnote was rewritten and the tests performed were described in the
statistical analysis section within methods
Table 3. Footnote. Same observation.
Response: the footnote was rewritten and the tests performed were described in the
statistical analysis section within methods
Table 4. The title is related to COST-EFFECTIVENESS. It is the first time we are
faced with this expression that has a very powerful meaning in economic evaluations
of health interventions
The authors must explain in the Methods section what type of cost-effectiveness
approach they are using and why?
Response: this section has been re-written with appropriated wording
Figures 2 and 3 are not very clear from the graphical point of view. I think that
tables with figures are more frequently used in this context.
Response: the figures were transformed into tables
AttachmentSubmitted filename: rebuttal_letter.docx
Click here for additional data file.
PLoS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0249877.r003Decision Letter 1
do Rosário Oliveira MartinsMariaGuest Editor© 2021 Maria do Rosário Oliveira MartinsThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License,
which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
18 Mar 2021

PONE-D-20-13677R1
Comprehensive approach to HIV/AIDS testing and linkage to treatment among men who
have sex with men in Curitiba, Brazil
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Cota
After careful consideration, we feel that major revisions suggested by the reviewers
have been addressed. However, there are still minor changes that need to be
considered before publication.
Methods Section, Statistical Analysis
The first paragraph must be corrected as suggested below:
"In the analyzes, absolute frequencies, ......, as well as unilateral statistical
tests for the difference in proportions - z test and/or Fisher test,
depending on the number of expected observations per cell."
In the third paragraph don’t include table numbers (Table 3) because these tables are
in the results.
Results section
Footnotes in Table 3 need to be revised.
Footnote 5- According to test, the proportion of the NGO (68.2%) is not
significantly greater than that of the MTU (67.5%).
Footnote 6- According to the test, the proportion of the COA (69.8%) is not
significantly lower than that of the NGO (80.0%).
In table 3 replace average age by median age to be consistent with
the sentence in the paragraph below the table.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Maria do Rosário Oliveira Martins, Ph.D
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you
have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing
so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant
current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the
rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a
retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list
and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be
attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your
account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View
Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight
Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps
ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as
a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you
will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues
or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting
Information files do not need this step.
PLoS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0249877.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
1052021165e0249877e0249877Collection date 2021.

23 Mar 2021

Methods Section, Statistical Analysis: The first paragraph must be corrected as
suggested below:
 "In the analyzes, absolute frequencies, ......, as well as unilateral statistical
tests for the difference in proportions - z test and/or Fisher test, depending on
the number of expected observations per cell."
Response: Changes made.
In the third paragraph don’t include table numbers (Table 3) because these tables are
in the results.
Response: Changes made.
Results section: Footnotes in Table 3 need to be revised. 
Footnote 5- According to test, the proportion of the NGO (68.2%) is not significantly
greater than that of the MTU (67.5%).
Footnote 6- According to the test, the proportion of the COA (69.8%) is not
significantly lower than that of the NGO (80.0%).
Response: You mentioned table 3, but the notes refer to table 2. Changes made on
table 2.
In table 3 replace average age by median age to be consistent with the sentence in
the paragraph below the table.
Response: Changes made.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: rebuttal_letter.docx
Click here for additional data file.
PLoS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0249877.r005Decision Letter 2
do Rosário Oliveira MartinsMariaGuest Editor© 2021 Maria do Rosário Oliveira MartinsThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License,
which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
29 Mar 2021

Comprehensive approach to HIV/AIDS testing and linkage to treatment among men who
have sex with men in Curitiba, Brazil
PONE-D-20-13677R2
Dear Dr. Vanda Cota,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically
suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets
all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When
these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your
manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an
efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the
'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user
information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact
our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about
your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press
materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48
hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under
strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more
information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Maria do Rosário Oliveira Martins, Ph.D
Guest Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
The authors made all suggested changes.
The paper can be accepted.
Reviewers' comments:
PLoS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0249877.r006Acceptance letter
do Rosário Oliveira MartinsMariaGuest Editor© 2021 Maria do Rosário Oliveira MartinsThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License,
which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
26 Apr 2021

PONE-D-20-13677R2 
Comprehensive approach to HIV/AIDS testing and linkage to treatment among men who
have sex with men in Curitiba, Brazil 
Dear Dr. Cota:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for
publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production
department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about
your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press
materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript
will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of
publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Professor Maria do Rosário Oliveira Martins 
Guest Editor
PLOS ONE
Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
AttachmentSubmitted filename: REVIEW_PLOSdec2020.docx
Click here for additional data file.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: rebuttal_letter.docx
Click here for additional data file.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: rebuttal_letter.docx
Click here for additional data file.

## Data Availability Statement
All relevant data are within the manuscript.