440plosonePLoS ONEPLoS OnePLOSPMC8162625816262581626253404848510.1371/journal.pone.0252432Determinants and consequences of heavy episodic drinking among female sex workers in Ethiopia: A respondent-driven sampling study
AmogneMinilik DemissieConceptualization, Formal analysis, Methodology, Supervision, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing AgardhAnetteConceptualization, Formal analysis, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing AbateEbbaConceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing AhmedJelaludinFormal analysis, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing AsamoahBenedict OppongConceptualization, Formal analysis, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing PageKimberlyEditor 1Department of Clinical Sciences Malmo, Social Medicine and Global Health, Lund University, Malmo, Sweden2Ethiopian Public Health Institute, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia3CDC Ethiopia, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia4University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center, UNITED STATESCompeting Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.
✉* E-mail: minilik_demissie.amogne@med.lu.se, minewdem@gmail.com
2852021165e0252432e02524321062021This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.

## Abstract

## Background
Female sex workers (FSW), due to their working conditions, have an increased likelihood of heavy episodic drinking (HED), which is associated with risky sexual behavior. Nevertheless the specific contribution of HED to risky sexual behavior among FSWs in Ethiopia is not well documented for prevention activities.

## Objective
The purpose of this study was to explore the determinants and consequences of HED among FSWs in Ethiopia.

## Methods
A cross-sectional study using respondent-driven sampling was conducted among 4886 FSWs in 11 major towns in Ethiopia in 2014. A structured interview was performed, and data were examined using descriptive statistics and multiple logistic regression analyses.

## Results
Most (66%) FSWs consumed alcohol, and the prevalence of HED was 29.1%. Compared to street-based FSWs, those who worked in bars/hotels and local drinking houses had 2.19 and 1.29 times higher odds of HED, respectively. FSWs who started selling sex when younger than 18 years (compared to those who started when older than 25 years) and those who were forced into selling sex had 1.48 and 2.91 times higher odds of HED, respectively. FSWs with more income from selling sex and FSWs who chewed khat reported increased odds of HED. Moreover, FSWs with experience of HED reported 1.27 and 1.44 times higher odds of physical beating and condom breakage/slippage, respectively. Furthermore, the population attributable risk fraction of HED among FSWs showed that 6.2% of physical beating and 8.9% of condom breakage/slippage could be attributed to HED.

## Conclusion
In general, several factors increase the experience of HED, and HED in turn increases the likelihood of violence and condom breakage. These factors could inform programs and intervention activities among FSWs populations.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2020 Oct 26; Accepted 2021 May 14; Collection date 2021.

## Introduction
Excessive use of alcohol has serious social, economic, and health-related consequences [ , ]. When compared with men, women are more vulnerable to the adverse consequences of alcohol use such as violence, unintended pregnancy etc. [ ]. Women who are engaged in a stigmatized profession such as selling sex may be at increased risk of the negative health effects of alcohol use [ ].
The harms associated with alcohol depend on the volume, frequency of consumption, and contextual factors [ , ]. Most FSWs work in alcohol-serving venues (hotels, bars and local drinking houses), on the street, or in red light houses. Because of their working situation, environment, and other factors, FSWs are more exposed to heavy episodic drinking (HED); for example, FSWs who work in alcohol-serving venues are expected to facilitate alcohol sales [ – ].
Previous studies show that younger FSWs experience more HED than older FSWs. A study in China reported that FSWs who started selling sex at a younger age experienced more HED [ ]. FSWs forced into the sex trade also may have increased vulnerability to abusing alcohol and other substances as a coping mechanism [ , ].According to studies in Kenya, Philippines and the US Virgin Islands, FSWs who reported alcohol abuse were more likely to report having used other drugs [ , , ].
In Ethiopia, the stimulant leaf khat (Catha edulis) is popular, although chronic use of khat or high doses may have adverse health and socioeconomic consequences [ ]. Khat chewing may contribute to reduced productivity, loss of working hours, malnutrition, and diversion of income, and for chronic users it is associated with hypertension, insomnia, liver toxicity, oral cancer, loss of appetite, and gastrointestinal effects [ ]. When a stimulant such as khat is combined with alcohol, it might mask the effect of alcohol, thereby increasing the chance of HED [ ]. Young people often chew khat during the daytime and go to bars to drink alcohol at night to purposely reduce the stimulant effect [ ]. In Ethiopia, FSWs often chew khat to pass the time during the day and to increase energy during the night for sex work and to socialize with other FSWs [ ].
The consequences of HED for FSWs are not merely limited to the physical effects of intoxication on the body but also increase the risk of violence and risky sexual behaviors [ , – ]. Studies among FSWs from Malawi, Kenya, China, and South India reported an association between alcohol use and inconsistent condom use [ , – ]. Another study among FSWs in Kenya also reported that HED (33%) in the past month was significantly associated with unprotected sex, violence, and sexually transmitted infections [ ]. Yet, in the aforementioned study and another study in Kenya, HED (having ≥5 drinks) was not found to be significantly associated with HIV infection [ , ].
Moreover, excessive alcohol use can impair FSWs’ abilities to detect the risk of violence and increases their involvement in risk-prone situations [ , ]. A study in China reported that FSWs who drank alcohol before sex were significantly more at risk for sexual coercion from their clients [ ]. In addition, a study in Kenya and South Africa also showed that reducing alcohol consumption among FSWs significantly decreased violence [ , ].
In general, studies among FSWs conducted in different countries found that the venue, income, FSW age, and other related factors were associated with HED among FSW, and those with HED in turn were exposed to violence and risky sexual behaviors [ , , , ].
However, little is known about the determinants and consequences of HED among FSWs in Ethiopia, although few studies have investigated the potential role of socio-demographic and other contextual factors [ , ]. In addition, the relationship between HED and violence and risky sexual behaviors is not well documented in Ethiopia. Therefore, the purpose of this cross-sectional study was to explore the determinants and consequences of HED among FSWs in Ethiopia.

## Methods

## Study design
This analysis was part of a larger cross-sectional study concerning HIV prevalence and related risk factors among FSWs in Ethiopia in 2014. Respondent driven sampling (RDS) was used to collect the data. RDS is a chain referral sampling technique recommended for hard-to-reach populations with a mathematical model that weights the sample [ ].

## Study area, period, and population
The study was conducted in seven major regional towns (Addis Ababa, Mekelle, Bahir Dar, Adama, DireDawa, Gambela, and Hawassa) and four main transport corridor towns in Ethiopia (Metema, Kombolcha, Semera-Logia, and Shashemene). This analysis included all data collected from FSWs living in these 11towns.
For the purposes of this study, we defined FSW as women who practice sexual activity with the preconditions of financial or in-kind benefits. FSWs were included in the study if they received money or other benefits for sex with ≥4 people within the last 30 days, were aged≥15 years, were properly recruited by a peer (presented the coupon), and gave consent both for the interview and blood sample collection.

## Sample size
A minimum sample size of 400 was calculated for each town using anticipated HIV prevalence of 25%, 6%precision, 95%confidence interval (CI), and design effect of two. Because of the RDS sampling requirement for equilibrium, the number of FSWs who participated in each town was not exactly 400 and the total number of FSWs who participated was 4886.

## Data collection procedure
Six FSWs, called seeds, were selected to initiate coupon-based recruitment in each town. Seeds were selected purposively to represent the geographical and occupational (e.g., brothel vs. street-based) diversity of the target populations. Seeds were identified through formative assessments (key informant interviews and in-depth interviews) with key stakeholders and representatives of different key population groups.
Following informed consent, participants were interviewed in a private room by a nurse counselor with a structured questionnaire in the Amharic language and were asked to provide blood samples for HIV testing. The questionnaire was piloted before the actual implementation of the study in town that was not included as a study site. Subsequently, participants were provided with up to three coupons and instructed to recruit their FSW peers into the study. FSWs were given a primary incentive of 100 ETB (US$5.00) and an additional 50 ETB (US$2.50) for each eligible peer recruited and enrolled into the study. The exchange rate of ETB to USD is according to 2014 exchange rate. Fingerprint recognition software was used to create a unique study identification number for each participant to help prevent the same participant from enrolling more than once.

## Variables
According to World Health Organization criteria, HED is defined as “the proportion of adults (15+ years) who have had at least 60 grams or more of pure alcohol on at least one occasion in the past 30 days. A consumption of 60 grams of pure alcohol corresponds approximately to 6 standard alcoholic drinks [ ]. Accordingly, the survey tool asked the following question: “How often do you have 6 or more drinks on one occasion?” A drink was defined as a drink of beer, liquor, or other local drinks such as tella, tej, or areke. The response alternatives were: 0,Never; 1, Less than once a month; 2,Monthly; 3, Weekly; and 4, Daily or almost daily. For the purpose of this analysis, respondents who selected 2 through 4 were categorized as engaging in monthly HED. Those who never drank were grouped with those who did not have HED.
To examine potential determinants of HED, we used the following independent variables: current age, age when the participant started selling sex, whether participant was forced to sell sex, whether participant supported others (financial or other support), monthly income from selling sex, educational status, sex selling venue, khat chewing frequency, and ever used any other drugs. Both the independent and dependent variables were selected based on previous evidence and on the objectives of the study.
To examine the potential consequences of HED, we included the following measures as dependent variables: HIV status, violence, condom breakage/slippage, and inconsistent condom use. During multiple regression analyses, each dependent variable was adjusted for age (sex selling starting age), average income, sex selling venue, khat chewing, being forced to sell sex, and educational level. Current age was a continuous variable and was categorized in 10-year intervals: younger age (15–24 years), middle (25–34 years), and older (≥35 years), with the younger age category used as a reference group. Age at start of sex work was also a continuous variable and was categorized as minor (<18 years), younger (18–24 years), and older (≥25 years). Monthly income from selling sex was an open-ended question and was categorized as <1000 ETB (<US$50), 1001–2000 ETB (US$51–$100), 2001–3000 ETB (US$101–$150), 3001–4000 ETB (US$151–$200), 4001–5000 ETB (US$201–$250), and >5000 ETB (>US$251), based on the cost of living in Ethiopia. Educational status was categorized as no formal education, primary first cycle (grade 1–4), primary second cycle (grade 5–8), and secondary and above, based on Ethiopia’s education system. FSWs were categorized according to the primary location of work, including street-based, red light houses, and bar/hotel. Khat chewing frequency (days per week)was also assessed: never, less than once, 1–2 days/week, 3–4 days/week, and 5–7 days/week. Information was obtained about ever using any other drug besides alcohol and khat during the last 30 days and was categorized as “yes” or “no.” Using any other drug at least once was categorized as “yes.”
Violence was defined as physical beating during the past year. Responses were dichotomized as “yes” or “no” for analysis. FSWs who reported a physical beating at least once were considered exposed to violence. Condom breakage/slippage and inconsistent condom use were assessed in terms of the last 30 days before the study. Inconsistent condom use was measured with the question, “With how many different paying partners did you have sex without condoms in the last 30 days?” Not using condoms at least once was considered inconsistent condom use.

## Data analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS, version 20 (Chicago, IL). Descriptive statistics were used to provide summary measures (means and frequencies). For each record in the data set, the RDS-based weights were applied. RDS weights were generated using RDS-Analyst software. In addition to this weight, information on estimated number of FSWs in each town, as well as number of completed interviews in each town was applied to obtain a final weight.
Crude and adjusted odds ratios with 95% CI were obtained using bivariate and multivariate logistic regression analyses models. Before conducting multivariate analysis, we performed correlation analysis to examine potential multicollinearity. P-values <0.05 were considered statistically significant, and cases with missing data were excluded from the analyses.

## Estimation of HED-attributable risk fraction among HED exposed and total FSW population
We estimated attributable risk fractions (AF) of HED for the occurrence of physical beating, condom breakage/slippage, and inconsistent condom use among FSWs (who reported HED) and the entire FSW population. The proportions were calculated to measure the effects that could be avoided if HED was prevented under an assumption of a causal link between HED and the listed variables.
Attributable risk fraction (AF) among HED-exposed FSWs was calculated as: [ ]

AF=100(OR−1)/ORThe population AF (PAF) among total FSW population was calculated as:

PAF=P∙AF=100P∙(OR−1)/OR
where OR is the odds ratio generated from multivariate logistic regression analysis and P is the proportion of HED among the FSW population.

## Ethical considerations
The data set was obtained from the Ethiopian Public Health Institute (EPHI). The protocol was cleared at the Scientific and Ethical Research Office (SERO) of EPHI, Ethiopian Science and Technology Ministry Ethical Committee, and CDC-IRB. Individual written informed consent was obtained from each participant for the interview and blood sample collection before the study was conducted. Permission was obtained from the ethical review committee to collect consent from FSWs between the ages of 15 to 18 because they are considered to be emancipated minors. For FSW under the age of 18 who indicated need for additional service, procedures were in place to refer to relevant service providers.

## Results

## Socio-demographic characteristics
A total of 4886 FSWs participated in the study, and most (59.0%) were aged 15–24 years, with a mean age of 24.17years (standard deviation [SD], 5.94). Most (59.1%) FSWs started selling sex between the ages of 18 and 24 years and 55.9% attended primary first or second cycle education. Of the participants, 38.3% sold sex on the street, 59.9% were never married, and 32.8% earned a monthly average income of less than 1000 ETB (US$50; ).
 

## Behavioral and other related factors
Of the participants, 30.4% reported that they were forced into the sex trade and48.9% supported others (financial or other support). Of the participants, 26.8% reported condom breakage/slippage within the past 30 days before the study, and 20.7% were HIV positive. Of the participants, 19.6% reported physical beating within the past 12 months. 52.9% chewed khat at least once per week, and 10.8% used other drugs. Furthermore, 66% of FSWs drank alcohol, and the prevalence of HED among all FSWs was 29.1% ( ).
 

## Determinants of HED in bivariate logistic regression analysis
Bivariate logistic regression was used to identify significant determinants of HED. Variables significantly associated with monthly HED experience included educational status, monthly income, sex selling venue, age when started selling sex, being forced into selling sex, providing regular support to others (financial or other), and frequency of khat chewing ( ).
 

## Determinants of HED on multivariate logistic regression analysis
In multivariate logistic regression analysis, having a monthly income greater than 1000 ETB (US$50) was a significant predictor of HED; as income increased, the odds of HED also increased. FSWs who worked in bars/hotels (adjusted odds ratio [aOR], 2.19[95% CI: 1.81–2.66]) and in local drinking houses (aOR, 1.29 [95% CI: 1.002–1.67]) had higher odds of HED compared to those who worked on the street. FSWs who worked in spas, massage parlors, beauty salons, or their own house (aOR, 0.46 [95% CI: 0.25–0.83]) had lower odds of HED than street-based FSWs. FSWs who started selling sex before the age of 18 years had 1.48 (1.13, 1.95) and between 18–24 years 1.59 (1.25, 2.03) times higher odds of HED than FSWs who started selling sex after the age of 25 years. FSWs who were forced into the sex trade had 2.91 (2.45, 3.46) times increased odds of HED than FSWs who chose to start selling sex. In addition, FSWs who reported chewing khat at least once per week had higher odds of HED than non-users; as the number of days of chewing khat increased, the odds of HED also increased. Educational status and those who reported support for others were no longer significant when adjusted for other variables ( ).
 

## Consequences of HED in bivariate and multivariate logistic regression analysis
Bivariate and multivariate logistic regression analyses were performed using HED as a predictor and condom breakage/slippage, inconsistent condom use, physical beating, and HIV status as dependent variables. In bivariate analysis, HED was significantly associated with each dependent variable except for HIV status. In multivariate analysis, FSWs with HED had 1.27times higher odds of physical beating than those without HED. FSWs with HED had 1.44 times higher odds of condom breakage/slippage than those without HED ( ).
 

## AF of HED on outcome variables
 shows the HED AF among the FSWs with HED and the entire FSW population. The proportion of HED in the total FSW population was 29.1% and was used to calculate the PAF. The results showed that 6.2% of the risk of physical beating and 8.9% of condom breakage/slippage could be attributed to HED among FSWs.
 

## Discussion
To our knowledge, this is the first study of FSWs that used RDS and includes 11 towns in Ethiopia. Alcohol use was common among FSWs, and the prevalence of HED was high (29.1%).Factors such as starting to sell sex before the age of 25years, being forced into selling sex, working in a bar/hotel, having a higher income, and chewing khat frequently were significant determinants of HED. In turn, HED was significantly associated with physical beating and condom breakage.
A national household-based study in Ethiopia reported a 1-month HED prevalence of 12.4% (men, 20.5%; women, 2.7%) [ ]. Although these findings are not directly comparable with our results, the difference in monthly HED prevalence observed among the general female population and FSWs in our study is considerable and supports the disproportional risk of HED among FSWs. The HED prevalence in our study (29%) was comparable with that among FSWs in Kenya (33%) [ ].
HED was significantly associated with average monthly income in our study, which supports findings from a study conducted in Malawi, showing that alcohol use facilitates FSWs’ solicitation with clients and is a help in price negotiation [ ].
Furthermore, the type of venue used by FSWs to sell sex played a role in alcohol drinking and increased HED. Our study showed that FSWs who worked in a bar/hotel or local drink house had higher odds of HED than street-based FSWs. FSWs working in these venues are expected to facilitate the alcohol sales, which in turn increases HED. Similar studies conducted in Kenya, India, and Indonesia and a meta-analysis involving several countries reported that higher alcohol consumption is more prevalent in a setting where alcoholic drinks are sold [ – ].
Early adolescent alcohol use is associated with an earlier age of first sexual intercourse and greater number of sexual partners [ ]. Our study showed that FSWs who started selling sex before the age of 18 years experienced more HED. A similar study conducted in China also reported that FSWs who had their sexual debut at a younger age were significantly more often intoxicated with alcohol before having sex with their client than older FSWs [ ]. Although we were unable to determine whether FSWs started drinking alcohol before or after they started selling sex, starting to sell sex at a younger age increased the odds of HED. This association underlines the importance of alcohol risk reduction interventions targeting young FSWs.
Moreover, being forced into sex work increases the vulnerability(risk for rape, inconsistent condom use, etc.) of women/girls by removing their basic autonomy [ ]. These FSWs tend to use substances including alcohol as a coping mechanism, which subsequently increases their risk to become a chronic user [ , ]. Our study also shows that FSWs who reported being forced into selling sex were significantly more likely to experience HED. To address the problem of sex trafficking and its consequences, it is crucial to identify the individuals behind such trafficking and to involve law enforcement officers in these efforts. Another strategy could be to increase and improve the knowledge and ability of law enforcement professionals to identify victims of sex trafficking.
A study conducted among frequent khat users in Addis Ababa, the capital of Ethiopia, reported that khat use was a significant predictor of harmful drinking [ ]. Although that study is not directly comparable with our study, our results showed that FSWs who chewed khat more frequently also experienced more HED. According to different studies, when a stimulant, such as khat, is combined with alcohol, it masks alcohol’s effects, so that people cannot assess their level of intoxication, which can result in over-consumption [ , ]. Therefore, targeting khat chewing among FSWs is an essential part of strategies to reduce HED among FSWs.
Even though condom use was high in our study, reported condom breakage/slipping was also high. FSWs who reported condom breakage/slipping and inconsistent condom use reported significantly more HED, and this is a major concern for HIV/sexually transmitted infection prevention programs. Our findings are similar to those of studies conducted in India and South Africa [ , ]. Although an individual may know how to use a condom, proper condom utilization may be affected by the state of mind during sexual intercourse. It is counter-intuitive to consider that improper use of a male condom during usage could be affected by the FSWs alcohol consumption level. However, during sexual intercourse with FSWs, it is not uncommon for FSWs to put the condom on the client.
In our study, HIV infection was not significantly associated with HED, although the prevalence of HIV was high (20.8%). This finding is similar to results reported in studies conducted in Kenya [ , ] but differs from other studies conducted in Botswana, South Africa, Rwanda, and Zambia which reported a significant association of HIV with HED [ – ]. Because of the cross-sectional study design, changes in alcohol consumption patterns over time could not be measured; therefore, we could not determine whether current drinking patterns differed from those at the time of HIV infection [ ].
Another factor found to be significantly associated with HED was violence. Alcohol use is one of the most important risk indicators of increased violence against FSWs [ , ].Alcohol use impairs FSWs’ ability to detect the risk of violence and increases their vulnerability to risk-prone situations [ , ].
Overall, our study shows that the proportion and associated consequences of HED among FSWs might require prevention and harm reduction efforts. Nevertheless, Ethiopia does not have any programs focusing on HED harm reduction among FSWs. Combining HED reduction programs with other ongoing programs such as HIV programs could help reduce HED and sustain epidemic control.
The strengths of this study included the large sample of FSWs from11 cities and the sampling technique (RSD), which is recommended for hard-to-reach populations.
Our study had several limitations; the first is the findings are subject to social desirability bias. Secondly, we defined HED as ≥6 drinks per occasion, which might not be the definition used by other studies; this potential difference in definitions may have implications with regard to the risk factors that we identified. In addition, caution is needed when making inferences regarding causality; because this was a cross-sectional study, cause could not be established. In addition, due to RDS method FSWs with small network size might not be adequately represented.

## Conclusion
We found that FSWs who started sex work before the age of 18 years, who had higher income from selling sex, who worked at venues where alcohol is sold, who were forced into sex work, and who chewed khat more frequently had increased likelihood of HED. In turn, HED increased the odds of violence, condom breakage, and inconsistent condom use. Increasing awareness of these factors and their consequences could help minimize the risks associated with HED for FSWs. In general, these results are likely to be relevant for FSW programs in other countries with a similar setting as Ethiopia and may inform targeted prevention strategies for FSWs.

## Supporting information
S1 Questionnaire(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.

## Data Availability
The data is owned by Ethiopian public health institute and is available based on request. Anyone who wants to get data from the institute should write email to the director general (Dr. Ebba) copying the director of data management (Dr. Alemnesh). The email should be brief on the objective of the study and the data set to obtain; future information will be followed after the first contact. Their details are below. Director General: Dr. Ebba: ebbaabate@yahoo.com Dr. Alemnesh: alemmirkuzie@yahoo.com.

## Funding Statement
The study was funded by the President’s Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) through Ethiopian Public Health Association (EPHA) under the terms of PS001229.

## References
 

PLoS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0252432.r001Decision Letter 0
PageKimberlyAcademic Editor© 2021 Kimberly PageThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
9 Apr 2021

PONE-D-20-33642
Determinants and consequences of heavy episodic drinking among female sex workers in Ethiopia: A respondent-driven sampling study
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Amogne,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please note that I, as academic editor reviewed this paper as Reviewer 2. We did encounter challenges in getting a second reviewer which delayed the paper's disposition.  I agree with Reviewer 1 comments and suggestions.  
Please submit your revised manuscript by May 7, 2021. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Kimberly Page, PhD, MPH
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments:
Thank you for your patience with the disposition of the article. Please note that the Academic Editor is Reviewer #2.
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2. You indicated that you had ethical approval for your study. In your Methods section, please ensure you have also stated whether you obtained consent from parents or guardians of the minors included in the study or whether the research ethics committee or IRB specifically waived the need for their consent.
3. Please include additional information regarding the survey or questionnaire used in the study and ensure that you have provided sufficient details that others could replicate the analyses. For instance, if you developed a questionnaire as part of this study and it is not under a copyright more restrictive than CC-BY, please include a copy, in both the original language and English, as Supporting Information.  If the original language is written in non-Latin characters, for example Amharic, Chinese, or Korean, please use a file format that ensures these characters are visible.
4. Please state whether you validated the questionnaire prior to testing on study participants. Please provide details regarding the validation group within the methods section.
5. Thank you for stating the following in the Acknowledgments Section of your manuscript:
"This research has been supported by the president’s plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) through
Ethiopian Public Health Association (EPHA) under the terms of PS001229. The findings and
conclusions in this report are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official
position of the funding agencies."
We note that you have provided funding information that is not currently declared in your Funding Statement. However, funding information should not appear in the Acknowledgments section or other areas of your manuscript. We will only publish funding information present in the Funding Statement section of the online submission form.
Please remove any funding-related text from the manuscript and let us know how you would like to update your Funding Statement. Currently, your Funding Statement reads as follows:
"The author(s) received no specific funding for this work."
Please include your amended statements within your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
6. We note that you have indicated that data from this study are available upon request. PLOS only allows data to be available upon request if there are legal or ethical restrictions on sharing data publicly. For information on unacceptable data access restrictions, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions.
In your revised cover letter, please address the following prompts:
a) If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially identifying or sensitive patient information) and who has imposed them (e.g., an ethics committee). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent.
b) If there are no restrictions, please upload the minimal anonymized data set necessary to replicate your study findings as either Supporting Information files or to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. Please see http://www.bmj.com/content/340/bmj.c181.long for guidelines on how to de-identify and prepare clinical data for publication. For a list of acceptable repositories, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-recommended-repositories.
We will update your Data Availability statement on your behalf to reflect the information you provide.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: This is a solid study with a impressive sample size!
Some minor comments:
1. Background: Please explain the relationship of alcohol use to khat using some supporting evidence. It becomes more clear later (in the discussion when you mention that it masks the effects of intoxication) but it would be useful to understand this earlier in the paper.
2. You say, "although few studies have investigated the potential role of socio-demographic and
90 other contextual factors." But do not cite any. Please cite existing studies or reports from Ethiopia.
3. Limitations: You should mentions some internal validity issues associated with RDS.
4. Can you also mention some of the things that make the FSW environment in Ethiopia distinct from the other settings you compare to in the discussion? This may be helpful in the background as well.
5. Discussion: You recommend different types of targeted programming. Can you point to any HED reduction programs for FSW from any other settings?
Reviewer #2: Please note that the Academic Editor was Reviewer #2
This is a nicely presented paper which assessed heavy episodic drinking (HED) in a large sample of female sex workers (FSW) in Ethiopia. The research has many strengths including: systematic sampling method (RDS), the large diverse sample from multiple area of Ethiopia. This is a population highly impacted by HIV and the paper addresses an important exposure factor - alcohol use - which is associated with multiple individual and social correlates of HIV infection. The paper is well written. The background and methods are well presented. The results and tables are in great shape. I have a few minor comments that I hope will help the authors strengthen the paper.
1. Please consider replacing the word 'determinants' with 'correlates' throughout the paper when discussing "determinants of HED". Since this is a cross-sectional study, I think terminology should be changed. With respect to consequences - these are also correlates, but the authors might couch the language to indicate "potential consequences."
2. Intro, line 69: please add in some examples of the adverse health and socioeconomic consequences of Khat use. I also suggest saying earlier in the paragraph that this is a stimulant.
3. Methods, line 139: How were the independent variables chose/selected? From the literature? hypotheses? other?
4. Methods, line 145: similarly, how were these dependent variables or what was the rationale for selecting these?
5. Methods, line 179: did the authors assess whether missing data was random? Excluding this data if its is not random could lead to bias.
6. Results, line 218 here and elsewhere please change to correlates of HED. line 223: I suggest changing determinants to "independent correlates' of HED. I know some people use the word "on" when talking about models but I do prefer 'in'. (as in 'in analyses'. )
7. Discussion, lines 264-266: elaborate on this: was this a hypothesis?, or did the other authors show that alcohol use faciliates FSW's solicitation? It is also possible that women working in those high alcohol venues make more money. This potential confounding should be examined.
8. Discussion line 269: I think ou need to examine the colllinearity of venue and income - this could explain (be confounding) the association between income and HED. Research in Cambodia showed that women in bar settings drank more because they got commissions on how much alcohol they helped get sold. (And relative to the comment below about bar managers - line 274, they may be more concerned about alcohol income than women's health. )
9. line 274: I am concerned that this is a very big leap of a suggestion. I don't see anything in the data that makes this suggesting seem timely or feasible. I agree that programs are needed, but jumping to bar managers is another study. As noted above - in some settings the managers are invested in the women drinking more to sell more.
10. Line 300: please reframe high condom breakage/spillage: high relative to what?
11. Line 306: Unless you know for sure that FSW put condoms on clients consider - saying "it is not uncommon" or some such with less authority (this does sound anecdotal).
12. Line 310 - lack of association with HIV is also similar to findings from Cambodia.
13. Line 313-314 - very good point!
14: suggestion only: See Evans et al, Int J STD and AIDS 2021 about joint effects of alcohol and stimulants in FSW. And also, how other substances are associated with violence experienced by FSW (Draughon et al, DAD 2016) .
15. Table 2: please clarify the variable about "provide any regular financial support' [is this referring to family, or dependents, or?
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: Carinne Brody
Reviewer #2: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
PLoS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0252432.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
2852021165e0252432e0252432Collection date 2021.

8 May 2021

Authors’ response to reviewer’s comments
Title: Determinants and consequences of heavy episodic drinking among female sex workers in Ethiopia: A respondent-driven sampling study in 11 major towns
Dear Editor and Reviewers,
Thank you for your comment and suggestions. We have revised the manuscript taking into account your comments. We have attached the revised version, and the responses point by point, are indicated below.
General comments 
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. 
Response: Thank you, we have now edited the manuscript based on the journal requirments
2. You indicated that you had ethical approval for your study. In your Methods section, please ensure you have also stated whether you obtained consent from parents or guardians of the minors included in the study or whether the research ethics committee or IRB specifically waived the need for their consent.
Response: Thank you, we included the statement below under the ethical consideration section
“Permission was obtained from the ethical review committee to collect consent from FSWs between the ages of 15 to 18 because they are considered to be emancipated minors”. Line 201
3. Please include additional information regarding the survey or questionnaire used in the study and ensure that you have provided sufficient details that others could replicate the analyses. For instance, if you developed a questionnaire as part of this study and it is not under a copyright more restrictive than CC-BY, please include a copy, in both the original language and English, as Supporting Information. If the original language is written in non-Latin characters, for example Amharic, Chinese, or Korean, please use a file format that ensures these characters are visible.
Response: Thank you, we included the English version of the questionnaire as a supporting document since it is not restricted under any copyright. The Amharic version is no longer available
4. Please state whether you validated the questionnaire prior to testing on study participants. Please provide details regarding the validation group within the methods section.
Response: Thank you, we included a statement mentioning the pilot process under the ‘data collection procedure’ section
“The questionnaire was piloted before the actual implementation of the study in a town that was not included as a site” Line 125
5. Thank you for stating the following in the Acknowledgments Section of your manuscript:
"This research has been supported by the president’s plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) through
Ethiopian Public Health Association (EPHA) under the terms of PS001229. The findings and
conclusions in this report are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official
position of the funding agencies."
We note that you have provided funding information that is not currently declared in your Funding Statement. However, funding information should not appear in the Acknowledgments section or other areas of your manuscript. We will only publish funding information present in the Funding Statement section of the online submission form.
Please remove any funding-related text from the manuscript and let us know how you would like to update your Funding Statement. Currently, your Funding Statement reads as follows:
"The author(s) received no specific funding for this work."
Response: Thank you, we excluded all funding statement from the manuscript. For the current publication process, they provide no funding but the study was funded by PEPFAR. The data set was obtained from the Ethiopian Public Health Institute (EPHI). Thus please edit the funding statement as follows:_
“The study was funded by the president’s plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) through the Ethiopian Public Health Association (EPHA) under the terms of PS001229”. We will mention this in the revised cover letter.
6. We note that you have indicated that data from this study are available upon request. PLOS only allows data to be available upon request if there are legal or ethical restrictions on sharing data publicly. For information on unacceptable data access restrictions, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions.In your revised cover letter, please address the following prompts:
a) If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially identifying or sensitive patient information) and who has imposed them (e.g., an ethics committee). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent.
Response: Thank you. the data are owned by the Ethiopian public health institute (EPHI) and therefore there is restricted public access. Anyone who wants to obtain data from the institute should write an email to the director general copying the director of data managment (Dr. Alemnesh). Their details are below, and we have updated this in the cover letter.
Director general email: Dr. Ebba: ebbaabate@yahoo.com
Dr. Alemnesh: alemmirkuzie@yahoo.com

Reviewer #1: Comment and response
1. Background: Please explain the relationship of alcohol use to khat using some supporting evidence. It becomes more clear later (in the discussion when you mention that it masks the effects of intoxication) but it would be useful to understand this earlier in the paper.
Response: Thank you, we revised the statement to clarify the releationship.
‘Young people often chew khat during the daytime and go to bars to drink alcohol at night to purposely reduce the stimulant effect” Line 69
2. You say, "although few studies have investigated the potential role of socio-demographic and
 other contextual factors." But do not cite any. Please cite existing studies or reports from Ethiopia.
Response: Thank you, we inserted citations as per your comment. Line 92
3. Limitations: You should mentions some internal validity issues associated with RDS.
Response: Thank you, we included a limitation of RDS as mentioned below.
“In addition, due to the RDS method, FSWs with small network size might not be adequately represented”. Line 354
4. Discussion: You recommend different types of targeted programming. Can you point to any HED reduction programs for FSW from any other settings?
Response: Although we couldn’t identify indicate a specific program directed towards FSWS in Ethiopia,, intervention studies conducted in different countries such as Mexico and Kenya suggested that alcohol reduction could contribute to violence reduction and recommended combining with HIV councelling to achieve good results. 
Reviewer #2: Comment and response
This is a nicely presented paper which assessed heavy episodic drinking (HED) in a large sample of female sex workers (FSW) in Ethiopia. The research has many strengths including: systematic sampling method (RDS), the large diverse sample from multiple area of Ethiopia. This is a population highly impacted by HIV and the paper addresses an important exposure factor - alcohol use - which is associated with multiple individual and social correlates of HIV infection. The paper is well written. The background and methods are well presented. The results and tables are in great shape. I have a few minor comments that I hope will help the authors strengthen the paper.
1. Please consider replacing the word 'determinants' with 'correlates' throughout the paper when discussing "determinants of HED". Since this is a cross-sectional study, I think terminology should be changed. With respect to consequences - these are also correlates, but the authors might couch the language to indicate "potential consequences."
Response: Thank you, we agree that both the determinants and consequences are correlates of HED as far as this is a cross-sectional study. However, we felt that it was meaningful to regard certain background factors that had an association with HED as likely determinants, due to the underlying nature of these measures and also to findings from previous studies cited in the manuscript. For the same reasons, we regarded other measures as very likely to be potential consequences of HED rather than determinants, and accordingly, we examined them separately. Therefore, we prefer to use determinant and consequences to separate the two sets of analyses; otherwise, both are “correlates” of HED. 
2. Intro, line 69: please add in some examples of the adverse health and socioeconomic consequences of Khat use. I also suggest saying earlier in the paragraph that this is a stimulant.
Response: Thank you, we have inserted a statement on the health and economic effects of khat chewing. under line 65-70
3. Methods, line 139: How were the independent variables chose/selected? From the literature?hypotheses? other?
Response: Thank you, we inserted a statement describing how the independent variables were selected.
4. Methods, line 145: similarly, how were these dependent variables or what was the rationale for selecting these?
Response: Thank you, we inserted a statement describing how the dependent variables were selected. Line 147
5. Methods, line 179: did the authors assess whether missing data was random? Excluding this data if its is not random could lead to bias.
Response: Thank you, we assessed this during the analysis, and the missing data was randomly distributed. Line 147
6. Results, line 218 here and elsewhere please change to correlates of HED. line 223: I suggest changing determinants to "independent correlates' of HED. I know some people use the word "on" when talking about models but I do prefer 'in'. (as in 'in analyses'. )
Response: Thank you, we prefer to use the terms predictors/determinants and consequences, as explained above in response #1. We have changed the word “on” to “in”, as suggested. Line 226, 236
7. Discussion, lines 264-266: elaborate on this: was this a hypothesis?, or did the other authors show that alcohol use faciliates FSW's solicitation? It is also possible that women working in those high alcohol venues make more money. This potential confounding should be examined.
Response: Thank you, the study was a mixed study conducted in Malawi and reported tha alcohol sale facilitates the negotiation with clients, and the reference is provided. Other studies also suggested that clients prefer FSWs who drink alcohol, so FSWs tend to drink alcohol. We feel that the text concerning this is satisfactory and does not require further explanation.
8. Discussion line 269: I think you need to examine the colllinearity of venue and income - this could explain (be confounding) the association between income and HED. Research in Cambodia showed that women in bar settings drank more because they got commissions on how much alcohol they helped get sold. (And relative to the comment below about bar managers - line 274, they may be more concerned about alcohol income than women's health. )
Response: Thank you, as mentioned in the “data analysis” section, we conducted correlation analysis to assess for multicollinearity and all variables included in the analysis did not have any multicollinearity. Regarding commission from the drinking, as far as my knowledge, in the bars in Ethiopia there is no such a thing. They just use the bars to meet clients and pay for the bar bill when they leave with clients.
9. line 274: I am concerned that this is a very big leap of a suggestion. I don't see anything in the data that makes this suggesting seem timely or feasible. I agree that programs are needed, but jumping to bar managers is another study. As noted above - in some settings the managers are invested in the women drinking more to sell more.
Response: Thank you, we agree with the suggestion, and we revised the sentence.
10. Line 300: please reframe high condom breakage/spillage: high relative to what?
Response: Thank you, the comparison was with the condom use reported,. Almost all reported consistent condom use but 25% experienced condom breakage/slippage in the past one month. Therefore, the sentence is intented to illustrate the problem represented by condom breakage, although they are using condoms.
11. Line 306: Unless you know for sure that FSW put condoms on clients consider - saying "it is not uncommon" or some such with less authority (this does sound anecdotal).
 Response: Thank you, we revised this accordingly. Line 331
12. Table 2: please clarify the variable about "provide any regular financial support' [is this referring to family, or dependents, or?
Response: Thank you, the support concerns anyone, including a family member, but the emphasis is on the fact that the support is regular. We included a word regarding this in the table
Note: On the process of addressing the comment and suggestions provided, additional references are included in the manuscript.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
PLoS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0252432.r003Decision Letter 1
PageKimberlyAcademic Editor© 2021 Kimberly PageThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
17 May 2021

Determinants and consequences of heavy episodic drinking among female sex workers in Ethiopia: A respondent-driven sampling study
PONE-D-20-33642R1
Dear Dr. Amogne,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Kimberly Page, PhD, MPH
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
PLoS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0252432.r004Acceptance letter
PageKimberlyAcademic Editor© 2021 Kimberly PageThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
20 May 2021

PONE-D-20-33642R1 
Determinants and consequences of heavy episodic drinking among female sex workers in Ethiopia: A respondent-driven sampling study 
Dear Dr. Amogne:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Kimberly Page 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
S1 Questionnaire(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.

## Data Availability Statement
The data is owned by Ethiopian public health institute and is available based on request. Anyone who wants to get data from the institute should write email to the director general (Dr. Ebba) copying the director of data management (Dr. Alemnesh). The email should be brief on the objective of the study and the data set to obtain; future information will be followed after the first contact. Their details are below. Director General: Dr. Ebba: ebbaabate@yahoo.com Dr. Alemnesh: alemmirkuzie@yahoo.com.