pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLoS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC8827439PMC8827439.1882743988274393513912110.1371/journal.pone.0263746PONE-D-21-271271Research ArticleSocial SciencesSociologyCommunicationsSocial CommunicationSocial MediaTwitterComputer and Information SciencesNetwork AnalysisSocial NetworksSocial MediaTwitterSocial SciencesSociologySocial NetworksSocial MediaTwitterBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationMedicine and Health SciencesPublic and Occupational HealthPreventive MedicineVaccination and ImmunizationMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesInfectious Disease ControlVaccinesBiology and Life SciencesMolecular BiologyInteraction NetworksPhysical SciencesMathematicsProbability TheoryProbability DistributionComputer and Information SciencesNetwork AnalysisSocial NetworksSocial SciencesSociologySocial NetworksSocial SciencesSociologyCommunicationsSocial CommunicationSocial MediaComputer and Information SciencesNetwork AnalysisSocial NetworksSocial MediaSocial SciencesSociologySocial NetworksSocial MediaMedicine and Health SciencesEpidemiologyMedical Risk FactorsCharacterizing polarization in online vaccine discourse—A large-scale study
Characterizing polarization in online vaccine discourse—A large-scale studyhttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-3683-312XMønstedBjarkeConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSoftwareSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing LehmannSuneConceptualizationData curationFunding acquisitionProject administrationSupervisionWriting – review & editing 
1
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark

2
Center for Social Data Science, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
DanforthChristopher M.Editor ], is a growing threat to global health, and is believed to be driven mainly by the ‘three C’s’: Confidence, Complacency, and Convenience [ ]. Social media platforms may potentially influence vaccine hesitancy through the former two, for example by enabling easy and wide-spread sharing of content that exaggerates the risks of vaccination and/or understating the risk of vaccine-preventable diseases [ ]. Vaccine hesitancy exist on a continuous spectrum [ ], where the extreme positions of rejecting or accepting all vaccines tends to be overrepresented in online settings [ ].
While vaccine hesitancy is a nuanced and context-dependent phenomenon, some general factors influencing hesitancy have been identified in the literature [ ]. Key among those factors are the availability of information regarding vaccines [ , ], the accuracy of beliefs about the risks and benefits of vaccines and vaccine-preventable diseases [ , ], social norms regarding vaccination, i.e. whether or not vaccinating is perceived as a ‘normal’ thing to do [ , ], and trust in health authorities and/or the pharmaceutical industry, particularly concerns regarding commercial conflicts of interest [ , , ]. The list above is by no means exhaustive, rather a few central factors which are well-described in the literature and of particular relevance for this paper.
These factors are strongly connected to the topic of social networks and online misinformation: Anti-vaccine messages on Twitter typically aim to alter the reader’s perception of risks and benefits regarding vaccination, often drawing on conspiracy theories [ ]. In addition to an inaccurate risk picture, anti-vaccine content on Twitter, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic, has focused on commercial interests in the pharmaceutical sector [ ], and often rely on conspiracy theories in doing so [ ].
The detrimental effects of reduced vaccine uptakes on public health are well described in the literature [ – ]. Somewhat paradoxically, vaccination rates have declined in part due to the success of vaccines in preventing disease, leading to complacency [ , ]. However, online misinformation has also been linked to decreasing vaccine uptake [ – ], and outbreaks of vaccine-preventable diseases have been observed in areas where anti-vaccine activists have organized disinformation campaigns [ ]. In this sense, the growing amount of online misinformation [ , ] can be characterized as a threat to public health [ ].
Countering medical misinformation in online systems is no easy task. While the scientific literature is rife with evidence which disproves the narratives outlined above [ , ], individuals at the ‘rejection’ extreme of the vaccine hesitancy continuum often have a strong sense of identity regarding their stance on vaccines [ ]. Individuals tend to reinterpret or disregard information if it conflicts with a stance that they strongly identify [ ], an effect which has been demonstrated in numerous contexts [ ] including vaccination [ ].
The challenges of countering misinformation is compounded by the fact that strongly anti-vaccine individuals often form tightly knit communities in large social networks, such as Twitter [ , ] and Facebook [ ]. In such environments, evidence challenging in-group beliefs is dismissed as untrustworthy [ ], and often ends up only reinforcing said beliefs [ , ].
Therefore, study of the interplay between vaccination attitudes and vaccine-related online (mis)information is essential to inform policy [ – ], also at the community level [ ].
We utilize two large datasets to study this interplay. The first (Dataset 1) is a large, random sample consisting of of approximately 60 billion tweets. The second (Dataset 2) consists of 6.75 million tweets obtained via Twitter’s search API for tweets containing vaccination-related terms. Both datasets are discussed in detail in the Methods section. Using these datasets, we construct a large network which captures interactions on Twitter, and use machine learning methods to identify Twitter profiles with vaccine stances at the ‘rejection’ and ‘acceptance’ extremes of the hesitancy continuum, known colloquially as anti- and pro-vaxxers, respectively.
Based on the data and methods outlined above (which are elaborated upon in the materials and methods section), the remainder of the paper presents a number of analyses on the interplay between strong vaccination stances, social network structure, and online information.

## Anti- and pro-vaccine profiles distinct types of URLs
We use a deep neural network to classify vaccine sentiments expressed in tweets from dataset 2, and identify ‘antivaxx’ and ‘provaxx’ profiles which consistently express highly negative and positive attitudes toward vaccination, respectively. Full details regarding the stance detection methods are presented in the materials and methods section. In the following, we assess the degree to which anti- and provaxx users tend to rely on distinct types of outside sources, what characterizes these sources, and whether interactions occur disproportionally between profiles with similar stances. After estimating vaccine sentiment in the individual tweets, we estimate the vaccine stance of each individual profile. We define a profile’s stance as provaxx or antivaxx if at least half of vaccine-related tweets posted by the profile are assigned a probability of at least 50% of expressing pro- and anti-vaccine sentiment, respectively. Approximately 48% of profiles were assigned pro- and antivaxx stances, as some profiles had posted only a few tweets regarding vaccination, or did not unambiguously express the same attitudes toward vaccination. In terms of the vaccine hesitancy continuum [ ], these labels correspond loosely to the extremes, which tend to be over represented in online discussions [ ]. Note that the correspondence is not exact, because hesitance is defined in terms of accepting or rejecting vaccines, whereas the labels used here refer to attitudes regarding human vaccination. However, intention to vaccinate is strongly influenced by attitudes regarding vaccination [ ].
The distributions of tweet sentiments and profiles stances are shown in . Of the vaccine-related tweets in English, approximately 35% could be identified as originating from the United States. An analysis at the state level of the vaccine sentiments expressed in tweets is provided in . Details on data gathering, classification, and geolocation are provided in the materials and methods section.
 Of those tweets, approximately 2.65 million contain external links (URLs outside of Twitter). Many such URLs start with a base URL, such as youtube.com, followed by a part which specifies which subpage (e.g. which particular video) the link points to, as well as various API calls, etc. We extracted the base URL for each such link, resulting in around 100 thousand distinct base URLs. Of those, we identified the 10 most frequently used by anti- and provaxxers, resulting in 18 URLs due to two domains (facebook.com and youtube.com) appearing among the ten most common URLs for both groups. The lists of top ten URLs contained 47% of links posted by antivaxx users, and 15% of links posted by provaxx users. Comparing the most frequently used base URLs with sentiment results reveals that profiles with different stances share highly dissimilar content, as shown in . In the top ten URLs, profiles with a pro-vaccine stance typically share content from mainstream news sites, medical or technology/science sites, and various social media sites, whereas anti-vaccine profiles tend to share content from YouTube, social media sites, and a number of sites specializing in alternative health products, pseudoscience, and conspiracy theories. For details on the categorization of links, see the section. The absolute number of links posted to each such domain varies a lot over time for some domains, yet the relative frequency of posts for each stance is relatively constant; visualizations and statistics are provided in .
 Expanding upon the above, we assign to each of the popular base URLs one or more of the following labels: “news”, “social”, “science”, “conspiracy”, “pseudoscience”, “commercial”. By ‘commercial’ we here mean sites which sell products related to (alternative) health, and so have a direct financial interest in the vaccination discourse. Exact definitions of all labels are provided in the methods section. shows that fraction of links posted by profiles of different stances which belong to each such category. The results summarized in are generally robust to changes in the sentiment threshold for stance attribution, with one exception: When increasingly strict thresholds are applied, i.e. when we consider only users who share very strong vaccine sentiments, the “news” category becomes more frequently linked to among anti-vaccine profiles. This is due to strongly anti-vaccine profiles disproportionally posting URLs which point to Fox News. Details and figures regarding that analysis are presented in .
 The most frequently occurring link category for pro- and anti-vaxxers are news sites, and Youtube links, respectively. The second most frequent category among antivaxx profiles is commercial sites profiting from selling health related products. This finding is unexpected, as common reason for vaccine hesitancy is mistrust in medical research due to perceived financial conflicts of interest and industry ties to pharmaceutical companies [ ]. Links to pseudoscience and conspiracy sites are also posted disproportionally by profiles with a strong anti-vaccination stance.

## Polarization and epistemic echo chambers
Using Dataset 1, we construct a large network representing observed mutual interactions between profiles on Twitter. In this network, profiles are linked if there exists a reciprocal @-mention, or a reciprocal retweet, within a 3-month time window. We refer to the interaction network as the MMR (mutual mention/retweet) network for this reason. Additional details regarding the MMR network, as well as some analyses of the network structure and temporal stability, are provided in the materials and methods section. Links are constructed in this fashion for consecutive time windows, where the number of such 3-month time windows in which two users have interacted can then be viewed as the weight of the link. In addition to thresholding on this weight, which is illustrated in Fig 5, the graph may be thresholded according to the number of vaccine-related tweets from each user, such that only nodes corresponding to users who posted at least a desired number of tweets with vaccination-related keywords are retained in the graph.
We initially consider a version of the MMR graph constructed using very strict criteria for node and link inclusion, then subsequently investigate the effects of easing those criteria. We first include, in each time window, only nodes that are assigned a pro- or anti-vaccine stance. Further, we only include links between nodes that interacted in several windows. The strictness of these criteria retains only nodes which consistently express strong vaccine-sentiments, in interact repeatedly nodes that do so as well. As a consequence of the strict criteria, the resulting graph contains only 4894 nodes, of which 3359 (69%) nodes form a giant connected component. The remaining connected components are loosely scattered, have fewer than 30 nodes in each, and contain only 5.6% anti-vaccine users. 395 nodes (11.76%) in the giant connected component represent antivaxx profiles. A representation of the graph using a force layout algorithm [ ] is shown in . The interplay between the stances of users and their neighborhoods, as well as user connectivity and activity, is visualized in .
 The graph is heavily stratified with regards to vaccination stance. The assortativity coefficient (Pearson correlation between stance and connectedness in the graph) is r = 0.813.
The analyses above, however, dependend on discretely partitioning users into two distinct categories. Considering instead user stance as a continuous variable—given by e.g. the average anti-/pro-vaccine sentiment expressed in their tweets—we obtain similar findings. Discarding users with fewer than 5 vaccination related tweets, we rebuilt the interaction graph while varying the minimum number of 3-month time windows in which users must have interacted before being connected in the graph. Results on the interplay of (continuous) stance and (repeated) connectivity are summarized in .
 Correlations between the mean vaccine sentiment expressed in neighboring users’ tweets were roughly the same independently of how frequently the users interacted, as shown in , although the number of users in the interaction graph decreases quickly when using strict inclusion criteria (additional analyses in the methods section). Similarly, we observe an anti-correlation between pro- and anti-vaxx probabilities of neighbors, which seems to diminish somewhat when considering repeated interactions. However, this decrease appears to be driven by a few nodes which have many connections, yet do not frequently discuss vaccines, as shown in .
The finding that users interact disproportionally with other users sharing their stance, aligns with previous findings that long time anti-vaccine users of social media tend to form tightly knit clusters which exhibit a high degree of in-group solidarity [ ], and in which misinformation may thrive unquestioned [ ]. To qualify the latter, we turn again to the URLs most frequently shared by users discussing vaccines, shown in , we probe regions in the MMR network around individuals of various stances and assess whether the URLs shared in those regions differ more or less from a normal distribution depending on stance.
Considering only the approximately 32 thousand users with at least 5 vaccination-related tweets, we group users based on the mean probability of antivaxx (pav) of their tweets. We computed the deciles of pav for all tweets and grouped users based on which deciles their mean score fell between, i.e. one bin for mean pav values below the first decile, one for values between the first and second deciles, and so forth. For each such group of users, we observed the regions surrounding them in the MMR network, and extracted the URLs shared by all users who were located in that region, and who had shared at least 5 URLs and posted at least 5 vaccine-related tweets. We then computed the frequency for each of the top URLs for the regions (locally), and observed the difference from the overall (global) frequency distribution. The frequency distributions may be interpreted as maximum likelihood estimates of the probability distributions over links shared in the regions around specific users, and globally. Therefore, we quantify the difference between such distributions using the Jensen-Shannon (JS) distance [ ]—an information-theoretical measure of distance between probability distributions which take values in the range between zero (no overlap between distributions) and one (identical distributions).

 shows the JS-distances between overall link frequencies, and links shared by users adjacent to users with a given mean pav. The figure shows that Twitter profiles that engage in online vaccine discourse are not only disproportionately connected to other users who share their stance, but that users with stronger anti-vaccine stances are also exposed to increasingly atypical sources of information. This is indicative of ‘epistemic echo chambers’ in online vaccine discourse in the sense that users, depending on their stance, are exposed not only to a skewed distribution of stances from other users (i.e. network homophily), but also to information sources that are highly dissimilar to those typically partaking in the overall discussion. Although we do not attempt to explain how these echo chambers arise in the first place, we can point to some mechanisms described in the literature which are consistent with our results. First, it is a well-known result in sociology and network science that links tend to form between nodes that share similar attributes [ , ]. Second, some studies indicate that people are highly selective in sharing information that aligns well with their convictions [ ], which in term can cause polarization by opinion reinforcement [ ], and by users cutting ties to avoid exposure to information causing cognitive dissonance [ ].
 

## Discussion
In summary, our findings paint a picture of the vaccine discourse on Twitter as highly polarized, where users who express similar sentiments regarding vaccinations are more likely to interact with one another, and tend to share contents from similar sources. Focusing on users whose vaccination stances are the positive and negative extremes of the spectrum, we observe relatively disjoint ‘epistemic echo chambers’ which imply that members of the two groups of users rarely interact, and in which users experience highly dissimilar ‘information landscapes’ depending on their stance. Finally, we find that strongly anti-vaccine users much more frequently share information from actors with a vested commercial interest in promoting medical misinformation.
One implication of these findings is that online (medical) misinformation may present an even greater problem than previously thought, because beliefs and behaviors in tightly knit, internally homogeneous communities are more resilient [ , ], and provide fertile ground for fringe narratives [ , ], while mainstream information is attenuated [ ]. Furthermore, such polarization of communities may become self-perpetuating, because individuals avoid those not sharing their views [ ], or because exposure to mainstream information might further entrench fringe viewpoints [ ].
A further problem exacerbated by the structure of the debate is that, parents often base their vaccination decisions on their impression of what other parents do [ ], so vaccine hesitant parents who encounter a strongly anti-vaccine community might get the impression that not vaccinating is the norm and opt not to. This risk is compounded by the fact that anti-vaccine communities are highly effective at reaching out to undecided individuals [ ], which highlights the need to reach undecided individuals with accurate information to overcome vaccine hesitancy [ ].
In summary, the characteristics of the online vaccine discourse may contribute to increasing vaccine hesitancy, possibly into the extreme of vaccine denial. A brief discussion of measures that have proven successful in decreasing hesitancy and increasing vaccine uptake therefore seems in order. One such measure is encouraging direct communication between hesitant individuals and healthcare professionals. Parents who interact with health care professionals are significantly more likely to vaccinate their children [ , ], whereas parents of underimmunized children are significantly more likely to obtain medical information online [ ]. Another measure is implementing policies which incentivize vaccination or discourages rejection [ – ].
In terms of digital interventions, our findings highlight the need for measures based—not just on whether content is true or false—but on a more nuanced understanding of the interplay between vaccination attitudes, social network structure, and information sources, including actors with a vested interest in promoting false beliefs. With disinformation campaigns aiming to erode consensus [ , ], fact-checking at the level of individual stories being shared online might need to be complemented by an understanding of the complex interplay between community structure and information content.
Future work based on the findings presented here could investigate e.g. the text content of the communication between users with highly similar and dissimilar stances regarding vaccination, as well as interactions between text topics and community structure.

## Materials and methods
This section provides details of the data analyzed and the methods employed.

## Twitter data
The work presented here relies on a large collection of data from Twitter. For clarity, we describe below two subsets of the data used in the analysis. The reason for this is that one part of the data comes from a large collection of data not specific to vaccination but well suited, due to its size, to analysis overall interactions on Twitter, whereas another was obtained by querying for vaccination-related keywords, and thus is better suited for analyses specific to vaccination. All data were collected through Twitter’s public search API—no terms of service agreements were violated in collecting the data.
Dataset 1 consists of a large collection (approximately 60 billion) of tweets [ ], collected as a random 10% in 2013–2016. These data were used to a general ‘interaction network’ in which nodes represent Twitter profiles, and connections between nodes represent cases where both profiles either mention or retweet each other. We refer to this as the Mutual Replies/Retweets (MMR) network.
Dataset 2 was constructed using Python to paginate backwards through the official search API for tweets containing various keywords pertaining to vaccination. A full list of the keywords queried for is: “unvaccinated”, “unvaccined”, “vaccinate”, “vaccinated”, “vaccinating”, “vaccination”, “vaccinations”, “vaccinator”, “vaccinators”, “vaccine”, “vaccined”, “vaccinering”, “vaccines”, “vaccinology”, “vaxx”.
When a match occurred, the tweet was analyzed and stored in a database. The analysis involved evaluating the sentiment expressed by the tweet’s contents, and following any external links it contained. In the following, we present details regarding the link analysis, the MMR network, and the sentiment classification process.

## Ethics statement
The study, including the data collection process, has received written approval from the Institutional Review Board at the Technical University of Denmark (IRB number COMP-IRB-2021–09).

## Network analysis
Using the sample of approximately 60 billion tweets (Dataset 1), we construct an interaction network, in which profiles are connected only if both profiles interact with the other, by retweeting content, or by replying, within a three month time window. Each such time window contained an average of 19,588,474 nodes and 47,115,188 edges. Combining the graph for all time windows resulted in a graph with a total of 89,577,277 nodes and 434,193,958 edges. The degree distribution—the probability distribution over k, the number of such connections to each profile—for the combined graph is showed in . The degree distribution closely matches a Weibull distribution,
 pk=βα(kα)β-1e(k/α)β,
(1)
with the parameter values specified in the figure legend.
 To assess the stability of the interaction network over time, we constructed an MMR network for each three-month time window in the period 2013–2016. For every pair of such networks, we compared how similar the connections in the two networks were, using the Jaccard similarity index
 HSi,Sj=|Si∩Sj||Si∪Sj|.
(2)
If the Jaccard similarity between the networks at two time points is 1, the network is completely unchanged, and if it is 0, no connection between any two profiles exists at both time points. shows the Jaccard similarities between the MMR networks for all of the three-month time windows. It shows that the similarity is relatively large at neighboring time points, with 14% of connections appearing at both time points, following which the self-similarity over time gradually reduces to almost zero over the period of 3 years.

## Link analysis
Links contained in tweets are shortened by Twitter, and sometimes by external URL shorteners as well. In order to analyze external URLs contained in the vaccine-related tweets, we used python to crawl each URL, repeatedly follow redirects, end noting the domain of the final destination. For profiles that were categorized as strongly anti- or pro-vaccine, we recorded the ten most frequently used such domains. This resulted in a total of 18 domains, due to youtube and facebook occurring in both top tens.
We manually assigned one or more categories to these 18 domains. The categories, along with classification criteria, are outlined below. For classifying pages as conspiracy or pseudoscience sites, we looked up the domains on the online service media bias/fact check (MBFC).
Commercial—Pages that include an online store selling health related products.
naturalnews.com, articles.mercola.com, go.thetruthaboutvaccines.com, greenmedinfo.com, healthimpactnews.com, healthnutnews.com, infowars.com, newstarget.com, vaccineimpact.com.
Conspiracy—Classified using MBFC.
awarenessact.com, newspunch.com, newstarget.com, worldtruth.tv, collective-evolution.com, inshapetoday.com, realfarmacy.com.
News—Known news sites.
bbc.co.uk, bbc.com, bioportfolio.com, cbc.ca, choice.npr.org, cnn.com, edition.cnn.com, forbes.com, foxnews.com, huffingtonpost.com, medicalnewstoday.com, nbcnews.com, nytimes.com, reuters.com, sciencedaily.com, statnews.com, theguardian.com, time.com, whitehouse.gov.
Pseudoscience—Classified using MBFC.
collective-evolution.com, inshapetoday.com, realfarmacy.com, seattleorganicrestaurants.com.
Science—Sites promoting mainstream science/medical information.
bioportfolio.com, cdc.gov, medicalnewstoday.com, sciencedaily.com, statnews.com, webmd.com.
Social Media—Large social media platforms.
facebook.com, instagram.com, reddit.com.
Youtube—The popular video-sharing platform.
youtube.com.

## Classification of vaccine-sentiment in tweets
Using machine learning techniques in general often requires a large amount of ‘ground truth’ data on which ones model can be trained, and this is particularly true for deep learning models. Establishing a ground truth dataset often requires human work and is thus often costly. One technique to work around this issue is transfer learning, in which a model is first trained on a large ‘source’ dataset, in which the ground truth has already been established, and then applied to a ‘target’ dataset. In the case of deep neural networks, this approach typically consists of first training a complex model to the source data, then stripping off the layer of output neurons and using the output of the second last layer, often called a representation layer, in conjunction with another model to predict the desired target dataset. This sometimes increases model performance, as it allows one to ‘reuse’ higher-order representations of the input data learned by the original classifier. We here describe the source and target datasets, along with the final model architecture, which is summarized in .
 The target data consisted of 10000 randomly selected tweets containing vaccine related keywords. We hired workers on Amazon’s Mechanican Turk (MTurk) platform to classify tweets as being either for, or against human vaccination, or as undecideable or unrelated. To ensure high-quality ratings, we first manually rated 100 tweets, then hired a number of MTurk workers for a test assignment which clearly stated that top performers would receive offers for additional tasks. The payment was set to be very high compared to typical MTurk to provide incentive for good performance. We then identified top performers whose scores where most similar to our own, and launched the remaining tasks, allowing only the identified workers to participate. We hired workers such that each tweet would be rated by 3 distinct raters. We then kept only the tweets for which all 3 raters agreed on a label, which reduced the data set to 5358, the distribution of labels in which was 18.8% antivaxx, 45.67% provaxx, and 35.50% neutral/unrelated.
As the source dataset, we chose to train the classifier to predict a number of hashtags which we presumed to be related to the sentiment prediction task. From an initial qualitative analysis of the data, and from a brief review of the literature, we noted that
Anti-vaccine narratives occasionally supposes underlying conspiracies, as represented by hashtags such as #cdctruth, or #cdcwhistleblower.
Many tweets that that mention vaccine-related keywords are not concerned with vaccination of humans, but rather of pets. To help the classifier disambiguate, we included hashtags such as #dog and #cat.
There is a relatively popular indie rock band called The Vaccines. To help disambiguate, we included hashtags like #music and #livemusic.
Based on the above observations, we opted to scrape for our source dataset a large number of tweets containing any of the following hashtags: #endautismnow, #antivax, #autism, #autismismedical, #cat, #cdctruth, #cdcwhistleblower, #dog, #ebola, #flu, #health, #hearthiswell, #hpv, #immunization, #livemusic, #measles, #medication, #music, #polio, #sb277, #science, #vaccination, #vaccine, #vaccines, #vaccinescauseautism, #vaccineswork, #vaxxed.
Using a large number of tweets (≈ 10,670,000 in total) of tweets containing either of those hashtags, and trained a deep neural network classifier to predict the hashtags from text. These tweets were obtained in a similar fashion to dataset 2. We used a random upsampling approach to achieve a balanced dataset within each training sample when doing cross-validation [ ].
The classifier consisted of an embedding layer, a spatial dropout, then a parallel sequence of a) a bi-directional GRU (gated recurrent unit) and a dropout layer, and b) a weighted attention average layer [ ]. Those were then concatenated into a representation layer.
After fitting the hashtag model, we removed the output layer and ‘froze’ the remaining layers, to prohibit training of the weights contained in the original model. We then added a fasttext network [ ] in parallel with the pretrained classifier. The rationale for this was that, while the initial classifier might have learned to recognize highly complex patterns in text, it might not do a good job of making simpler connections between input text and target probabilities. After fitting the fasttext part of the classifier, we used the chain-thaw approach of [ ] to further improve performance.
On the three-class prediction task, the classifier attained a micro-averaged F1-score of 0.762. The score was computed by aggregating true and false positives/negatives over a 10-fold stratified cross-validation procedure [ ]. For comparison with the literature, we also trained the classifier for binary prediction (i.e. predicting simply whether a text snippet was anti-vaxx or not). The accuracy on the binary case was 90.4±1.4% over a 10-fold stratified cross-validation evaluation, an increase over what to our knowledge is state of the art performance [ ].
Looking qualitatively at the performance of the classifier, the tweets that were labeled with high confidence demonstrate some capability of the classifier to recognize relatively subtle indications of the correct label for the tweet, as shown in .
 

## Categorization of Twitter profiles from tweets
For each user, we considered tweets containing vaccination-related keywords (see description of Dataset 2 above). For each such tweet, we estimated the probability of the tweet expressing sentiment that is pro-vaccine, anti-vaccine, or neutral/unrelated, using the machine learning classification method described above. We then label profiles as anti/pro-vaxx if the classifier assigns more than 50% of the profile’s tweets a probability of at least 50% of being anti/pro-vaxx. Note that this leaves the majority of profiles not assigned to either of the two categories, as illustrated in . This strong criterion is intended to reduce the number of profiles falsely assigned into either category.

## Note on uncertainties and robustness
Most of the figures presented here are produced using a very large number of data points. For this reason, some quantities, such as the tweet sentiment and user stance distributions presented in , will have very small error bars that are difficult to meaningfully visualize. Meanwhile, the distributions turn out to be more sensitive to changes in the arbitrary threshold for labeling user stances from tweet sentiments, although this does not qualitatively alter the results. In such cases, we have opted to present the figures without error bars in the main paper, referring the reader to for a more detailed overview of uncertainties, as well as analyses of robustness to the aforementioned sentiment threshold.

## Supporting information
S1 Appendix

## Robustness and uncertainties.
More details on uncertainties and robustness to sentiment thresholds is provided in S1 Appendix.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Appendix

## Geographical analysis of tweets originating from the USA.
A short analysis of tweet sentiment by American state, of potential relevancy to researchers interested in the interplay between state policy/regulations and Twitter discourse, is presented in S2 Appendix.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Appendix

## Temporal evolution of link frequencies.
S3 Appendix presents illustrations of how the number of links posted to each external domain by changes over time.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Appendix

## Explorative analyses of user and neighborhood stances.
S4 Appendix contains some explorative visualizations on the interplay between user stance strength, the strength of disagreement with the user neighborhood, and the neighborhood activity and number of neighbors, for the data underlying .
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.

The authors wish to thank Alan Mislove for his invaluable help with collection and analysis of Twitter data, and Bjarke Felbo for sharing his wisdom of machine learning.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0263746.r001Decision Letter 0
DanforthChristopher M.Academic Editor© 2022 Christopher M. Danforth2022Christopher M. Danforthhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
6 Oct 2021

PONE-D-21-27127Characterizing polarization in online vaccine discourse – a large-scale studyPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Mønsted,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process. The reviewers are enthusiastic about the findings and the importance of the work, but offer suggestions to improve the presentation and strengthen the applicability of the results. 
Please submit your revised manuscript by Nov 19 2021 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Christopher M. Danforth
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. In your Methods section, please include additional information about your dataset and ensure that you have included a statement specifying whether the collection method complied with the terms and conditions for the website.
Furthermore, you indicated that ethical approval was not necessary for your study. We understand that the framework for ethical oversight requirements for studies of this type may differ depending on the setting and we would appreciate some further clarification regarding your research. Could you please provide further details on why your study is exempt from the need for approval and confirmation from your institutional review board or research ethics committee (e.g., in the form of a letter or email correspondence) that ethics review was not necessary for this study? Please include a copy of the correspondence as an "Other" file.
3. Thank you for stating the following in the Acknowledgments Section of your manuscript: 
[The authors wish to thank Alan Mislove for his invaluable help with collection and analysis of Twitter data, and Bjarke Felbo for sharing his wisdom of machine learning. The research described in this paper was funded by the Danish Council for Independent Research, grant number 4184-00556a.]
We note that you have provided funding information that is not currently declared in your Funding Statement. However, funding information should not appear in the Acknowledgments section or other areas of your manuscript. We will only publish funding information present in the Funding Statement section of the online submission form. 
Please remove any funding-related text from the manuscript and let us know how you would like to update your Funding Statement. Currently, your Funding Statement reads as follows: 
 [The authors received no specific funding for this work.]
Please include your amended statements within your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
4. In your Data Availability statement, you have not specified where the minimal data set underlying the results described in your manuscript can be found. PLOS defines a study's minimal data set as the underlying data used to reach the conclusions drawn in the manuscript and any additional data required to replicate the reported study findings in their entirety. All PLOS journals require that the minimal data set be made fully available. For more information about our data policy, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability.
Upon re-submitting your revised manuscript, please upload your study’s minimal underlying data set as either Supporting Information files or to a stable, public repository and include the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers within your revised cover letter. For a list of acceptable repositories, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-recommended-repositories. Any potentially identifying patient information must be fully anonymized.
Important: If there are ethical or legal restrictions to sharing your data publicly, please explain these restrictions in detail. Please see our guidelines for more information on what we consider unacceptable restrictions to publicly sharing data: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions. Note that it is not acceptable for the authors to be the sole named individuals responsible for ensuring data access.
We will update your Data Availability statement to reflect the information you provide in your cover letter.
5. We note that Figure 2 in your submission contains map images which may be copyrighted. All PLOS content is published under the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY 4.0), which means that the manuscript, images, and Supporting Information files will be freely available online, and any third party is permitted to access, download, copy, distribute, and use these materials in any way, even commercially, with proper attribution. For these reasons, we cannot publish previously copyrighted maps or satellite images created using proprietary data, such as Google software (Google Maps, Street View, and Earth). For more information, see our copyright guidelines: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/licenses-and-copyright.
We require you to either (1) present written permission from the copyright holder to publish these figures specifically under the CC BY 4.0 license, or (2) remove the figures from your submission:
a) You may seek permission from the original copyright holder of Figure 2 to publish the content specifically under the CC BY 4.0 license.  
We recommend that you contact the original copyright holder with the Content Permission Form (http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=7c09/content-permission-form.pdf) and the following text:
“I request permission for the open-access journal PLOS ONE to publish XXX under the Creative Commons Attribution License (CCAL) CC BY 4.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). Please be aware that this license allows unrestricted use and distribution, even commercially, by third parties. Please reply and provide explicit written permission to publish XXX under a CC BY license and complete the attached form.”
Please upload the completed Content Permission Form or other proof of granted permissions as an "Other" file with your submission.
In the figure caption of the copyrighted figure, please include the following text: “Reprinted from [ref] under a CC BY license, with permission from [name of publisher], original copyright [original copyright year].”
b) If you are unable to obtain permission from the original copyright holder to publish these figures under the CC BY 4.0 license or if the copyright holder’s requirements are incompatible with the CC BY 4.0 license, please either i) remove the figure or ii) supply a replacement figure that complies with the CC BY 4.0 license. Please check copyright information on all replacement figures and update the figure caption with source information. If applicable, please specify in the figure caption text when a figure is similar but not identical to the original image and is therefore for illustrative purposes only.
The following resources for replacing copyrighted map figures may be helpful:
USGS National Map Viewer (public domain): http://viewer.nationalmap.gov/viewer/
The Gateway to Astronaut Photography of Earth (public domain): http://eol.jsc.nasa.gov/sseop/clickmap/
Maps at the CIA (public domain): https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/index.html and https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/cia-maps-publications/index.html
NASA Earth Observatory (public domain): http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/
Landsat: http://landsat.visibleearth.nasa.gov/
USGS EROS (Earth Resources Observatory and Science (EROS) Center) (public domain): http://eros.usgs.gov/#
Natural Earth (public domain): http://www.naturalearthdata.com/
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: No
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Abstract
• The characterization of all vaccine discussions as against, for, and neutral is an oversimplification. Decades of vaccine hesitancy research has led to the understanding most individuals are not against per say, but “skeptical,” referred to as vaccine hesitancy, or the “middle ground” in your conceptualization. Almost everyone has some type of hesitancy, and hesitancy depends on the vaccine and context they are in; however, the characterization here has equated hesitancy to a rejection stance, which is entirely inappropriate in my view and fully against current vaccine hesitancy discourse.
Introduction/Findings
• I understand the contention for categorizing all profiles and tweets along a dichotomy of against or for vaccines. However, myself and others who know this literature well would find the findings in this paper much much more valuable if the authors were able to develop a more complex characterization that is not dichotomous. As said in the previous comment, the characterization is largely misrepresented. I would suggest authors to clearly outline how they are defining vaccine hesitancy (or related terms) using terms that are widely used by scholars in this area.
Discussion
• I would have liked to see a much more elaborate exploration of the implications of your findings for the literature and policymaking. I get the impression that the wealth of literature on vaccine hesitancy is largely unexplored or ignored. However, this may not be completely accurate. For example, commercial interests have actually been explored in literature in the past few years. These interests are primarily from the focal point of trust, whereas mistrust is directed towards government, providers, and pharma, to direct trust towards companies or groups that do not fall in the canonical communities. These issues have been explored and should be mentioned in your discussion. I would suggest a more comprehensive searching of the literature, including recently published reviews on the topic. Furthermore recent work on COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy have also explored some of these topics, and they are relevant for today’s discussions.
Reviewer #2: I very much enjoyed reading “Characterizing polarization in online vaccine discourse — a large-scale study.” I have only some minor follow-up questions, potential areas for more theoretical expansion, and a handful of suggestions that the authors can take or leave.
Perhaps this is just my taste, but my main suggestion for the authors is to do more to situate their very impressive data collection and methodology and really drive home what they think we’ve learned from all of this. The findings are each individually interesting and do stand on their own, but I think they could be tied together into a more cohesive story. To me, there are at least two fascinating findings here that quantify dynamics that have previously been identified qualitatively — and are each more interesting than the “polarization” referenced in the title (after all, why wouldn’t we expect vaccine discourse to polarize in a venue like Twitter, where people tend to express stances that are more strongly held?).
First, the grift. Journalistic accounts have documented how various conspiracy theorists on the internet try to channel their followers’ fears into product sales, but this is the first time I have seen it quantified. Second, and more importantly, the interaction network. So much work on vaccine misinformation is about exposure to various sources that are flagged as unreliable or misleading — with the implication that if we were better at flagging or removing bad information from these sites, people’s attitudes and behaviors would change in pro-social ways. This work treats Twitter as social *media.* What I take from these findings is that this is not even half of the story — the real action is in the communities that get built on these sites. Which is to say, the really compelling part of this manuscript is its treatment of Twitter as a social *network.* I suspect that no amount of flagging unreliable domains will deter users in these communities from reinforcing each others’ anti-vaccine views — Motta, et al (2021) on anti-vaccine social identities (https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/21565503.2021.1932528?journalCode=rpgi20) could be a helpful tie-in on this front.
This presents some interesting and tough questions concerning the tradeoffs associated with so much information flowing in these online spaces. Here, Twitter is doing exactly what it’s designed to do: bring people together to share and discuss information. It’s agnostic as to the ends for which it is bringing people together, and it’s legitimately difficult to say with any certainty what we should expect them to do regarding *communities of users* who reinforce each others’ anti-vaccine views. That’s a harder problem than picking some unreliable information sources to flag or even block.
Some follow-up questions:
- How sensitive are these results to higher thresholds for classifying users’ stances? 50% of on-topic tweets with at least 50% p(stance) is an intuitive threshold, but my expectation would be that most tweets with a stance express an unambiguous stance — i.e. p(stance) well over .5 — and most users with a stance are much more consistent than 51%. How much data do we lose when we require more confidence in our classifications?
- Does downsampling instead of upsampling matter? There’s a ton of data here and also a ton of imbalance, so I worry that the relatively smaller number of anti-vax tweets wind up getting overworked.
Remaining suggestions:
- Personally, the geolocation and state-level analysis didn’t do much for me. The share of tweets/users who could be geolocated in the first place is so small, and those users are likely different from users in similar locations who can’t be located. I wouldn’t put my foot down and say it’s wrong or needs to be cut, but I would say that I wouldn’t miss it (it doesn’t even get a full paragraph in the body as it stands). I’m just not sure what it adds.
Reviewer #3: The paper presents an interesting analysis of how Twitter behavior differs based on vaccine stances, in particular there are notable differences in the links that are shared and the degree of connection. I think the stance detection in in individual tweets is interesting methodologically and demonstrated quite rigorously. However, I think the conclusions of the analysis depend on certain assumptions made by the authors and sensitivity to those assumptions is not fully addressed. Moreover, the paper describes differences between two groups (provax and antivax accounts) but does not include uncertainty metrics for the comparisons. Finally, the authors situate their conclusions in the context of broader understandings of vaccination-related issues but not relative to other work studying discussion of vaccinations on Twitter. Acknowledging these connections would substantially improve the paper.
Major issues presented in order of importance.
1. Threshold for profile classification. Nearly all of the analysis depends on grouping accounts into provax, antivax or neutral based on a 50% threshold. While authors note that the 50% threshold is over all tweets not just vaccine-related tweets in the Materials and Methods section (to allow neutral classifications), it is necessary to note if the results are sensitive to this threshold. In particular, any account that tweets frequently about vaccines will be classified as either pro- or antivax with this procedure even if the classification model is uncertain about the actual labels. This discrete labeling from a continuous measure is a fine practice in general, but knowing if the results differ by the cutoff is necessary. In particular, smaller numbers of provax and antivax accounts will affect the uncertainty measures requested in the next point.
2. Uncertainty measures. Throughout the paper, I think the authors do not adequately report uncertainty in their measures of differences between provax and antivax accounts. In particular, the number of accounts labeled as antivax is a small subset of the full data, as shown in Figure 1. Comparing point estimates of distributions, such as in Figures 3, 4 and 7, is likely to show large differences when one group is small just due to random chance. Showing uncertainty with either confidence intervals or p-values, for example, is necessary to demonstrate that the observed differences in point estimates are not likely to have arisen due to random chance.
3. Prior work studying vaccination discourse on Twitter. Discussing prior work on the issue of vaccine debates on Twitter is necessary to present a rigorous analysis, especially to convince a reader that the authors’ modeling choices are reasonable. This paper discusses prior work on the effects of antivax movements on health outcomes, but makes no mention of prior work using Twitter data to study vaccine sentiment. In particular there is a lot of research on echo chambers in vaccination debates, both COVID-19 and non-COVID-19 related. Either identifying other papers that have employed similar methods or explaining why the authors have employed different methods would improve the rigor of the analysis.
4. Correlation construction. Figure 6 shows a correlation between vaccine stance for different kinds of edges provax-provax, antivax-antivax, and provax-antivax. However, those categories are identified by that same vaccination stance. So by construction, provax-provax and antivax-antivax node pairs will be positively correlated and provax-antivax edges will be negatively correlated. I think a global metric, such as correlation across all types of nodes, is an interesting statistic and it would be more useful here. However, using correlation between node features does require identifying an ordering for the nodes or permutations to properly measure the correlation.
Additional analyses. There are a few points in the paper that would benefit from additional analysis.
1. (Major) MMR graph (Figure 5). I think this graph is an excellent visualization of the disconnectedness of provax and antivax accounts. However, I think more should be discussed in the results.
a. Figure 5 only shows the largest connected component. For the parts of the full graph not shown, are they mostly “pure” (all anti- or pro- vax)? Does the connectedness look different for those smaller graphs?
b. What kind of content are the edges formed on? My reading is that the edges indicate interaction between accounts on any kind of tweet, not just vaccine-related ones. Does the anti-vax cluster interact on vaccine related tweets?
c. Expanding on the point above, it would be nice to see if they authors can identify whether the clustering by vaccine stance is attributable to the stance or some other characteristic, i.e. are the antivax accounts densly connected because of their antivax stance or are they connected because they all share some other common interest and happen to be antivax. Establishing this may be challenging due to lack of reliable account-level features on Twitter data, so I understand if the authors are not able to conclusively answer this issue.
d. There are some anti-vax accounts scattered throughout the pro-vax portion of the network and a few pro-vax accounts in the anti-vax cluster. Can you say anything about what makes those accounts (those with many connections to accounts with different stances) different from the clustered accounts? For example, are those people less anti-vax than the clustered portion? A scatterplot of each node’s vaccine stance and proportion of the node’s neighbors who share the same stance would get at this question.
2. (Minor) Time trends in link sharing. The dataset used to analyze link sharing (Dataset 2) spans a large time period. Do certain domains change in popularity overtime? I would think that the popularity of less-reputable sites shared by antivax accounts could ebb and flow over as their reputation changes.
3. (Minor) Geographic distribution. I do not fully see the point if including the geographic distribution of the anti-/provax tweets across US states. Is there something that explains the variation across states, maybe some demographic features of the states? I don’t think this figure is necessary to include if not, especially because so few tweets are geocoded with an identifiable state.
Minor issues.
1. Why use two datasets instead of one? I think there are good reasons for why Dataset 1 is better for conducting network analysis and Dataset 2 is better for analyzing link sharing, and it would be useful for readers to explain that in the paper.
2. What inputs are used in the first layer of the tweet-level classifier? Are they word counts or some word embedding outputs?
3. In Figure 6, I do not see the need to show different curves on the same plot with different y-axes. I think the clarity of the figures would improve if split into four figures rather than two combined ones.
4. Data availability. I understand privacy concerns regarding sharing the text of tweets and account identifiers, but I do think suitably anonymized data can be shared. In particular, Dataset 1 could be shared including only the tweet-level classification scores and indicators for what base URLs were included in the tweets. Dataset 2 could be shared as just a list of interactions and account classification labels.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: Umair Majid
Reviewer #2: Yes: Jon Green
Reviewer #3: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Review.pdf
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0263746.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
3 Jan 2022

The resubmission contains a rebuttal letter which provides both a high-level summary of the major changes, as well as detailed point by point responses to each individual comment.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: rebuttal.pdf
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0263746.r003Decision Letter 1
DanforthChristopher M.Academic Editor© 2022 Christopher M. Danforth2022Christopher M. Danforthhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
26 Jan 2022

Characterizing polarization in online vaccine discourse – a large-scale study
PONE-D-21-27127R1
Dear Dr. Mønsted,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Christopher M. Danforth
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #3: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #2: I was enthusiastic about this manuscript on the first round, and the authors have done an excellent job of addressing my minor concerns and incorporating my feedback. As far as I'm concerned, I look forward to seeing it published!
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #2: Yes: Jon Green
Reviewer #3: No
10.1371/journal.pone.0263746.r004Acceptance letter
DanforthChristopher M.Academic Editor© 2022 Christopher M. Danforth2022Christopher M. Danforthhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
31 Jan 2022

PONE-D-21-27127R1 
Characterizing polarization in online vaccine discourse - a large-scale study 
Dear Dr. Mønsted:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Christopher M. Danforth 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE