3792fasebbioadvFASEB BioAdvancesFASEB BioadvWileyPMC8493971849397184939713463231610.1096/fba.2021-00068Life with FASEB for three decades
ChienShu 
1
Department of Bioengineering, Department of Medicine, and Institute of Engineering in Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA*

Correspondence
, 
Shu Chien, Institute of Engineering in Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093‐0435, USA. 
Email: shuchien@ucsd.edu

✉Corresponding author.
2672021310814814–8288102021© 2021 The Author. FASEB BioAdvances published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of The Federation of American Societies for Experimental BiologyThis is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.

## Abstract
As APS President‐elect, I participated in the Williamsburg Retreat in 1989 to address the issue of keeping member societies in FASEB. The Retreat led to focusing on public affairs and reducing society dues. As APS President, I met with leadership of ASBMB to convince them to remain in the restructured FASEB. As the first elected President of the new FASEB in 1992, I organized member societies to participate in NIH Strategic Plan meeting to maintain the priority of funding of unsolicited investigator‐initiated research instead of a top‐down approach. A new Office for Policy Analysis and Research was established to pursue proactive public affairs activities and strategic thinking. In response to qualitative and quantitative threats to biomedical research funding, I worked with FASEB member societies and the Public Affairs office to mobilize letter‐writing and a petition drive to the President and Members of US Congress, resulting in >20,000 signatures. This led to a 6.1% increase of FY94 funding, instead of a cut. When FASEB’s annual meeting was changed to Experimental Biology (EB), I worked with EB to ensure the smooth transition. I organized Tang Prize Lectures which became the highly successful EB plenary lectures. My involvement with FASEB was helpful in the formation of NIBIB in 2001 and recruitment of BMES as a member society in 2008.
Keywords: biomedical research funding, experimental biology, National Institutes of Health, public affairs, United States Congress, Williamsburg Retreat

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2021 Jul 2; Received 2021 Jun 8; Accepted 2021 Jul 7; Collection date 2021 Oct.

The Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology (FASEB) is an umbrella organization for societies in the fields of biological and medical sciences. , It was formed in 1912 with three societies: American Physiological Society (APS), American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics (ASPET), and American Society for Biological Chemists (ASBC), which was changed to American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (ASBMB) in 1987. American Society of Experimental Pathology (later changed to American Society for Investigative Pathology, ASIP), joined in 1913; American Society for Nutritional Sciences (later changed to American Institute of Nutrition, AIN) joined in 1940, and American Association of Immunologists (AAI) joined in 1942 to make FASEB a six‐society organization. In nearly half of a century, FASEB still had only the same six societies. The rapid growth of the biological sciences that dramatically accelerated in the 1970s first highlighted the stagnation in FASEB membership. It seemed that FASEB was not attractive to new member societies, and there was also an impediment for other societies to join because of the high assessment ($60 for each member in the society in 1989). The annual FASEB meetings generated a significant amount of revenue from the meeting exhibit program, and the share garnered by each member society was quite close to the assessment. Thus, the American Society for Cell Biology (ASCB), which did not meet with FASEB, chose to be an Associate Member that paid significantly lesser dues; however, an associate member did not have voting rights on the FASEB Board and other privileges of a full member.
1.

## MY PARTICIPATION IN FASEB FROM 1989 TO 1992
1.1.

## The Williamsburg Retreat in 1989
The ASBMB began to meet separately from the Federation in 1971 (as a boycott of the city of Chicago over their handling of the demonstrations at the DNC in 1968). Thereafter, they adopted a policy of meeting both separately and with the Federation in a cyclical fashion with intemittent participation. In the 1980s, ASBMB felt that the FASEB meetings were too large to effectively address its specific needs and decided to meet separately. As a result, their assessment was not being offset by a concomitant revenue income from the FASEB meeting. The assessment actually exceeded the dues ASBMB received from its members. There was also the concern about how FASEB was spending the money. As a result of these considerations, ASBMB was unhappy about its membership in FASEB and considered its withdrawal; this caused major repercussions through the other member societies, including APS, which also considered the question of withdrawal. Faced with this crisis, the FASEB Board held a retreat in Williamsburg, VA, on 21–24 September 1989 to discuss the future of the organization. As President‐elect of APS, I was one of the participants at that retreat.
The retreat had an in‐depth discussion of the past, present, and future of FASEB. I, among others, felt strongly that FASEB had an important mission as a unifying organization for experimental biology and that we should do everything to correct what was wrong in the organization and begin moving in the right direction. After extensive, frank discussions, a consensus began to evolve that FASEB should serve the needs of its member societies, especially in the area of public affairs. Other FASEB activities, such as placement, publications, scientific meetings, and conferences, should be self‐sufficient in budget without using the membership dues. It was decided that the annual multisociety meetings would no longer be an official FASEB function, and that an Experimental Biology (EB) group would be formed by the participating societies to manage the meeting. It was also recommended that the FASEB Journal be changed from free distribution to paid subscription. As a result of these proposed changes, the large assessment fee could be replaced by a dues structure in which the societies would eventually pay only $10 per member per year; this goal would be achieved by a gradual ramping downward over a 5‐year period. Furthermore, in order to attract new member societies, they would pay only $10 from the beginning. There was some skepticism as to whether this could work out financially. I spoke strongly in favor of this proposal, emphasizing that if we did not go this route FASEB would have to be dissolved; hence we had no other choice but to give this reasonable proposal a fair trial. This view received the support of Board Presidents Howard Schachman (1988–89), Bill Dewey (1989–90), and Tom Edgington (1990–91), as well as most of the attendees. The retreat concluded with a general understanding of the principle, but it needed the agreement of each member society, particularly ASBMB.

1.2.

## Keeping ASBMB in FASEB and recruiting American Society of Cell Biology and Biophysical Society
The issue of the future of FASEB was a major agenda item of the APS Council meeting in July 1990. (I was APS President at that time.) Following extensive discussions, the consensus was to support the recommendations of the 1989 Williamsburg Retreat for the restructuring of FASEB.
As mentioned above and presented by Garrison et al. : “ASBMB, which had struggled with its relationship to FASEB in the late 1980s, were more cautious.” At its June 1990 meeting, ASBMB passed a resolution to inform the Federation that it was the intent of the Council to withdraw in November 1991, “unless positive steps were taken in the meantime to attract societies representing new and emerging disciplines into the Federation.”
Realizing the importance of getting the ASBMB on board for the new FASEB, I invited its leadership to meet with the APS Council to discuss this issue. ASBMB Presidents Bob Schimke (1989–90), Bill Lennarz (1990–91), and Dan Lane (1991–92), and Executive Director Chuck Hancock accepted my invitation to meet with the APS Council on 6 October 1990 during the APS fall meeting in Orlando. I first called a meeting of APS Council that morning to have a thorough discussion in preparation for the afternoon meeting with the ASBMB leadership. This was followed by a luncheon in my hotel room that I invited the ASBMB leadership to discuss the key issues in order to gain consensus among the five of us prior to meeting with the APS council. Following these preparatory gatherings, the meeting of ASBMB leadership with APS council in the afternoon was highly successful with a fruitful, collegial exchange of views, leading to the consensus that we should endeavor to keep the new FASEB to serve the biomedical research community based on the principles established at the 1989 Williamsburg Retreat.
To follow‐up these valuable exchanges, I offered to meet with the ASBMB Council at their next meeting on 1 December 1990 in Bethesda. Members of ASBMB Council asked me many critical questions regarding the merit of FASEB as an umbrella organization. I stressed the importance of having such an organization to work for the common good of the biomedical research community, so that we would have a unified, strong voice representing more than 30,000 scientists. This would be extremely important in dealing with the legislative and executive branches of the government, especially in view of the stringent funding situation at the time. After the hour‐long meeting with me, the ASBMB Council met with FASEB President Tom Edgington and Executive Director Michael Jackson.
Later that day, the ASBMB Council passed the resolution to support the new FASEB, with the stipulation that the FASEB President works with others to change management, governance, financial structure, and activities in public affairs to recruit other societies that represent new and emerging disciplines; these were exactly what we planned to do in the new FASEB. This resolution was passed by the ASBMB Council by a single vote! That deciding vote had an extremely important bearing on the future of FASEB and hence biomedical research. The FASEB Board met the next day in Bethesda; Dan Lane reported to the Board that ASBMB had decided to remain in FASEB. This was met with extremely enthusiastic applause.
In the following week, ASCB held its Annual Meeting in San Diego. On 9 December 1990, Tom Edgington, Dan Lane, ASIP President Dorothy Bainton and I met with the ASCB Council. We all expressed the view that the new FASEB would be indeed a federation that serves its constituent member societies and that it would fulfill the important function of representing the biomedical research community with a strong unified voice. The ASCB Council was concerned about whether other FASEB societies would have views similar to ASCB. Tom and I, as an ASCB member, stressed that this should not present any problem. ASCB voted to join FASEB as a full member at its next Council meeting.
I met with the Council of Biophysical Society (BPS), of which I was also a member, in February 1991 to present the case for joining FASEB as a full member with the new dues structure. The fruitful discussions were similar to those at the meeting with the ASCB Council. The BPS Council also decided to join FASEB as a full member.
The extremely important synergism between the decision of ASBMB to remain in FASEB and the agreements of ASCB and BPS to join as full members, in the face of the changes in FASEB membership structure and fees, enabled the formation of the new Federation, with the increase of constituent member societies to eight.
The American Association of Anatomists (AAA) joined FASEB on 1 January 1993, bringing the total membership to nine societies with 46,244 members, as compared with 27,000 when the transition was initiated in 1990.

2.

## ELECTION AS FASEB BOARD MEMBER AND PRESIDENT
Prior to the Williamsburg Retreat in 1989, the presidents of the six member societies took turns serving as FASEB President using a rotation system; thus, every sixth year the Presidency would come back to the same society. At the 1989 Williamsburg Retreat, it was decided that the President should be elected by the FASEB Board among the Board members. Furthermore, every member society would have two Board members, each serving staggered 4‐year terms, instead of having two or three members (depending on the size of the society) serving a 3‐year term. APS previously had three positions on the FASEB Board, and they were filled by its Past President, President, and President‐elect. The new rule would require filling the two FASEB Board positions with APS presidents elected in alternating years. Seeing what was coming, I proposed to APS Council that we started with the APS Presidents in 1989–90 and 1991–1992, thus I would not be in the turn. My colleagues, however, voted to have me (APS President 1990–1991) and Stan Schultz (1992–1093) as the first two FASEB Board members from APS under this new rule. Thus, I joined the FASEB Board as a member. As part of the transition plan, the Board voted to have Bob Cousins of AIN serve as the last rotating FASEB President for 1991–1992. The FASEB Board voted in December 1991 for me to serve as the first elected President in 1992–93.

3.

## NIH STRATEGIC PLAN IN 1992
My first duty at FASEB prior to formally becoming the President was leading the Federation's participation in the discussion of the NIH Strategic Plan.
In early 1992, NIH Director Bernadine Healy planned to change the modus operandi of NIH extramural funding to emphasize mission‐oriented research instead of the unsolicited investigator‐initiated research. She proposed to implement a strategic planning process for the FY 1994 budget, which would be based on programs rather than mechanisms, thus giving the NIH greater control in determining the direction of research. On 10 June 1992, Dr. Healey told the Advisory Committee to the NIH Director that her programmatic approach would produce a budget request that is more balanced among mechanisms, as she felt excessive focus had been placed on the R01 grants, and this “cannibalized” other mechanisms. She aimed to change the operating policies to give more decision power on grant funding to the NIH Director and Institutes and Centers, instead of peer review by the extramural scientific community. This had the dangerous potential of creating a “Corporate NIH” that would lead to an increase in NIH‐directed research, and a decrease in support for unsolicited investigator‐initiated research, which has been the key to NIH’s success by leveraging on the ingenuity and creativity of the outstanding investigators of our nation.
With strategic planning as the main agenda item, NIH organized a National Task Force Meeting on 23–25 June 1992, at the Ramada Renaissance Hotel in Herndon, VA, near the Washington Dulles airport. As President‐elect of FASEB who would take over on July 1, I was asked to lead a delegation of FASEB member society representatives to attend this meeting. In preparation for the meeting, I first held a teleconference of these representatives on June 21 and then face‐to‐face meetings in Ramada Hotel in the afternoon of June 23 and during the lunch break on June 24 to exchange ideas and generate consensus. It was the unanimous opinion that we must resist such changes in NIH policy and maintain the priority of unsolicited investigator‐initiated research.
The National Task Force Meeting was attended by more than 200 members of the extramural community and NIH intramural programs. After plenary lectures by Bernardine Healey and several other leaders, the meeting broke into panels on Science, Policy, and Research Capacity, each with several subpanels. In these panel/subpanel sessions, FASEB representatives made important arguments to present the views of the extramural research community in maintaining the priority of unsolicited investigator‐initiated research. At the closing plenary session on June 25, Dr. Healey expressed her displeasure with the opposition to her proposal and, to illustrate that people are hard to please by using the example of a mother‐in‐law giving two ties as gifts to her son‐in‐law. When she saw him wearing one of the ties, she was not happy and asked what he disliked about the other one. I got up and pointed out the importance of maintaining the unsolicited investigator‐initiated research as the key mechanism for NIH grant funding, and said “Why can't he wear both ties?” The auditorium burst out in loud laughter and this broke the tense atmosphere.
On 15 July 1992, the NIH issued a draft of its strategic plan, “Advantage America,” that had incorporated many of the suggestions by the research community and led to improvements of the plan.
Throughout this process, the member societies of FASEB provided valuable inputs and a unified strategy, truly reflecting the importance of the Federation. Alice Hellerstein, FASEB Manager of Legislation and Policy Development, provided valuable assistance.

4.

## PUBLIC AFFAIRS ACTIVITIES IN FASEB
As determined at the Williamsburg Retreat at 1989, the major activity of the new FASEB would be public affairs. The following paragraphs summarize FASEB’s public affairs activities during 1992–1993. The activities in 1992 are summarized in the FASEB Annual Report that year, together with my President's Report The FASEB public affairs activities drew on the strengths of the Societies to represent laboratory investigators in biomedical sciences.
4.1.

## Public affairs executive committee
During my Presidency, FASEB formed a Public Affairs Executive Committee (PAEC) composed of representatives from member societies, with Past President Robert Cousins serving as the Chair. The Committee held monthly teleconferences to exchange information and develop consensus and actions related to public affairs. In addition, Bob Cousins, President‐elect Frank Fitch, Michael Jackson, Gar Kaganovich, and I held weekly teleconferences on public affairs. These teleconferences served to generate consensus with fast turnaround.
After the completion of my term as FASEB President on 30 June 1993, I took over the Chairship of PAEC to coordinate the public affairs activities of member societies and generate consensus. The Committee held biweekly teleconferences, as well as a face‐to‐face annual meeting on.
1 February 1994, with the attendance of members of the Executive Committee of FASEB Board, representatives and staff of each member society, and the staff of the offices of public affairs. The PAEC generated consensus among the member societies and reacted timely and effectively to public affairs issues with proactive approaches. The teleconferences addressed issues on Capitol Hill, Congressional appropriations, healthcare reform and biomedical research, university research environment, indirect costs, animal issues, radioactive and hazardous wastes, patent policy, scientific misconduct, conflict of interest, increase of NIH publicity, development of consensus conferences, coalitions with other organizations, and participation in amalgamated organizations with similar goals such as the Academic‐Industry Alliance for Biomedical Research.

4.2.

## Office for policy analysis and research
When I took over the Presidency of FASEB in 1992, there was an Office of Public Affairs directed by Gar Kaganovich, who was doing an excellent job in making liaison with the legislative and executive branches of government and in responding to issues and questions that arose in areas related to biomedical research. However, the FASEB Board felt that, while the OPA was very successful making these liaisons and responding to issues and questions that arose in areas related to biomedical research, there was an urging need to place a major emphasis on a proactive approach in our public affairs activities.
In March 1993, the Board set up an ad hoc Subcommittee on Public Affairs Staffing, which I chaired, to reorganize public affairs activities to facilitate development of proactive initiatives, policy analysis and strategic thinking. The Subcommittee recommended the formation of a new Office for Policy Analysis and Research (OPAR) to meet these needs, including the gathering and organization of the information and data related to public affairs, the writing of draft documents on various issues needed for proactive approaches and strategic thinking, the preparation, organization and drafting of reports for consensus conferences, and the composition and publication of FASEB Newsletters. The Director of the Office would report to the Executive Director, and the PAEC would determine the agenda of Office activities.
At the FASEB Finance Committee on 4 May 1993, Treasurer Ronald Estabrook and Comptroller John Rice reported a revenue surplus in calendar year 1992 of $442,517 generated from operations. This is slightly more than the estimated annual operating costs of approximately $420K for the OPAR, including the director, a secretary and a staff. Since public affairs was the primary goal for the Federation and the proposed Office would allow us to implement a proactive approach to address this key issue, I was strongly in support of the use of the revenue surplus to establish OPAR, in addition to and as a compliment to the Office of Government Liaison. This view was echoed by the Finance Committee, PAEC and the Board, which approved the establishment of the new Office at its meeting on 30 June 1993.
In July 1993, FASEB posted the position description for the director for OPAR. We were very fortunate to have an outstanding candidate, Dr. Howard H. Garrison. When Kaganowich left in 1996, the two offices relevant to public affairs were combined to form the new Office of Public Affairs (OPA), with Howard as the director. Howard made excellent contributions to FASEB in the next quarter of a century, fully implementing the goals for FASEB public affairs. Howard's outstanding accomplishments were recognized by his reception of the prestigious FASEB Public Service Award in 2018.

4.3.

## The consensus conference
FASEB Consensus Conferences addressed various topics, including Federal funding of biomedical research. With the active participation of government officials and scientific leaders, the recommendations of the FASEB Consensus Conference became an important source of reference for the government.
I chaired the FASEB Consensus Conference on FY1994 Biomedical Research Funding on 4–6 November 1992. The conference was attended by representatives of the FASEB member societies, as well as American Society for Microbiology, Genetics Society of America, and Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology. Following speeches by David Brautigan of Brown University, Frank Sulzman of National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), Mary Clutter of National Science Foundation (NSF), Raymond Sphar of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), Ruth Kirschstein of NIH, and David Kleffman of Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the conferees discussed biomedical research funding for these US government agencies. It was concluded in the strongest terms that basic biomedical research benefits the nation's health, social well‐being, and its economy. Basic research enables us to increase our understanding about life processes and contributes to the development of more effective medical treatments, thus people can lead more productive lives and contribute to the nation's economic and social progress. Research‐driven medical advances help contain the escalating costs of medical care and contribute directly to domestic economic growth and international competitiveness. Accordingly, the conferees made FY1994 budget recommendations for NIH, NSF, VA, NASA, and EPA, with clearly justified increases ranging from 10 to 15%.
The report was distributed to the Senate and House Appropriations Subcommittees on Labor‐HHS‐Education, and major groups in the DC science community such as the Association of American Medical Colleges (AAMC), Association of American Universities (AAU), American Federation for Clinical Research, American Institute of Biological Sciences, American Society for Microbiology, American Chemical Society, American Physical Society, Society for Neuroscience, Research!America, National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, Institute of Medicine (now National Academy of Medicine), American Association for Advancement of Sciences (AAAS), and FASEB societies. It became an important reference source for biomedical research funding and was used by AAMC and other organizations to benchmark their recommendations.

4.4.

## Interactions with the US government
Prior to the US Presidential election in 1992, I wrote a letter on behalf of FASEB in October to all three candidates for US President (Bill Clinton, George H.W. Bush, and Ross Perot), outlining several biomedical research issues that required their attention. We suggested a substantial increase of the fiscal year 1994 budget for NIH and other life science agencies, an improved methodology for calculating indirect costs, and the continuation of the current federal policies on basic biomedical research instead of the contemplated top‐down federal control. We also urged an enhanced role for the Presidential Science and Technology Advisor in the next administration. The letter drew an immediate favorable response from the Clinton camp, which requested FASEB to recommend the names of several candidates for the position of Science and Technology Advisor to the President, and we complied with this request.
On 4 December 1992, FASEB received a request from Greg Simon, Senior Advisor for the Clinton‐Gore Transition Team, to provide input on how to improve NIH’s science and technology efforts and its contribution to the economy, with a turnaround time of four days. We held a PAEC teleconference on December 7. With the collaboration of all societies and the public affairs offices, an excellent draft letter was prepared that night for me to finalize. The letter was delivered to Greg on December 8 by Gar Kaganowich, together with our 1992 Consensus Conference Report. In the six‐page document, we emphasized the importance of unsolicited, investigator‐initiated investigations in driving the discoveries leading to medical applications that enhanced effectiveness, improved safety and reduced costs for the treatment, cure and prevention of diseases. Furthermore, we pointed out the effective transfer of the research findings and technologies from such investigations into practical products by the life science industries, thus helping to create jobs and contribute to the economy.
The Transition Team posed three funding scenarios. The first one was “No Additional Money.” FASEB regarded this as an untenable condition, as the FY 1993 appropriation was already well below what was required to maintain the vitality of biomedical research. The second was a “Modest Increase in Funding” and the third was a “Full Blown Increase in Funding.” FASEB urged the Transition Team and the new Administration to give favorable consideration to the last two recommendations. Option #2 would maintain the minimum level needed for the continued creation of basic scientific knowledge for clinical and industrial applications, whereas option #3 would maximize our ability to accomplish these goals and fully achieve our role as the world leader in health research and economic development. The Administration budget for FY 1994 turned out to be between #1 and #2, and that was insufficient to maintain the minimum level required. This led to FASEB’s petition drive for the support of biomedical research (see Section IV.E).
In September 1992, the Federal Registrar Notice for NSF had an article with the intention to alter its direction from the support of basic research and education to applied research and development. On behalf of FASEB, I wrote to Dr. Charles Brownstein of the Special Commission on the Future of the NSF on 16 October 1992, making the strong recommendation that NSF continue its time‐proven and extremely successful policy of supporting basic research and education in science/engineering, and I stated that diversion of NSF’s resources away from such fundamental, indispensable missions would be disastrous to the future advancements of our knowledge and counterproductive to the generation of applied research.
In March 1993, FASEB learned of Dr. Healey's resignation from NIH Directorship. I wrote a letter to HHS Secretary Donna Shalala urging the appointment of a nationwide search committee composed of the constituents represented in the NIH scientific programs to find the best‐qualified individual. We also asked Secretary Shalala to appoint Dr. Ruth Kirschstein, Director of the National Institute of General Medical Sciences at the NIH, as Acting Director until a permanent head can be found. In July 1993, Ruth Kirschstein was appointed Acting Director. The search committee selected Nobel Laureate Harold Varmus of UCSF as the next NIH Director. Dr. Varmus received his medical education at Columbia University, where I taught the Physiology course for medical students from 1958 to 1988, including 1962, when he was in the class. Harold served as an outstanding NIH Director from 1993 to 1999, with an excellent relationship with FASEB.
The above were some of my interactions with the Executive Branch of the US Government on behalf of FASEB. My interactions with the Legislative Branch are given in the next section.

4.5.

## Petition to president Clinton and members of congress for support of biomedical research funding
It is one of the FASEB’s fundamental principles that unsolicited investigator‐initiated research is the driving force for the discovery of novel knowledge that leads to the improvement of diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of diseases. In early 1993, there were two major threats to the continuation of this premise: first, the Congress was considering initiatives to direct biomedical research; and second, the legislative and executive branches of the government had plans to reduce biomedical research funding. These were qualitative and quantitative threats to the funding and hence efficacy of biomedical research.
In March 1993, the House and Senate Budget Committees seriously considered a proposal to drastically reduce Federal funding of extramural scientific research. On March 10, I received an urgent message from PAEC Chair Bob Cousins that “Reports from Washington suggest that cost‐cutting and budget reductions have become ‘all the rage.’ The research budgets of the NIH, NSF, USDA, etc., are all likely to be victims. …. FASEB must work toward building a coalition of scientific societies and associations representing higher education to bring the impact of these cuts to the attention of both the Administration and Congress.” On the same day, I wrote a memo to the FASEB Board, PAEC, Executive Officers Advisory Committee (EOAC), Michael Jackson and Gar Kaganowich, saying that “The Congressional Budget Office, in addition to proposing … capping indirect costs, is also proposing a reduction of direct costs for basic research funding. The implementation of these proposals will be devastating to biomedical research and cause irreparable damage to the excellent life sciences research foundation built through decades of investment by our nation.” I pointed out that, although we had hand‐delivered a letter on March 9 to all members of the House and Senate Budget Committees, we needed to mobilize the broadest participation possible. On March 12, when I was in Bethesda, I called a meeting with the FASEB Society Executive Officers and the Public Affairs personnel; we came to the unanimous conclusion that we must mobilize our support by using combined approaches of:

Letter‐writing: Send a memo to all FASEB society members urging them to write to the President and the Members of Congress in their State/District to support biomedical research, as well as soliciting more letters from their scientific and nonscientific colleagues.
Signatures at Experimental Biology Meeting: Set up a kiosk at the EB meeting in New Orleans (28 March–1 April 1993) for participants to sign petitions to be sent to the President and Members of Congress.
Visit with congressional representatives: Visit by FASEB Society members to Members of Congress in their State/District to address the importance of biomedical research.
This urgent request was quickly approved by PAEC and the Board, and I sped to initiate immediate actions.
On 17 March 1993, I wrote to all members of the nine constituent FASEB Societies [ ] regarding the anticipated difficulties in NIH funding and asked them to join in a petition drive to tell Congress and the Administration the importance of basic biomedical research and the necessity of enhancing NIH funding. The FASEB Executive Director's Office sent more than 50,000 letter packets to individual members of the Societies, including students. A similar letter was also sent to 23 other organizations (including AAMC, AAU, American Heart Association, American Cancer Society, Society for Neuroscience, Genetics Society of America, American Society for Microbiology, American Society for Animal Science, and American Chemical Society). As a result, many of the members of these societies wrote to their respective members of Congress and also gathered signatures from their colleagues, friends, and neighbors in support of a petition [ ] advocating increased basic biomedical research funding.
I used the opportunity of the EB meeting in March/April 1993 (Section V.C) to generate further support for this petition. On March 22, I sent a letter to each of the exhibitors at the meeting, asking them to send messages to the President and congressional representatives for support of basic biomedical research. During the EB meeting on 28 March–1 April 1993, a kiosk was set up at the registration area for meeting attendees to sign the petition. Whenever I did not have any official business to attend to, I stood at the meeting registration area to ask every passing attendee to sign the petition; virtually everyone complied with the request. We also asked people to enlist the support of their scientific and nonscientific colleagues, as well as friends and neighbors in this campaign by signing the petition.
In addition to the EB meeting, we also had petition drives at the 1993 meetings of ASCB, ASBMB, and BPS, which met at different times and sites.
The information on the petition drive was featured in the May 1993 issue of the FASEB Newsletter, and readers were urged to join in this effort. These activities attracted a great deal of attention from Congress, the press, industry, and other scientific and professional organizations.
Our multi‐prong petition drive generated more than 20,000 signatures; this unprecedented support of biomedical research funding was 10 times greater than any of our previous grass‐root attempts. After sorting by OPA according to the regions of congressional representations, these signature sheets were sent to the appropriate Senators and House Representatives in late April 1993 to urge their support for an NIH appropriation of $11,750 billion in fiscal year 1994. These targeted efforts turned out to be extremely successful and led to very positive responses from our congressional representatives. Twenty‐nine such letters are presented in .
At the meeting of House Subcommittee on Labor, Health & Human Services, Education and Related Agencies (LHHS) on 4 May 1993, Representatives Dick Durbin (D‐IL), Barney Frank (D‐MA) and Benjamin Gilman (R‐NY) pointed out the benefits of biomedical research and the inadequacy of funding. They stated that investment on NIH would further stimulate the US biomedical industry, resulting in additional jobs and revenues, as well as helping to develop the technologies needed to find cures for diseases. On May 10, sixteen members of the House wrote to Representative William Natcher (House LHHS Appropriation Subcommittee Chair) to urge an increase in NIH funding. They said that the funding was inadequate and would not maintain a viable biomedical research enterprise competitive in international markets.
At the Senate Subcommittee on Labor, Health & Human Services, Education and Related Agencies meeting on 16 May 1993, Senator Mark Hatfield (R‐OR) said that it is disturbing that this Administration fails to accept that medical research is a vital investment program. Senator Warren Magnuson (D‐WA) stated that biomedical research is the first link in the chain of prevention. Sen. Connie Mack (R‐FL) said that we are on the verge of cost and life‐saving breakthroughs and that the proposed NIH budget is unacceptable. Senator Tom Harkin (D‐IA) said that the President's budget is bad news for biomedical research and pointed out that medical research has brought us the advances in treatment and prevention of diseases and disability that define our current high standards of medical practice and promise even more remarkable advances in the near future.
Thus, following the intense efforts of FASEB, there was strong bipartisan support for the increase in support for biomedical research.
In late May 1993, the House and Senate Appropriations Committees responded with much improved funding levels, by recommending NIH appropriations of $10,937 million and $10,956 million, respectively. The latter was the final funding level. It represented a 6.1% increase over FY93, instead of a budget cut. It was most gratifying that the efforts of FASEB over a limited time window resulted in dramatically greater support of biomedical research.
Our efforts to enhance biomedical research funding did not stop with the excellent responses of the Appropriations Committees to our petition drive. On 26 June 1993, I sent letters to President Clinton and all members of Congress on behalf of 36 scientific organizations to strongly urge the enhanced support of biomedical and biological research by our government through the NIH, NSF and other federal agencies.
On behalf of FASEB, I testified before the Senate and House Labor‐HHS‐Education Appropriation Committees. During my terms as President‐elect, President, and Past President, I visited many US Congressional members and/or their staffs to explain the scientific community's concerns about the proposed NIH budget. These includes Senators Dick Durbin (D‐IL), Diane Feinstein (D‐CA), Tom Harkin (D‐ IA), Mark Hatfield (R‐OR), Connie Mack (R. Fla.), and Representatives George Brown (D‐CA), Bob Filner (D‐CA), Benjamin Gilman (R‐NY), William Natcher (D‐KY), John Porter (R‐IL), and Thomas Reynolds (R‐IL). Gar Kaganovich led me through the corridors of the senate and house buildings to meet with congressional members and their staff.

4.6.

## 
Press conferences in Washington, D.C.
On 3 December 1992, I held a press conference as FASEB President at the National Press Club in Washington, DC, to speak about the 4–6 November 1992 FASEB Consensus Conference on Biomedical Research Funding. After giving the rationale for the development of the Conference Report, I pointed out that basic biomedical research is the most cost‐effective approach for developing better and less expensive ways to prevent and cure diseases. In order to provide a stream of discoveries that can be translated into new products, it is vital to provide adequate federal support for a broad base of fundamental research. The unsolicited investigator‐initiated research drives our discoveries and the success in medical research. I outlined the Conference's recommendations for the NIH, NSF, VA Medical Research, NASA Life Sciences, and EPA and urged Congress and President Clinton to give favorable considerations to these requests on medical research funding.
On 25 May 1993, I held another press conference at the National Press Club. I announced the results of the petition drive of FASEB members for increased funding for biomedical research that had gathered more than 20,000 signatures. I reported on the pending release of the FASEB study that traced the economic benefits of monoclonal antibody (mAb) technology back to its origin in an investigator‐initiated basic research study (Section V.D). As the previous press conference, this one was also attended by representatives from major scientific media, including Nature, Science, Journal of NIH research, and The Blue Sheet; several of them had write‐ups about these FASEB initiatives and developments.

5.

## OTHER FASEB ACTIVITIES
As public affairs were the major activities of the new FASEB, the other activities, e.g., publication and meeting organization, were delegated to entities associated with FASEB, which had separate cost centers. Thus, the FASEB Journal became self‐sufficient based on subscriptions and was no longer sent free to all FASEB Society members. The annual meeting of FASEB Societies became the EB Meetings run by participating organizations (Section V.C). There was also other FASEB activities such as summer research conferences, placement, marketing, personnel, and production services.
I had my faculty position at UC San Diego, and most of the communications for FASEB were made by fax (there was no e‐mail yet). Because of the time difference, there were usually a big pile of fax messages on the machine by the time I got up in the morning. Answering these messages was my first order of business every day. Although it was a very busy time, it was also a very enjoyable time, because it was such a pleasure to work with all the wonderful colleagues: Board members, PAEC representatives, member society leadership and executive officers, and the FASEB staff.
5.1.

## Administrative activities
The FASEB Administrative Office was led by Executive Director Michael Jackson, who had been a Professor of Physiology at George Washington University. He had extensive knowledge and experience in biomedical science and its administration, and did a marvelous job fostering the remarkable progress of FASEB through a difficult period. Michael and I felt that a document was needed to spell out the duties and benefits of the Director. With the help of Michael, Past President Cousins and President‐elect Fitch, we prepared an Employment Agreement for FASEB Executive Director that included term of employment, compensation, duties and responsibilities, indemnification, termination, benefits, vacation, and sick leave, etc. The signing of this document by Michael and me formalized for the first time the responsibilities and privileges of the top administrative position of the Federation.
An Executive Committee of the FASEB Board was formed, comprising the past president, current president, president‐elect, and two members elected from the Board (Elizabeth Neufield and Stanley Shultz). Its responsibilities included the review of performance of the Executive Director, establishment of the agenda of the Board meetings, and acting on behalf of the Board in the intervals between regular Board meetings in accordance with policy established by the Board.
On 7 June 1993, following a detailed review of Michael's written report and interviews with him and relevant parties, the Executive Committee concluded that he had made excellent progress achieving the important objectives of the transition of FASEB, including the enhancement of the role of the Federation in providing effective representation of its interest in public policy of basic biomedical sciences, the decrease in obligatory costs of membership to the societies, the improvement of administrative efficacy, and the advancement of relations with member societies.
With the excellent work of Michael, Treasurer Ronald Estabrook, Comptroller John Rice, and the Finance Committee, FASEB was able to carry out its functions while reducing the Society dues from $60 to $20 per member by 1992–3, which was ahead of the pace planned at the Williamsburg Retreat in 1989. This reduction in dues resulted in a considerable saving for the six original member societies for use in their discretionary programs. Despite the reduction in dues of the original societies and the maintenance of the dues for the new societies at $10 per member, FASEB had a significant surplus in 1992–3, and this enabled the establishment of the new OPAR to pursue proactive public affairs activities, as mentioned above (Section IV.A). In addition, FASEB instituted an electronic communication network system which was very valuable for public affairs activities.
The Executive Committee of the Board also initiated the Performance Management Program for FASEB staff, which included a comprehensive reevaluation of every position in the Federation and its goals and objectives, as well as determination of compensation. The Program was managed by the Executive Director. It was based on the principle that successful performance is achieved through an effective management process.
As the President, I chaired the FASEB Board, which met quarterly to discuss all administrative issues and the activities and directions of the Federation. The Board is the final authority to approve administrative matters and operating principles of FASEB, including budget and services, investments, governance issues, coordination with the FASEB member societies, official communications with external organizations, selection of FASEB Public Service Awardee, and other key activities.
Whenever I was in Bethesda, I met with the FASEB staff and expressed my appreciation for their wonderful work, including participation in the staff appreciation gathering.
There were many pleasant duties in FASEB, e.g., presiding over the annual FASEB Public Service Award. It was my great pleasure to present the award on 29 June 1993 to Dr. Ruth Kirschstein (Figure  ), who was Director of the National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) and later Acting Director of NIH, in recognition of her tremendous public service through her outstanding contributions at NIGMS and beyond.
 
5.2.

## Relations with FASEB member societies and executive officers
I helped to increase the number of member societies from six (which had been unchanged for nearly 50 years) to nine, making FASEB the leading organization speaking on behalf of the biomedical science community to the legislative and executive branches of our government. This set up the momentum for FASEB to later expand to 29 member societies and over 130,000 members, providing a strong voice for the community in Congress and elsewhere.
When I took office as President in 1992, FASEB membership still was in a relatively precarious state. I visited the member societies during their Council Meetings and had frank and open exchanges on various issues that concerned the societies, especially in relation to FASEB. These included Biophysical Society on February 14, 1993 in Bethesda; ASPET, AIN and ASIP on March 27, and APS on March 28, during the EB 93 meeting in New Orleans; ASCB on April 9 in Bethesda; AAI on May 21 in Denver, and ASBMB on May 29 in San Diego. I found these meetings with Society Councils to be most fruitful in enhancing communication with the leadership of each Society, obtaining their valuable inputs, and keeping them informed of FASEB activities. The cooperative spirit and the unified consensus of the constituent Societies were key to successful FASEB actions. I felt that strengthening ourselves as a Federation was a prerequisite for our success and had the highest priority.
ASCB and BPS joined FASEB as full members on a trial basis in 1991 after the 1989 Williamsburg Retreat. In the early years these two new FASEB Societies had some concerns. In February 1993, BPS President Tom Pollard wrote to me expressing BPS’ concern about its participation in FASEB, including the Public Affairs programs (pace, proactiveness, and expense), the financial system, and effective husbanding of resources. I organized a subcommittee meeting with BPS leaders after the FASEB Board meeting on 28 March 1993, to develop several recommendations, including the reorganization of the Public Affairs Office, the recruitment of a new director of OPAR, and improvement of the consensus conference. On the same day, FASEB Treasurer Eastabrook and Comptroller Rice met with BPS and ASCB leaders to explain the financial plan and financial report; this was found to be very helpful.
In accordance with the transition plan, the individual member dues of the six founding member societies were reduced from $60 to $20 per member per year.
The Executive Officers of each member society worked in the Washington, DC area, but the President and other leaders generally did not. Furthermore, the Presidents turned over every year, while the Executive Officers had longer terms of service. Therefore, it was valuable to keep in close touch with the Executive Officers and the Executive Officers Advisory Committee (EOAC). I often sought the advice of the EOAC. For example, I met with EOAC on 10 March 1993 to discuss the petition drive for biomedical research funding. This was very well received by the EOAC, and its members said that I energized this meeting with innovative ideas.

5.3.

## Experimental biology meeting
In 1993, in accordance with the decision at the 1989 Williamsburg Retreat, the annual FASEB meetings that had provided the joint scientific venue of FASEB member societies for over three‐fourths of a century was changed to a stand‐alone EB meeting not organized by FASEB, starting with EB 93 in New Orleans. While FASEB did not provide financial or administrative resources for the meeting, I endeavored to assure the success of the new meeting format, participating actively in it to ensure the smooth transition from the traditional FASEB meeting to a new EB meeting. I attended the entire meeting from 28 March to 1 April 1993, including scientific sessions, exhibitions, and a FASEB public affairs symposium that I organized (next paragraph). I spoke to the exhibitors to thank them and encourage them to participate in future EB meetings. I also leveraged the opportunity of EB 93 to meet with the boards of the participating FASEB Societies (see Section V.B) and to pursue the petition drive for NIH funding (see Section IV.E).
On 29 March 1993, I organized a FASEB public affairs symposium on the future of basic research at EB 93 in New Orleans, with the goal of addressing the issues raised in a 1992 report released by the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology (HCSST) that challenged many of the paradigms upon which the nation's basic research system is based. The speakers included Dr. Kenneth Shine, Institute of Medicine President, Dr. Mark Novitch, Upjohn Vice President, Dr. Barry Gold of the House Science, Space and Technology Committee, and Dr. David Brautigan of Brown University. I served as the moderator. While various views were expressed at this symposium, the consensus was that, although Congress has the obligation to see funding relates well to overall national policy considerations, it should not place undue political pressures on the NIH and funding agencies, and it should not attempt to micromanage. It was concluded that the scientific community must stay closely involved and participate actively in any deliberations and decisions related to the policies and funding of biomedical research.
I have participated in every EB meeting since its inception and received several awards from the APS during these meetings, including the Ray Daggs Award (1999), Walter B. Cannon Lecture Award (2003), Carl Wiggers Distinguished Lecture Award (2019), and Claude Bernard Distinguished Lecture Award (2020–1).
The Tang Prize was established by Dr. Samuel Yen‐Liang Yin, Founder & Chairman of the Board of the Tang Prize Foundation, as an international award that honors and encourages innovative research in four fields, one of which is Biopharmaceutical Sciences (BPS). Each field has the prize money of about $1.3 million for one to three laureates, plus a $320K research grant to each laureate. Four of the BPS laureates have subsequently won the Nobel Prize. I arranged an agreement between the Foundation and EB to have the BPS laureates present the Tang Prize Lecture at EB since 2015 (Figure  ). Because of the tremendous success of the Lecture, EB has made it a plenary lecture since 2017 to bring all attendees to one place to begin its programs; the Lecture has become the highlight of the meeting with about 6000 in the audience.
 The FASEB Presidents have a luncheon gathering at the EB meeting each year. I enjoy meeting with the wonderful colleagues to learn of recent developments in FASEB and discuss future initiatives.
I am saddened by the decisions of the participating societies to disband EB after 2022, with each society holding their own meetings. It has been wonderful to participate in these joint meetings for three decades, but as the saying goes: all good things must come to an end. The same can be said about FASEB’s moving out of its magnificent Beaumont campus on Rockville Pike in Bethesda (Figure  ).
 
5.4.

## Publications on impacts of research
The staff of FASEB Life Science Research Office wrote several reports on the economic returns from basic research. Ken Fisher wrote an article on the use of monoclonal antibodies (mAb) in the detection of HIV. Daniel Raiten and Stanley Berman wrote an article on “Can the Impact (Benefits) of Basic Biomedical Research Be Measured?: A Case Study Approach”. 

Sam Silverstein and I wrote an article on “Economic impact of application of monoclonal antibodies to medicine and biology” ; Daniel Raiten and Stanley Berman provided valuable help to generate the needed information. This report focused on the basic research origins of monoclonal antibody technology, which allows researchers to produce a single specific type of antibody under controlled conditions as needed. The development of this technology from research on basic biological questions led to widespread usage spanning many disciplines with numerous clinical applications.
This paper showed that the discovery of a method for producing mAb test led to the development of an industry with revenues between $329 million and $1900 million in 1991. The application of this technology for HIV testing in blood led to significant cost benefits via the prevention of diseases and disabilities, saving of lives and productivity, reduction of medical costs, creation of jobs and industries, and prevention of pain and suffering. This study suggested that the aggregate economic impact of a few major basic advances in biomedical science, with the resulting progress in prevention, diagnosis, treatment, and cure of diseases, can vastly exceed the federal investment in basic biomedical research. It concluded that today's investments in basic biomedical research ensure the health and well‐being of tomorrow's citizens.

5.5.

## Interactions with other organizations
The Joint Steering Committee (JSC), which was initially composed of three FASEB member societies (ASBMB, ASCB, and Biophysical Society) and the Genetics Society of America, has been active in public affairs activities. FASEB worked with JSC to achieve our common goals, including FASEB’s sponsorship of the Peat Marwick Report on “The Economic Returns of Investments in Biomedical Research.” Michael Jackson attended JSC’s meeting on improving interaction and cooperation, and Peter Kyros of JSC attended FASEB biweekly public affairs briefings. During the 1990s, FASEB co‐sponsored the Congressional Biomedical Caucus with JSC that brought prominent scientists to Capitol Hill to inform members of Congress and their staff of recent advances in biomedical research.
In early 1993, an Ad hoc Committee on Industrial Liaison was set up at Bob Cousin's suggestion with the aim of having industry help to stress the importance of basic biomedical research in providing the fundamental knowledge needed for industrial application. In June 2013, FASEB arranged a meeting with Roy Vagelos, President and CEO of Merck & Co., Inc. On 1 July 1993, new FASEB President Frank Fitch, Mike Jackson and I met with Roy, and he agreed to help FASEB to establish an Academic Industrial Alliance for the support of biomedical research by bringing together the executives of research‐intensive therapeutic drug and technology companies to develop means to better uniform government at all levels, volunteer organizations, and the public about issues facing basic biomedical research.

Research!America was established to increase public and policymaker awareness of the health and economic benefits of medical research and build a strong base of citizen support for more research and innovation. In January 1993, I nominated Sam Silverstein as FASEB representative to their Board. President Mary Woolley invited me to attend their annual meeting on 9 March 1993, and we discussed many areas of possible collaborations. Since then, Research!America and FASEB have collaborated on many projects, especially on research advocacy. The most recent one was announced by FASEB Director of Office of Public Affairs Jennifer Zeitzer on 4 November 2020: a joint program called Civic Engagement Opportunities for Young Scientists. This initiative provides financial support for graduate students and postdocs in science, technology, engineering, and math fields to develop communication and program planning skills and improve their understanding of government.
When I was in the Washington, DC area, I took the opportunity to visit leaders of scientific organizations to exchange ideas and foster collaboration. Examples are Robert Petersdorf of AAMC and Ken Shine of the Institute of Medicine.
FASEB is a key participant in the Coalition for National Science Funding, which in 1993 included 124 professional organizations, universities, and businesses united by a concern for the future vitality of the national science, mathematics, and engineering enterprise.

The Scientist magazine, which reports life sciences news, had a full‐page article on October 26. 1992, entitled SHU CHIEN: Bringing societies together (Figure  ). It says “Shu Chien, past president of the Federation of American societies for Experimental Biology, has been a key figure in bringing together the nine societies that currently belong to FASEB – which has a membership of more than 46,000 science professionals. More important, he ensures the Federation's unity by continually emphasizing FASEB’s common goal: advancing the state and support of biomedical research in America.”
 

6.

## FORMATION OF THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR BIOMEDICAL IMAGING AND BIOENGINEERING (NIBIB) IN 2001
The relationship I established with Ruth Kirschstein at FASEB had a significant influence on the establishment of NIBIB in 2001. In 1997, NIH Director Harold Varmus and Acting Director Ruth Kirschstein initiated the Bioengineering Consortium (BECON, chaired by Deputy Director Wendy Baldwin) to foster inter‐institutional activities related to biomedical engineering. In 2000, the NIH established an Office of Bioengineering, Bioimaging, and Bioinformatics. However, there was intramural resistance to the formation of an Institute dedicated to these fields. The efforts by the extramural community to create an NIH Institute devoted to bioengineering and bioimaging succeeded in the passing of a bill to establish the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering (NIBIB) by the U.S. House of Representatives in September 2000 and the Senate on 15 December 2000. It was signed into law by President Clinton on 29 December 2000, his last official action related to legislation. These events occurred suddenly and caught the research community and the NIH by surprise.
Following the passage of the bill in the Senate, I realized the importance of creating a consensus among the NIH Institutes and Centers for working together with this new Institute; hence I immediately drafted a letter for submission to the Science magazine to stress the interdisciplinary nature of NIBIB and proposed that "Certain imaging and bioengineering research efforts must be closely integrated with approaches pursued in other NIH institutes and centers. These institutes/centers, therefore, should retain sufficient and appropriate resources to continue efforts in imaging and bioengineering that are integral to their missions. The NIBIB, on the other hand, should be devoted primarily to basic and applied bioimaging and bioengineering research and training that are likely to cut across different organ systems, diseases, and conditions. The new institute should strengthen and complement (not subtract from or substitute for) research programs in other NIH institutes and centers." On 2 January 2001, I was called to meet with Ruth Kirschstein, Wendy Baldwin, Donna Dean and other high‐level NIH officials at the NIH. The NIH leadership reacted very positively to the principles outlined in my draft letter, which served as a base for the Mission Statement developed for NIBIB. C. Douglas Maynard, President of Academy of Radiology Research (ARR) agreed to co‐sign this letter, which was published in the 2 March 2001 issue of Science.
As President of AIMBE in 2000–2001, I had invited Ruth Kirschstein in Fall 2000 to be the plenary speaker at the AIMBE Annual Meeting on 1 March 2001. This turned out to be an excellent choice in view of the establishment of the new NIBIB. Ruth gave a superb speech. In January 2001, I also invited Donna Dean to give a presentation on NIBIB at the AIMBE Forum on March 2, with Stan Baum and Jack Linehan serving as members of a discussion panel with Donna after her presentation. The plenary lecture and the forum presentation were very well received. They provided the attendees with excellent, timely information regarding the status and future directions of the NIBIB, and many of the attendees changed their attitude from skepticism to support.
I was a member of the search committee for the Director of NIBIB. After several months of careful deliberations beginning in fall 2001, the committee chose Roderic Pettigrew to be the first Director of NIBIB, a position he served with distinction from May 2002 to November 2017. Under his excellent leadership, NIBIB has made wonderful progress in fulfilling its mission, that is, to improve human health by leading the development and accelerating the application of biomedical technologies and to integrate the physical and engineering sciences with the life sciences to advance basic research and medical care, with the goal of enhancing the health and well‐being of our people.
My involvement with the biomedical engineering community facilitated the joining of the Biomedical Engineering Society (BMES) as a FASEB member society (next section).

7.

## BMES JOINING FASEB IN 2008 AND MY SECOND TERM ON FASEB BOARD
In Spring 2008, FASEB wanted to have an engineering‐based society join the Federation. Because of my close relationship with FASEB and my role in BMES as its President in 2006–2008, FASEB President Richard Marchase and Executive Director Guy Fogleman contacted me about this. I brought this up with the BMES Board and presented the potential benefits to BMES and to biomedical science as a whole. With a positive response from the BMES Board, I invited Richard Marchase and Guy Fogleman to meet with the Board in October 2008 and present the roles and activities of FASEB in science policy and collective advocacy for the scientific community. Following an excellent meeting in which fruitful exchanges were made, FASEB sent an invitation to BMES to join as a Full Member with the dues phased in over 3 years. This led to BMES becoming a FASEB member society in 2009. The BMES Board elected me as a FASEB Board member to represent the Society for a 4‐year term beginning 2009. As a result, after 16 years, I joined the FASEB Board for a second time to foster interactions and cooperation between the bioengineering and EB societies. BMES organized scientific sessions during the FASEB annual meetings and implemented collaborative activities in supporting government funding for the research community. As FASEB Board member, I again participated in the annual visits to the Capitol Hill to inform congressional representatives of important research outcomes in biomedical engineering.
In December 2009, FASEB President Dr. Mark Lively called to ask me whether I would consent to be nominated for the position of President‐Elect of FASEB. It was a great honor that I would be considered for a second time as a candidate for this most important leadership position in biomedical sciences. I really would have liked to have been a candidate because I love FASEB and wished to dedicate myself to its growth and development. However, my wife KC had a health problem at that time. I felt that, if I should be elected, I would have to go to Bethesda every month (as I did in 1992–1993), and this could be detrimental to her condition. After many days of agonizing deliberations and several telephone conversations, I declined Mark's wonderful invitation. As it turned out, KC’s health did have some ups and downs, and she became healthy a year later. While to this date, I still feel missing the possible opportunity to serve my beloved FASEB for a second time, on balance I made the right decision. There are many outstanding colleagues who could lead FASEB, but KC is my only beloved and loving lifelong companion who cannot be replaced.

8.

## SUMMARY AND PERSPECTIVE
FASEB made significant advances during 1992–3. It not only attained the goals set at the 1989 Williamsburg Retreat, but also actually progressed at a rate faster than planned. The new Federation developed into a much more effective organization that serves its constituent societies and their members, with its primary emphasis on public affairs. This was a cooperative effort of the FASEB Board, the member societies, the various committees, the executive leadership, and the staff. It was the collective effort of all the dedicated and talented individuals and the wonderful societies that made the remarkable progress possible. I am grateful for having the privilege of working as a member of this marvelous team.
During the nearly three decades since I completed my presidency, FASEB has had outstanding leaders as Presidents and other key positions who have brought the Federation to impressive new heights. The coalition has grown from six member societies to 29, and its unified voice now speaks for more than 130,000 scientists. I would like to salute and congratulate them for their outstanding accomplishments and express my sincere wishes for the continuous success of this most important Federation in experimental life sciences. FASEB has the unique and indispensable function of bringing scientists and their organizations together to assure the continued improvement of the health and well‐being of people throughout the world.

## CONFLICT OF INTEREST
No conflicts of interest to declare.

## Supporting information
Text S1
Click here for additional data file.
Text S2
Click here for additional data file.
Text S3
Click here for additional data file.
Text S4
Click here for additional data file.
Text S5
Click here for additional data file.
Text S6
Click here for additional data file.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I express my sincere gratitude for the privilege of working with the marvelous FASEB team and warmest wishes for the continuous success of this most important Federation in experimental life sciences. I wish to thank Dr. Howard Garrison for inviting me to write this article.

Chien S. Life with FASEB for three decades. FASEB BioAdvances. 2021;3:814–828. 10.1096/fba.2021-00068

## REFERENCES
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
Text S1
Click here for additional data file.
Text S2
Click here for additional data file.
Text S3
Click here for additional data file.
Text S4
Click here for additional data file.
Text S5
Click here for additional data file.
Text S6
Click here for additional data file.