pmcCampbell Syst RevCampbell Syst Rev4072csysrev9918227275506676CL2Campbell Systematic Reviews1891-1803SAGE PublicationsPMC8356495PMC8356495.1835649583564953713150810.1002/cl2.1049CL210491Systematic ReviewSYSTEMATIC REVIEWCrime and JusticeSocial WelfareThe promotion of well‐being among children exposed to intimate partner violence: A systematic review of interventions
LATZMAN et al.
LatzmanNatasha E. nlatzman@rti.orgCasanuevaCecilia BrintonJulia Forman‐HoffmanValerie L. 

1

RTI International
Research Triangle Park
North Carolina

*
Correspondence Natasha E. Latzman, Children and Families Program, Survey Research Division, RTI International, 3040 E. Cornwallis Road, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709.
Email: nlatzman@rti.org

30920199201915338780910.1002/cl2.v15.3e1049300920190105202314082025© 2019 The Authors. Campbell Systematic Reviews published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of The Campbell Collaborationhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.PROTOCOL: The promotion of well‐being among children exposed to intimate partner violence: a systematic review of interventions
1413112018119Campbell Systematic Reviews10.1002/CL2.216PMC842796537131373We received funding under the Jacobs Foundation (in partnership with the Campbell Collaboration) call for proposals, Better Evidence for Children and Youth 
6.1.2

## Inter‐rater reliability
Two trained researchers (N. E. L. and J. B.) independently assessed the 169 reports for inclusion or exclusion. A second member of the team (N. E. L. and J. B.; opposite reports than those originally reviewed) then reviewed all inclusion and exclusion decisions. Disagreements were resolved via discussion and on occasion, consultant by a third team member (C. C. and V. L. F.‐H.). Subsequently, three trained reviewers (N. E. L., J. B., and C. C.) extracted the relevant data from each included article into the evidence tables. A second member of the team (N. E. L. and J. B.; opposite reports than those originally reviewed) reviewed all data abstractions for completeness and accuracy. Here again coding disagreements were resolved via discussion and consensus and on occasion, consultation of a third team member (V. L. F.‐H.).

6.1.3

## Excluded studies: Full‐text screening
Following our published protocol, we excluded a total of 169 reports at the full‐text level of screening. References for the studies excluded at the full text level of screening (with rationale for each exclusion decision) are provided in the references section. Many articles were excluded for multiple reasons; in the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta‐Analyses) flow diagram and in the excluded references list, we report the first relevant reason in our a priori hierarchy (no new data—such as an overview, critical review or editorial; meta‐analysis/systematic review of intervention studies; study protocol; no intervention; wrong intervention; wrong population; wrong study design; no child‐level outcomes; no outcome data for population; high risk of bias). Below we describe each of these exclusion reasons in turn.
6.1.3.1

## No data/not original research
We excluded 31 reports because they did not present data or original research; that is, the reports were critical reviews (or another type of unsystematic review), opinions, commentaries, or editorials/letters to the editor.

6.1.3.2

## Meta‐analysis/systematic review
During the searches, we kept eight articles which corresponded to systematic reviews literature reviews and/or meta‐analyses related to interventions to promote well‐being following parent and/or child IPV exposure. These eight manuscripts were initially retained to examine reference lists, but eventually excluded once reference lists were checked.

6.1.3.3

## Study protocol
We excluded six study protocols which described study methodology but did not present outcome data. Five protocols did not meet inclusion criteria due to various reasons (e.g., wrong intervention, wrong population, wrong study design; Catherine et al., ; Loeffen, Lo Fo Wong, Wester, Laurant, & Lagro‐Janssen, ; Skerfving, Johansson, & Elgán, ; Tarzia et al., ; van Rosmalen‐Nooijens, Prins, Vergeer, Wong, & Lagro‐Janssen, ). The sixth protocol (Overbeek, de Schipper, Lamers‐Winkelman, & Schuengel, ) was referenced during the risk of bias classification but was ultimately excluded in favor of the two published studies stemming from the evaluation described (Overbeek, de Schipper, Lamers‐Winkelman, & Schuengel, ; Overbeek, de Schipper, Willemen, Lamers‐Winkelman, & Schuengel, ).

6.1.3.4

## No intervention
Thirteen reports were excluded because they did not involve an intervention; these studies were predominately etiological in nature or focused on outcomes following IPV exposure.

6.1.3.5

## Wrong intervention
One study was excluded because the intervention evaluated was not psychosocial in nature. In this case, Fredland et al. ( ) conducted an observational study examining the impact of an abused mother's decision to seek safe shelter or a protection order on maternal and child functioning.

6.1.3.6

## Wrong population
Twenty‐six reports were excluded because they included children broadly defined as “at risk” for IPV exposure (e.g., McWhirter, ), or children exposed to other forms of violence (e.g., organized violence, Rousseau, Benoit, Lacroix, & Gauthier, ). Other reports excluded for this reason examined the impact of prevention programming on general populations of children (e.g., Dahle & Archbold, ).

6.1.3.7

## Wrong study design
Sixty reports were excluded because they did not satisfy the study design characteristics specified in the protocol. Specifically, of the 60 reports, 23 were excluded because they were a program description or provided qualitative data only. For example, Behan (2013) provided qualitative data on families engaged with Spokane Safe Start Project in Spokane, Washington, a program designed for children exposed to IPV. Similarly, Ellison ( ) described the First Steps Domestic Violence Program, a program designed to address the mental health needs of infants and toddlers entering a domestic violence shelter. Another 37 reports were excluded because they did not include a comparison group. For example, Grip et al. ( ) employed a repeated measures design to evaluate the impact on behavioral functioning of a community‐based program for children exposed to IPV. Similarly, Herschell et al. ( ) examined preschool child behavior and mental health symptomatology before and after receiving Parent‐Child Interaction Therapy (PCIT).

6.1.3.8

## No child‐level outcomes
Twenty reports were excluded because they did not present child‐level outcomes. Studies excluded for this reason typically included outcomes at the level of the victimized parent (e.g., parent depression; Graham‐Bermann & Miller‐Graff, ), or, sometimes, at the level of the parent‐child relationships (e.g., parenting behaviors, Howell, Miller, Lilly, et al., ; parenting stress, McConnell, Barnard, & Taylor, ).

6.1.3.9

## No outcome data for population
Four studies did not report results for children who have been exposed to IPV (at least, but not limited to). For example, Raden ( ) examined the impact of Head Start involvement on children's adaptation of violence‐related stress; results were presented for the entire sample, not stratified by youth exposed to (but not limited to) IPV.

6.1.4

## Excluded studies: Risk of bias
The methodological quality of each publication included after full‐text review was evaluated for risk of bias. We subsequently excluded 16 reports (across 11 independent studies) due to ratings of high risk of bias. Risk of bias assessment for RCTs and observational studies deemed to have high risk of bias are shown in Appendix B in Tables and , respectively.
We excluded 15 reports for five or more reasons, such as selection bias (e.g., poor randomization and lack of allocation concealment for trials, failure to control for confounding factors for observational studies), performance bias (e.g., not controlling for concurrently occurring or unintended interventions), attrition bias (e.g., substantial loss to follow‐up of >20% or differential loss to follow‐up of >15% without appropriate handling of missing data), detection bias (e.g., in outcome assessment), and poor treatment fidelity.
After consultation with a third rater outside the study team with expertize in evaluation of bias (Dr. Meera Viswanathan), we eliminated an additional study (Pernebo, Fridell, & Almqvist, ) with a high degree of unmeasurable selection bias and confounding. In this study, children were recruited from a community‐based agency (arm 1) and a child and adolescent psychiatry unit (arm 2). The authors reported significant group differences between the arms (e.g., age, contact with father, anxiety symptomatology, posttraumatic stress symptomatology, sexual concerns), but did not control for these baseline differences in analyses.

6.2

## Risk of bias in included studies
Figure summarizes the eight studies in our review deemed to be at overall moderate and low risk of bias. See Table in Appendix B for a detailed risk of bias assessment for each included study.
 
6.3

## Synthesis of results
Table outlines characteristics of studies included in the review. Table presents the types of IPV experienced by the parent and the nature of the child s exposure. Table outlines the characteristics of study interventions and arms included in the review. Tables and figures outlining strength of intervention effects can be found in Appendix C.
6.3.1

## General Characteristics of Studies
Table in Appendix C presents characteristics of the eight independent studies (15 articles) included in the review. All studies were published in peer‐reviewed journals. The first study that met inclusion criteria was published in 2001. The majority of studies were conducted in the United States (n = 6 independent studies, 75%), with others carried out in Western Europe (the Netherlands; n = 1, 12.5%) and Asia (India; n = 1, 12.5%). The total baseline sample sizes varied, from 36 (Jouriles et al., 2011) to 58 (McFarlane et al., ). The age range of target children also varied; two studies examined outcomes across the entire span of childhood (age 18 months to 18 years in McFarlane et al., ; age 0–16 years in Satyanarayana et al., ); five studies examined outcomes in children in a 6–8 years age span (e.g., age 4–9 years in Jouriles et al., ; age 7–14 years in Cohen et al., ); and one study focused on outcomes in children of a more narrow age band (age 3–5 years; Liberman et al., 2005).
Three included studies recruited general populations of parents and/or children who had been exposed to IPV, without stated inclusion criteria around parent or child symptomatology or functioning. Four studies had more explicit inclusion requirements, specifically: children with IPV‐related PTSD symptoms (Cohen et al., ), clinical levels of child behavior problems (Jouriles et al., 2011; Jouriles et al., ), concerning child behavior or parenting (Lieberman et al., ), and fathers with alcohol dependence syndrome (Satyanarayana et al., ). The most common exclusion reason (reported by six studies) was parent and/or child serious mental illness (e.g., psychosis).
Of note, studies varied widely regarding the nature of IPV experienced by parents and witnessed and/or heard by children. These variations are outlined in Table in Appendix C and also described below.
6.3.1.1

## Exposure
Most included studies inferred exposure from either the mother's report of her own victimization (Cohen et al., ; Jouriles et al., , ; McFarlane et al., ; Overbeek et al., ) or the father's IPV perpetration (Satyanarayana et al., ). Two studies had more explicit definitions around exposure (Lieberman et al., ; McWhirter, ).

6.3.1.2

## Types of IPV
The types of IPV experienced or perpetrated by parents varied widely across included studies. Two studies (Jouriles et al., , ) recruited mothers who had experienced at least physical IPV; two studies recruited mothers (McWhirter, ) or a parent (Overbeek et al., ) who had experienced physical or psychological IPV; one study examined outcomes in children with a mother who had experienced physical or sexual IPV (McFarlane et al., ); and one study (Satyanarayana et al., ) recruited fathers who reported physical, psychological, or sexual IPV perpetration. Two studies (Cohen et al., ; Lieberman et al., ) did not explicate specific types of IPV experienced.

6.3.1.3

## Victim‐perpetrator relationship
All but one (Overbeek et al., ) included study focused on outcomes of children with a victimized mother. Of these seven studies, two explicitly noted the perpetrator must be a husband, two focused on mothers with male partners, and three were broader, referencing the mother's “partner.” Overbeek et al. ( ) described the most inclusive victim‐perpetrator relationship: victimized parent (of either sex) and perpetrating partner (of either sex).

6.3.2

## Characteristics of interventions evaluated
Table in Appendix C presents characteristics of the interventions evaluated in the eight independent studies (15 articles) included in the review. There was great heterogeneity in intervention types and comparators, the intervention recipient or modality, and the intervention delivery setting. Intervention types ranged from cognitive‐behavioral therapy for the child, mother, and/or perpetrating father (Cohen et al., ; McWhirter, ; Overbeek et al., ; Satyanarayana et al., ), to intensive parent training (Jouriles et al., , ), CPP (Lieberman et al., ), and nurse case management (CM; McFarlane et al., 2005). Three studies compared an active intervention to either an attention control (Jouriles et al., , ) or inactive control (McFarlane et al., ), whereas five studies (Cohen et al., ; Liberman et al., 2005; McWhirter, ; Overbeek et al., ; Satyanarayana et al., ) were comparative effectiveness studies that compared two active interventions.
Included studies examined the impact of interventions delivered to the mother only (Jouriles et al., , ; McFarlane et al., ), mother and child together (here defined as any number of joint sessions; Cohen et al., ; Lieberman et al., , McWhirter, ), mother and child separately (Overbeek et al., ), and perpetrating father only (Satyanarayana et al., ). Jouriles et al.'s ( , ) intensive parenting intervention was delivered in the parent's home, whereas other interventions were delivered in outpatient settings, such as community centers and clinics (Cohen et al., ; Lieberman et al., ; McFarlane et al., ; Overbeek et al., ), homeless family shelters (McWhirter, ), and inpatient psychiatric clinics (Satyanarayana et al., ).
Only one study reported tracking adverse events. In this study, Cohen et al. ( ) found that families participating in TF‐CBT reported fewer instances of serious physical IPV, reportable episodes of child abuse, child self‐injury, and other serious problems requiring psychiatric hospitalization than did participants in the Child Centered Therapy Group (3.65% vs. 41.25%).

6.3.3

## Outcome: Overall problems
Two trials examined overall (or total) problems among the full study sample, both using the Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL; Achenbach, ). One study reported between group changes immediately posttreatment (Lieberman et al., ) and the other reported total problem outcomes at 1‐ and 3‐month posttreatment (Satyanarayana et al., ). Table in Appendix C shows the effect sizes for each study that included overall problem outcomes. Findings were not pooled due to differences in (a) interventions; (b) comparison interventions (“comparator); and (c) timing of outcomes.
Lieberman et al. (2015) found that that participants in a CPP group had greater decreases in total behavioral problem scores at posttreatment than participants in a (CM) plus treatment as usual (TAU) in the community group (SMD = −0.56, 95% CI [−1.06 to −0.06]). Satyanarayana et al. ( ) found no significant differences in total problem behavior at 1‐ and 3‐months posttreatment between participants in the integrated cognitive behavioral intervention (ICBI) group and the TAU group.

6.3.4

## Outcome: Externalizing behavior
Five trials used the CBCL to examine externalizing behavior outcomes among the full study samples. One trial compared TF‐CBT with child‐centered therapy (CCT) and reported externalizing behavior immediately posttreatment only (Cohen et al., ). Two trials compared externalizing behavior immediately posttreatment and at 6 months posttreatment, one testing CPP versus CM plus individual therapy (Lieberman et al., ) and the other comparing a specific factors intervention versus a nonspecific factors intervention (Overbeek et al., ). The other two trials each compared an intensive services intervention versus an attention control condition immediately posttreatment, and at 4‐ and 8‐month follow‐ups, permitting meta‐analyses of findings across these two studies at each of these time points (Jouriles et al., ; Jouriles et al., ). Findings were not pooled for other studies because of variation in intervention types and comparators (some employed a control group whereas others were comparative effectiveness studies that compared two active interventions). In addition, one of the trials also reported three other externalizing measures, the Eyberg Child Behavior Inventory (ECBI; Eyberg & Ross, ) (immediately and at 12 months posttreatment), oppositional behavior as coded from observational data using a code developed by Hetherington and Clingempeel ( ) (immediately and at 16 months posttreatment), and the Psychopathy Screening Device (PSD; Frick, O'Brien, Wootton, & McBurnett, ) (immediately posttreatment only) (ECBI and observed oppositional behavior in Jouriles et al., ; PSD in McDonald, Jouriles, & Minze, ).
Table in Appendix C shows the standardized effect sizes for each of these studies as well as the three aforementioned pooled estimates. Two studies found no significant differences in externalizing behavior scores: (a) immediately posttreatment comparing participants in a TF‐CBT and CCT group (Cohen et al., ), and (b) immediately or at 6‐month follow‐up comparing those in a specific factors intervention and a nonspecific factors intervention (Overbeek et al., ). A third study found that participants in a CPP group had greater decreases in CBCL externalizing scores immediately posttreatment and also at 6‐month follow‐up than participants in a CM plus individual therapy group (Lieberman et al., ). For the two studies testing intensive services versus an attention control group, the first found no significant group differences in CBCL‐measured externalizing behaviors immediately posttreatment or at 4‐month follow‐up, but did find that participants in an intensive services group had greater decreases in externalizing behaviors at 8‐ and 24‐month follow‐ups than an attention control group (Jouriles et al., 2011); whereas the second trial found significant differences immediately posttreatment and at 8‐, 16‐, and 20‐month follow‐ups but not at 4‐ or 12‐month follow‐ups (Jouriles et al., ). Pooling the findings from the two studies together, the meta‐analyses demonstrated homogeneity in effects (I
2 = 0.00 in each instance). Participants in the intensive services group had greater decreases in CBCL externalizing behavior scores than attention control group participants immediately posttreatment (SMD = −0.54, 95% CI [−0.95 to −0.13], two studies, I
2 = 0.00; Figure ) and at 8‐month follow‐up (SMD = −0.74, 95% CI [−1.15 to −0.34], I2 = 0.00; Figure ) but not significantly so at 4‐month follow‐up (SMD = −0.16, 95% CI [−0.55 to 0.23], two studies, I
2 = 0.00; Figure ).

6.3.5

## Outcome: Internalizing behaviors
Three trials examined internalizing behavior among the full study samples. Two tested internalizing behaviors as assessed by the CBCL (one comparing an intensive services intervention vs. an attention control condition immediately posttreatment and at 4‐, 8‐, and 24‐month follow‐ups; Jouriles et al., ) and the other comparing a goal‐oriented intervention to an emotion‐focused intervention immediately posttreatment only (McWhirter, ), and the other trial used a visuographically emotional barometer to compare internalizing behavior between participants receiving a specific factors intervention compared with participants receiving a nonspecific factors intervention immediately posttreatment and at 6‐month follow‐up (Overbeek et al., ). Findings were not pooled because of variation in intervention types and comparators (one employed a control group whereas other two trials were comparative effectiveness studies that compared two active interventions).
Table in Appendix C shows the standardized effect sizes for each of these studies. No significant differences were found in internalizing behaviors compared between participants in the goal‐oriented intervention and emotion‐focused intervention groups immediately posttreatment (McWhirter, ) or between who received a specific factors intervention compared with participants who received a nonspecific factors intervention immediately posttreatment and at 6‐month follow‐up (Overbeek et al., ). The third study found that intensive services group participants had significantly greater decreases in internalizing behavior scores immediately posttreatment and at 8‐month follow‐up than attention control group participants, but no significant between group differences at the 4‐ or 24‐month follow‐ups (Jouriles et al., ).

6.3.6

## Outcome: Posttraumatic stress symptomatology
Two trials examined posttraumatic stress among the full study samples. One study tested PTSD scores on the Diagnostic Classification of Mental Health and Developmental Disorders of Infancy and Early Childhood (DC 0–3; Zero to Three: National Center for Clinical Infant Programs, ) immediately posttreatment between participants who received CPP and those who received CM plus individual therapy (Lieberman et al., ). The other study examined scores on the Trauma Symptom Checklist for Children (TSCC)/for Young Children (TSCYC; Briere, ) immediately and at 6‐month follow‐up and TSCYC scores at 6‐month follow‐up between participants in a specific factors intervention and those in a nonspecific factors intervention (Overbeek et al., ). Findings were not pooled because of variation in intervention types and comparators.
Table in Appendix C shows the standardized effect sizes for both of these studies. Participants in the CPP group had significantly greater decreases in posttraumatic stress symptomatology scores than those in the CM plus individual therapy group immediately posttreatment (Lieberman et al., ). The other study found no significant between‐group differences in TSCC scores immediately and at 6‐month follow‐up but did find that participants in the specific factors intervention had greater decreases in PTSD scores on the TSCYC at 6‐month follow‐up than those in the nonspecific factors intervention (Overbeek et al., ).

6.3.7

## Outcome: Other (anxiety, depression, cognitive ability, social relationships)
Three trials examined other child‐level outcomes among the full study samples. One study compared anxiety using the Screen for Child Anxiety Related Emotional Disorders (SCARED; Birmaher et al., ), a self‐report measure of non‐PTSD anxiety, cognitive ability using the Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test (KBIT; Kaufman & Kaufman, ), and depression using the Children's Depression Inventory (CDI; Kovacs, ) immediately posttreatment between participants who received TF‐CBT and those who received CCT (Cohen et al., ). Another trial compared depression using the CDI between participants receiving a specific factors intervention compared with participants receiving a nonspecific factors intervention immediately posttreatment and at 6‐month follow‐up (Overbeek et al., ). The third trial reported 24‐month follow‐up differences in mothers’ assessments of their child's happiness and social relationships using four items drawn from the Health Resources Inventory (Gesten, ) in participants who received an intensive services intervention versus those who received an attention control intervention (McDonald et al., , part of Jouriles et al., ). Findings were not pooled because of variation in intervention types, compartors or outcomes.
Table in Appendix C shows the standardized effect sizes for each of these studies. Immediately posttreatment, participants in the TF‐CBT group had significantly greater improvements in anxiety and cognitive ability scores than those in the CCT group, but depression scores did not significantly differ between these groups (Cohen et al., ). Depression scores immediately posttreatment and at 6‐month follow‐up also did not significantly differ between those in the specific factors intervention and those in the nonspecific factors intervention. The third study found no significant differences in child happiness/social relationships as reported by their mothers at 24‐month follow‐up between intensive services and attention control group participants (McDonald et al., , part of Jouriles et al., ).

6.3.8

## Subgroup analyses
6.3.8.1

## Age of participant
One study (McFarlane et al., ) examined whether the impact of a nurse CM intervention (compared to an inactive control group) differed between younger (ages 18 months to 5 years old) and older (ages 6–18 years old) children. Outcomes examined included total problem behavior, externalizing behavior, and internalizing behavior using the CBCL, measured at 6‐, 12‐, 18‐, and 24‐month follow‐up. As shown in Table in Appendix C, no significant differences were reported for any outcome within or between age groups at any of the follow‐up time points.

6.3.8.2

## Number of traumatic life events
One study (Ghosh Ippen, Harris, Van Horn, & Lieberman, ; part of Lieberman et al., ) focused on the comparative effectiveness of CPP versus a CM plus individual therapy intervention examined two subgroups: youth with four or more (“high risk”) and youth with less than four lifetime (“low risk”) lifetime exposures to traumatic and stressful life events. Total problem behaviors (CBCL scores) were reported immediately and at 6‐month posttreatment, and PTSD and depression (each measured using the DC 0–3) were reported immediately posttreatment only. As shown in Table in Appendix C, for each outcome, the CPP intervention was superior to the CM plus individual therapy intervention only among high risk, but not low risk, children.

6.3.9

## Metaregression
6.3.9.1

## Intervention recipient/modality
To answer our research question regarding whether the intervention recipient (“modality”) impacts efficacy or effectiveness of tested interventions, we intended to conduct a meta‐regression. We deemed this potentially possible for only one outcome, with five studies reporting changes in CBCL‐measured externalizing behaviors immediately postintervention. As shown in Table in Appendix C, two studies targeted families together—with the dyad as the unit of treatment, two studies targeted the nonoffending parent only (in both studies, the child's mother), and one study examined outcomes of an intervention delivered concurrently but separately to the nonoffending parent and child. Upon evaluation of our data, however, we did not believe it was appropriate to conduct a formal quantitative meta‐regression because of heterogeneity in study characteristics such as the nature of the comparators. For example, the interventions targeting the nonoffending parent both compared an intervention to an attention control, whereas the other three interventions each had an active comparator. Instead, we present here the pooled findings of the studies grouped by the targets of the intervention (e.g., families together, nonoffending parent only, and nonoffending parent separately from child), we found that studies targeting the nonoffending parent (mother) had the highest pooled effect size (SMD = −0.38, 95% CI [−0.62 to −0.14], p < .01), followed by those that targeted the family together (SMD = −0.25, 95% CI [−0.53 to 0.04], p = ns) and, finally, the single study that targeted parent and child, separately (SMD = −0.08, 95% CI [−0.45 to 0.26], p = ns). Upon further inspection of the nature of the comparators, however, we determined that the interventions targeting the nonoffending parent (mother) both compared the intervention to an attention control, whereas the other three interventions (which targeted parents together and nonoffending and child separately) each had an active comparator. It is not unsurprising that efficacy studies would have larger effect sizes than comparative effectiveness studies, where both group participants receive an active intervention. Thus, these findings should be interpreted with great caution.

6.3.9.2

## Setting
Another research question sought to determine whether the setting of the intervention impacted the efficacy or effectiveness of the tested interventions. Like modality described in the prior section, we had intended to conduct another meta‐regression for the five studies that reported changes in CBCL‐measured externalizing behaviors immediately postintervention, but, again, heterogeneity in study characteristics precluded us doing this quantitively. Instead, we present the pooled findings of the studies grouped by settings of the intervention. As shown in Table , Appendix C, two interventions were delivered family home and the other three were delivered an outpatient clinical setting. Pooled findings indicated that studies conducted in the home had a moderately significant pooled effect size (SMD = −0.38, 95% CI [−0.62 to −0.14], p < .01), and the effect size of studies conducted in an outpatient setting did not reach statistical significance (SMD = −0.25, 95% CI [−0.53 to 0.04], p = ns).
These findings should be interpreted with great caution because of heterogeneity in study characteristics (e.g., nature of the comparators). The interventions conducted in the home setting were efficacy studies, whereas the interventions conducted in outpatient settings each employed an active control group. Again, it is expected that efficacy studies would have larger effect sizes than effectiveness studies.

6.3.10

## Publication bias analysis
We conducted analyses to determine whether the included studies adequately represent the whole population of completed studies, and not just those that have been published in the literature. There is evidence that studies reporting larger effect sizes are more likely to get published than those showing small or no effects of a tested intervention (Rothstein, Sutton, & Borenstein, ). To examine the potential for publication bias, we constructed a funnel plot that illustrates the effect sizes by standard errors of the effects. We chose to examine publication bias for the studies that tested externalizing outcomes, which was the outcome most widely reported by the studies included in our meta‐analysis. As illustrated in Figure in Appendix C, the funnel plot does not illustrate evidence of publication bias, with the effect sizes (standardized difference in means) plotted against the standard errors indicating a normally distributed, symmetrical distribution of points under the funnel. Individual study points are distributed around the main effect, with all points falling under the funnel. However, since the evaluation of funnel plots can be subjective, we conducted additional statistical measures of publication bias, specifically, Duval and Tweedie's trim‐and‐fill analysis. This additional analysis did not suggest trimming any studies. We note that because these analyses of studies included in our review are only from published studies, however, we cannot be certain that no publication bias exists.

6.4

## Sensitivity analysis
Since the present meta‐analysis involved a wide range of decisions, we conducted sensitivity analysis to test the robustness of these decisions (Higgins & Green, ). Specifically, we ran sensitivity analysis for the pre‐post correlations (i.e., covariance) assumed to be .70. We re‐ran the analysis using a correlation equal to 0.50. As expected there was no change in the effect sizes and no relevant difference in standard errors.

7

## DISCUSSION
7.1

## Summary of main results
The objective of this review was to synthesize the evidence on the impact of psychosocial interventions on well‐being among children exposed to IPV. We also sought to examine whether impact was related to intervention modality (e.g., individual, family‐based) or setting (e.g., home, outpatient clinic).
Below we discuss the main findings from our systematic review and meta‐analysis. When applicable, we also discuss, qualitatively, findings from key studies ultimately excluded due to high risk of bias.
Although studies were searched from the earliest search date available to April 2018, the first study that met inclusion criteria was published in 2001, with half of the primary study papers published since 2011. We identified eight RCTs, with a total of 924 participants, reporting results on the impact of a range of interventions designed to promote well‐being among children exposed to IPV. However, the great clinical and methodological variability of included studies largely precluded pooling of trials. Specifically, there was a high degree of heterogeneity regarding differences in interventions employed, comparators (some studies employed a control group whereas others were comparative effectiveness studies that examined two active interventions), outcomes examined, and timing of outcomes (i.e., length of follow‐up period). Therefore, it is unclear the extent to which psychosocial interventions promote well‐being among children exposed to IPV, and under what circumstances, such as the modality and setting. Of note, only one study reported tracking adverse events. This is surprising, given the high‐risk nature of study populations and the established finding that IPV tends to co‐occur with child maltreatment and other risk behaviors such as substance use (e.g., Chan, 2011; Dube, Anda, Felitti, Edwards, & Williamson, ).
7.1.1

## Externalizing behavior
We were only able to pool results from two studies, both of which examined the impact of Project Support (intensive services intervention focused on parent training and emotional support) compared to an attention control on child externalizing behavior—among youth referred for clinical levels of conduct problems. This meta‐analysis found that participants reported greater decreases in their child's externalizing behavior immediately posttreatment and at an 8‐month follow‐up, but not at a 4‐month follow‐up. One of these pooled studies (Jouriles et al., ) also found decreases in internalizing behavior in the Project Support group (compared to the attention control) immediately posttreatment and at the 8‐month follow‐up, but not at the 4‐ or 24‐month follow‐up. Mixed results regarding impacts on externalizing behaviors were found in comparative effectiveness trials, with only one of three trials finding significant group differences.

7.1.2

## Other outcomes
We could not pool trials examining other outcomes due to the great heterogeneity mentioned above. Only one study examined impacts on non‐posttraumatic stress anxiety and cognitive ability, finding greater positive impacts for a TF‐CBT group compared to a CTT group (Cohen et al., ). Qualitatively, there are mixed findings regarding intervention impacts on internalizing behaviors and posttraumatic stress symptomatology, perhaps due to the variability in the types of participants included across trials. For example, Ghosh Ippen et al. ( , part of Lieberman et al., ) found that CPP was more efficacious than CM and individual therapy in reducing posttraumatic stress symptomatology and depression for high risk (higher number of exposures to traumatic life events) but not low risk (lower number of exposures to traumatic life events) children. This finding is consistent with two studies that were ultimately excluded due to high risk of bias. First, Foshee et al. ( ) found that a mother‐child self‐directed intervention (mailed booklets of dating abuse prevention information and interactive activities) was effective in reducing dating violence victimization for adolescents with higher, but not lower, levels of exposure to domestic violence. Second, Pernebo et al. ( ) found that compared to a group psychoeducational intervention, a group psychotherapeutic intervention (parallel groups children and parents) for was effective at reducing child mental health problems, particularly for those children with higher levels of pretreatment trauma symptomatology.

7.1.3

## Modality
With regard to modality, pooled findings indicate that studies targeting the nonoffending parent (mother) had the highest pooled effect size (SMD = −0.38, 95% CI [−0.62 to −0.14], p < .01), followed by those that targeted the family together (SMD = −0.25, 95% CI [−0.53 to 0.04], p = ns) and, finally, the single study that targeted parent and child, separately (SMD = −0.08, 95% CI [−0.45 to 0.26], p = ns). These findings should be interpreted, however, with great caution because of heterogeneity in study characteristics such as the nature of the comparators. For example, the two interventions targeting the nonoffending parent both compared an intervention to an attention control, whereas the other three interventions each had an active comparator.
Interestingly, no studies removed due to high risk of bias evaluated interventions delivered to the parent only. Most studies removed due to risk of bias evaluated family‐based interventions in which parent‐child pairs received separate but parallel (Graham‐Bermann et al., ; Graham‐Bermann, Miller‐Graff, Howell, & Grogan‐Kaylor, ; Pernebo et al., ; Sullivan, Bybee, & Allen, ) or joint (Foshee et al., ; Waldman‐Levi & Weintraub, ; Smith, Belton, Barnard, Fisher, & Taylor, ) programming. Three additional studies evaluated interventions delivered to children only (Kot, ; Smith & Landreth, ; Tyndall‐Lind, Landreth, & Giordano, ; Wagar & Rodway, ). It is unclear whether this is chance, speaks to broader challenges with minimizing selection bias with parent‐child programming, challenges with evaluating an active comparator (versus an attention control, as was used in the two pooled studies examining parent‐only interventions), or some other factor entirely. Importantly, the broader literature as well as excluded studies point to the potential value of family‐based treatment. For example, Graham‐Bermann et al. ( ) found that a child‐plus‐mother intervention (Kids’ Club and MEP) was more effective at reducing children's externalizing and internalizing behavior problems compared to a child‐only intervention (Kids’ Club) and a no‐treatment control.

7.1.4

## Setting
With regard to setting, pooled findings indicated that studies conducted in the home had a larger (and significant) pooled effect size (SMD = −0.38, 95% CI [−0.62 to −0.14], p < .01) as compared with those conducted in an outpatient setting (SMD = −0.25, 95% CI [−0.53 to 0.04], p = ns). Like the findings focused on modality, these findings focused on setting differences should be interpreted with great caution because of heterogeneity in study characteristics (e.g., nature of the comparators). The interventions conducted in the home setting were efficacy studies, whereas the interventions conducted in outpatient settings each employed an active control group. It is expected that efficacy studies would have larger effect sizes than effectiveness studies.
Given the inconclusive findings from our review, below we discuss three general conclusions and provide recommendations for future research to build the evidence base.
First, the evidence base remains underdeveloped and characterized by some breadth at the sake of depth. This breath became evident during our full‐text review and systematic application of inclusion and exclusion criteria. For example:
Sixty reports were excluded because they did not meet study design requirements as specified in the protocol. Twenty‐three of these articles provided a program description or presented qualitative data only, and another 37 were excluded because they did not include a comparison group. This suggests there is great interest in developing, describing, and evaluating programs for children exposed to IPV. Several recent observational studies show promise and warrant more rigorous evaluation (e.g., Herschell et al., ; Lacasa et al., ), as do practice‐based programs described by many of the excluded qualitative reports. Practice‐based programs (or those developed in the field and not in the “ivory tower”) have the advantage of uptake in practice and some degree of demonstrated acceptability by interventionists and the contexts (e.g., shelters) in which they are implemented. Funding opportunities that require partnership between researchers and practitioners may help advance the evidence‐based on practice‐based programs. Such calls for rigorous evaluation of practice‐based programs have been made in the field of violence prevention (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, ).
Twenty reports were excluded because they did not present child‐level outcomes. Studies excluded for this reason met other study design requirements (e.g., RCT or quasiexperimental design with a comparison group), but typically examined outcomes at the level of the victimized parent. A recent meta‐analysis examining the effectiveness of interventions to promote well‐being among survivors of IPV found that short‐term interventions (typically cognitive‐behavioral in nature) were effective in reducing PTSD symptomatology, depression and general distress, and increasing self‐esteem and general life functioning—particularly in studies that employed a control group (Arroyo, Lundahl, Butters, Vanderloo, & Wood, ). Given the large literature demonstrating the negative impact of parent psychopathology on child functioning (e.g., Cummings & Davies, ), addition of child‐level measures to parent‐focused evaluations would be a contribution to the evidence base and with relatively minimal resources.

Similar to Howarth et al. ( ), we suggest a “pause” in the development of new psychosocial interventions unless they address a clear gap in service delivery that cannot be addressed by adapting components of existing theoretically driven programs. For example, Herschell et al. ( ) conducted a feasibility trial of PCIT in a domestic violence shelter; although results indicated that PCIT had a positive impact on child behavior and mental health symptomatology, only 42% of families completed the full course of treatment. These results suggest that PCIT holds promise, but likely needs to be adapted from the standard protocol (weekly, 1‐hr sessions) to meet the needs of families in a shelter setting. Similarly, as noted earlier, we found very few replication studies—our meta‐analyses of externalizing outcomes were in fact limited to a single replication study conducted by the same team as the original study (Jouriles et al., , ). Paired with the fact that four (50%) studies in our review had fewer than 100 total participants, well‐powered replication studies conducted by independent research teams will undoubtedly help move the field forward.
Second, although 19 independent studies met our full‐text review inclusion criteria, 11 of these studies were ultimately excluded due to high risk of bias. Our decision to examine only studies assessed to be at low or moderate risk of bias was conservative, built from the concerns expressed by authors of prior reviews (e.g., Hackett et al., ; Howarth et al., ; Rizo et al., 2011) that conclusions around “what works” have been drawn from a literature dominated by studies with methodological limitations. Trials evaluating the widely disseminated Kids’ Club, Pre Kids’ Club and MEP (Graham‐Bermann et al., , ; Howell, Miller, Lilly, & Graham‐Bermann, ; Miller, Howell, Hunter, & Graham‐Bermann, ) were ultimately removed due to high selection bias (also coded as high risk of bias in Howarth et al., ). Given these programs are theory‐driven, rated as “promising” by the California Evidence‐Based Clearinghouse for Child Welfare (CEBC; 2016) and have demonstrated uptake the field, including internationally (used in Sweden and Canada; CEBC, 2016), we recommend that these programs undergo rigorous evaluation by independent research teams.
Third, consistent with the larger literature (Latzman et al., ) included studies generally failed to acknowledge the varied ways in which children come to know about their parent's IPV victimization (exposure) or consider the full range of the types of IPV to which children can be exposed. Most studies inferred exposure from either the mother's report of her own victimization or child residence in a domestic violence shelter. As noted by Latzman et al. ( ), a growing body of research indicates that the type of exposure may be a key element helping to explain differential outcomes, with children most negatively impacted when they are directly involved in the violence (e.g., Jarvis, Gordon, & Novaco, ; Jouriles, Rosenfield, McDonald, & Mueller, ). Similarly, most included studies—if the type of IPV was explicated—focused on mother's report of physical IPV victimization, or physical or sexual/psychological IPV victimization. Only one study (Satyanarayana et al., ) included fathers who reported physical, psychological, and/or sexual IPV perpetration. Thus, the scope of this review is ultimately narrower than the title implies; this review speaks to the impact of interventions on well‐being among children whose mother reported physical (and possibly, sexual, or psychological) IPV victimization. Future research should consider assessing the full range of ways in which children are exposed (direct involvement, direct eyewitness, indirect exposure) to multiple types of IPV (physical, sexual, and psychological aggression, and stalking).

7.2

## Overall completeness and applicability of evidence
The majority of evidence included in this review was generated in the last 10–15 years. Most studies were conducted in the United States, with one study each from the Netherlands and India. Thus, findings from our review are only applicable to these countries and additional evidence from outside of the United States is needed to better inform practice and policy in international contexts.

7.3

## Quality of the evidence
As noted, we only included studies in this review that were rated to have a low or moderate risk of bias—with only one study assessed as having a low risk of bias. All included studies evidenced limited to no selection, attrition or reporting bias. Detection bias was rated as either “low” or “unclear” for all included studies.

7.4

## Limitations and potential biases in the review process
Our search as limited to 10 electronic databases and scans of relevant review articles. Thus, it is possible that we may have missed studies. As noted, 50% of the included studies reported results based on samples with <100 participants. The small samples sizes could impose limitations on the ability to detect effects of interventions.

7.5

## Agreements and disagreements with other studies or reviews
The review that most closely matches with the present review is that of Howarth et al. ( ), who conducted a mixed‐methods review of findings from studies that tested interventions to improve outcomes for children exposed to domestic violence and abuse published up through April 2013. The authors concluded that the evidence base, even from this comprehensive examination of evidence, lacked empirical data testing the clinical effectiveness, cost effectiveness, and acceptability of these interventions. Our review is an advancement on this work, including five more years of published literature and providing information on the most internally valid studies available. Nonetheless, the evidence base appears to have made limited advancements over the last five years, with our conclusions consistent with that of Howarth et al. ( ): more rigorous evaluations need to be conducted in order to draw conclusions. We also suggest that in addition to increased rigor in evaluation design, researchers assess the nature of child exposure and the multiple subtypes of IPV to which children can be exposed.

8

## AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS
8.1

## Implications for practice and policy
The findings from this systematic review indicate that it is largely unclear the extent to which psychosocial interventions promote well‐being among children exposed to IPV, and under what circumstances.

8.2

## Implications for research
The main research need that emerges from this review is more rigorous evaluation (e.g., RCTs or quasiexperimental trials with strong internal validity) of psychosocial interventions to promote well‐being among children exposed to IPV. There are simply too few comparable studies (i.e., in interventions, comparators, outcomes) conducted to draw conclusions at this point in time.
Given the inconclusive findings from our review, below we outline three general conclusions and recommendations for future research to build the evidence base.
First, the evidence base remains underdeveloped and characterized by some breadth at the sake of depth. This breath became evident during our full‐text review and systematic application of inclusion and exclusion criteria. For example:
Twenty‐three reports provided a program description or presented qualitative data only, and another 37 evaluated programs but failed to include a comparison group. This suggests there is great interest in developing, describing, and evaluating programs for children exposed to IPV. Several recent observational studies show promise and warrant more rigorous evaluation (e.g., Herschell et al., , Lacasa et al., ).
Twenty reports were excluded because they did not present child‐level outcomes. Studies excluded for this reason typically examined outcomes at the level of the victimized parent. Given the large literature demonstrating the negative impact of parental psychopathology on child functioning (e.g., Cummings & Davies, ), addition of child‐level measures to parent‐focused evaluations would be a contribution to the evidence base and with relatively minimal resources.
We found very few replication studies—our meta‐analyses of externalizing outcomes were in fact limited to a single replication study conducted by the same team as the original study (Jouriles et al., , ). Paired with the fact that half of the studies in our review had fewer than 100 total participants, well‐powered replication studies conducted by independent research teams will undoubtedly help move the field forward.

Second, although 19 independent studies met our full‐text review inclusion criteria, 11 of these studies were ultimately excluded due to high risk of bias. Again, this highlights the breadth of programming, but unfortunately, lack of internal validity of a large proportion of existing work. We recommend—particularly for programs with uptake in the field (e.g., Kids' Club, Pre Kids' Club and MEP)—more rigorous evaluation by independent research teams. It is particularly important for researchers to design studies that minimize biases in sample definition and selection.
Third, consistent with the larger literature (Latzman et al., ) included studies generally failed to acknowledge the varied ways in which children come to know about their parent's IPV victimization (exposure) or consider the full range of the types of IPV to which children can be exposed. Future research should consider assessing the full range of ways in which children are exposed (direct involvement, direct eyewitness, indirect exposure) to multiple types of IPV (physical, sexual, and psychological aggression, and stalking).

## INFORMATION ABOUT THIS REVIEW

## REVIEW AUTHORS

Lead review author: The lead author is the person who develops and co‐ordinates the review team, discusses and assigns roles for individual members of the review team, liaises with the editorial base and takes responsibility for the on‐going updates of the review.

## ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Content: N. E. L. and C. C. Systematic review methods: N. E. L. and V. L. F.‐H. Statistical analysis: N. E. L. and V. L. F.‐H. Information retrieval: N. L., J. B., V. L. F.‐H.
The team was led by N. E. L., who has substantive expertize in violence and victimization, child and adolescent mental health, and evaluation research. She led the project, including development of the protocol, overseeing literature retrieval, participating in analysis, and leading the development of the final paper. She was supported by C. C., an expert in IPV and child maltreatment, who contributed to coding, synthesis and report writing; J. B., a social science analyst, who contributed to information retrieval, database management, citation screening and coding; and V. L. F.‐H., an expert in review methodology and statistical analysis, who provided input on all stages of the review process and conducted analyses.

## SOURCES OF SUPPORT
We received funding under the Jacobs Foundation (in partnership with the Campbell Collaboration) call for proposals, Better Evidence for Children and Youth.

## DECLARATIONS OF INTEREST
None of the researchers involved in the team present conflicts of interest to note.

## PLANS FOR UPDATING THE REVIEW
The lead reviewer anticipates updating the review on a 5‐year cycle, pending continued research on the topic.

1Hereafter “children” is used to refer to children and adolescents aged 0–17 years.
 APPENDIX A

## CODING FORMS

APPENDIX B

## RISK OF BIAS ASSESSMENT
 APPENDIX C

## DESCRIPTIVE TABLES
 APPENDIX D

## RESULTS—TABLES AND FIGURES