pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLoS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC8631635PMC8631635.1863163586316353484715810.1371/journal.pone.0260224PONE-D-21-173441Research ArticleSocial SciencesSociologyEducationSchoolsMedicine and Health SciencesMental Health and PsychiatryMood DisordersDepressionMedicine and Health SciencesMental Health and PsychiatryPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsAge GroupsChildrenAdolescentsPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsFamiliesChildrenAdolescentsBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyBehaviorRecreationGamesSocial SciencesPsychologyBehaviorRecreationGamesPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsProfessionsTeachersBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyLearningHuman LearningBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyLearningHuman LearningSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyLearningHuman LearningBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceLearning and MemoryLearningHuman LearningMedicine and Health SciencesHealth CareHealth Education and AwarenessFeasibility of a serious game coupled with a contact-based session led by lived experience workers for depression prevention in high-school students
Serious game coupled with a contact-based session led by lived experience workers for depression preventionhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-8851-7535GijzenMandyConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing RasingSanneConceptualizationFunding acquisitionMethodologyProject administrationSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing van den BoogaartRianInvestigationProject administrationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9550-6730RongenWendyData curationInvestigationProject administrationWriting – review & editing van der SteenTwanWriting – review & editing CreemersDaanFunding acquisitionSupervisionWriting – review & editing EngelsRutgerFunding acquisitionSupervisionWriting – review & editing SmitFilipConceptualizationFunding acquisitionMethodologySupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Trimbos Institute (Netherlands Institute of Mental Health and Addiction), Utrecht, The Netherlands2
GGZ Oost Brabant, Boekel, The Netherlands3
Erasmus School of Social and Behavioural Sciences, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands4
Anxiety, Compulsion & Phobia Foundation; National Patient Organization, Driebergen-Rijsenburg, The Netherlands5
Behavioral Science Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands6
Department of Clinical, Neuro and Developmental Psychology and Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Amsterdam University Medical Center, Location VUmc, Amsterdam, The NetherlandsMordauntDylan AEditor . Qualitative data: excerpts are within the paper.

## Data Availability
Data regarding the game Moving Stories have been added as . Qualitative data: excerpts are within the paper.

## Introduction
Adolescence is a critical period in developing affective disorders such as major depression [ ]. Both depressive symptoms and depressive disorder are associated with a range of psychosocial difficulties first during adolescence such as lower educational attainment, social withdrawal, low self-esteem, possibly even suicidal thoughts and behaviors, and later in adulthood unemployment, financial debt, poorer marital and social functioning, and recurrence of depressive episodes [ ]. Considering, the adverse impacts of depression, early recognition and preventive strategies are needed. Preventive strategies within the school setting have potential to reach most adolescents.
It is important that preventive programs for adolescents are embedded in a multimodal integrated stepped-care program for early detection and prevention of depression coupled with pathways to professional help. Indicated preventive strategies, that are aimed at adolescents with elevated depressive symptoms, were shown to have the largest effect sizes in depression [ – ]. However, universal preventive strategies, that target all adolescents regardless of risk or symptom level, have the added benefit that they reach most adolescents, may lower barriers related to receiving professional treatment and might be less stigmatizing [ ]. A growing body of evidence suggests that integrating universal and indicated prevention in sequential stepped-care approaches with screening and monitoring of outcomes are most effective [ – ].
One of these multimodal prevention programs is the Strong Teens and Resilient Minds (STORM) program [ , ]. In the first iterations of STORM, screening was followed by an indicated CBT-based preventive program and was found to be effective in several RCTs [ – ]. Currently, the STORM program consists of four components: screening, gatekeepers’ training of teachers, sequentially followed by universal and indicated preventive interventions that are coupled with pathways to professional mental healthcare. This iteration of the STORM program is currently being evaluated for effectiveness in an RCT [ ]. It is worth noting that the gatekeepers’ training, screening and indicated prevention program have been evaluated elsewhere and were found to be effective and feasible for future implementation [ – ]. The universal preventive strategy, Moving Stories, added to the latest iteration of the STORM program has not been evaluated for feasibility. Moving Stories in itself was evaluated for effectiveness in a randomized trial and was found to reduce adolescents’ personal stigma, and while symptom recognition (a component of mental health literacy) was also improved this effect was not significant compared to a control group [ ]. Therefore, it is now important to determine whether Moving Stories can be successfully integrated and implemented as a new component within the STORM program.
The Moving Stories intervention was based on teen Mental Health First Aid (MHFA), an educational stigma intervention that was developed to improve mental health awareness [ ]. The teen MHFA program was found to improve mental health awareness in adolescents, inspired confidence to support a peer with mental health difficulties, and increased personal help-seeking intentions, while reducing stigmatising attitudes [ ]. This is important because depressive symptoms and suicidal behaviors are associated with decreased help-seeking due to fear of stigma and low mental health literacy [ – ].
A recent review concluded that adding direct social contact with a person with lived experience of mental health issues to educational stigma interventions was most effective in reducing mental-health-related stigma [ ]. Another meta-analysis concluded that education alone and direct contact interventions were both effective in lowering stigma toward people with mental illness, but education was favored among adolescents [ ]. Therefore, Moving Stories was based in both approaches: education as well as direct-contact with a lived experience worker.
Even if the reach of adolescents in schools can be large, the acceptability and uptake of universal preventive interventions could be further enhanced through use of gaming and smartphones. Over 90% of Dutch adolescents of age of 12 years and older own a smartphone [ ]. Additionally, a study in the USA showed the importance of video games considering that 97% of their participants, aged 12–17, played video games [ ]. A meta-analysis showed that using serious games for health promotion can lead to small, albeit positive effects in healthy life-style behavior [ ]. Therefore, Moving Stories was designed as a serious game to be played by high-school students followed by a debriefing session led by lived experience workers.
In addition to the evaluation of effectiveness, it is also important to assess, and possibly improve, the feasibility of interventions for future scale-up. This requires the formulation of a well-tested implementation strategy that took into consideration the lessons learned from the intervention’s implementation during the STORM trial. These lessons learned may guide future role-out of Moving Stories embedded in the STORM program. Acceptability of screening, gatekeepers’ training and indicated CBT-programs have been reviewed previously as mentioned earlier [ – ]. Therefore, the primary aim of the current study was to assess the feasibility of implementing Moving Stories as a universal preventive intervention within the STORM program as this intervention was newly added within the STORM approach. More specifically, during the STORM trial we aimed to record (1) the number and percentage of high-school students that actively played Moving Stories (coverage rate), (2) the average number of playing days out of the five (participation rate), (3) how successful LEWs were in reviewing all five mental health first aid (MHFA) strategies during the debriefing sessions and to what extend students could identify depressive symptoms (fidelity), (4) what other themes were addressed and resonated with the students during the debriefing sessions, and how the students responded to the personal experiences of the LEWs. Finally, implementation costs were computed including the costs of recruiting and training LEWs for leading the debriefing sessions to see if money was spent wisely or requires reallocation. As recommended by Oakley et al. [ ], assessing the feasibility of an intervention is performed before the effectiveness data of the STORM trial are analyzed.

## Materials and methods

## Participants and procedure
In the context of the STORM trial, the program of Moving Stories was implemented in two consecutive study years, namely 2017–2018 and 2018–2019. In the Netherlands the study year generally starts around September and concludes around July. Moving Stories was offered from January to May in each study year. Fifteen high schools participate within the STORM trial, of which seven were randomly assigned to the experimental condition. Moving Stories was only offered at schools in the experimental condition.
Nearly one thousand (N = 982) eight grade high-school students across seven schools in the Southeast of the province North-Brabant participated in Moving Stories. Data from the STORM trial indicated that 11–13% of these eight grade students were screen positive for depressive symptoms as measured by the Children’s Depression Inventory 2, and 5–6% of them were screen positive on suicidal thoughts or behaviors.
Inclusion criteria were that they had to be enrolled in their second year of high school (i.e. 8th grade in the US) and were sufficiently fluent in the Dutch language to participate in classroom sessions (which were in Dutch). During their second year of high school most student in The Netherlands are 13–14 years of age. However, there are few exceptions and we did not want to exclude any students. Therefore, a wide age range of 11–15 years was used for inclusion.

## Intervention: Moving Stories
Moving Stories is intended to increase recognition of depression in self and peers, decrease stigma about depression and to promote help seeking behaviours. The intervention consists of a combination of a serious game and contact-based learning, comprising an introductory face-to-face lesson led by a researcher, single player game-app and a debriefing session led by a Lived Experience Worker (LEW) with experience of depression. The app Moving Stories was made available on the Apple App Store and Google Play app on 6 October, 2017 in both English and Dutch.
During the introductory lesson a researcher would explain to students how to download the app, what was expected of them and provided log-in codes. These sessions were delivered during a regular school class in a structured manner using a ready-to-use PowerPoint presentation to ensure every student received similar instructions. The aim of the game, as described to students, is that they will enter a virtual home where they will find a girl, Lisa, who is not feeling well. Students are asked to see if they can be of any help to Lisa. The term depression is not used during this introductory session. Although the game is played individually, the students are encouraged to help each other in identifying strategies that could be of any help to Lisa. Students were instructed to download the app during this introductory classroom session. After downloading the app, participants had to enter a passcode in order to receive access to the full app to ensure only adolescents from participating schools could actively use the app. As such, only participants that were enrolled in their second year of high school could participate.
Students then go on to play the game app for 10–15 minutes in the morning, between 7AM and 11AM, for 5 days. Students only had access to the app during the five days that they were asked to play, while they could still open the app students could no longer perform any actions or start over after the five playing days of their class was over. Students play the game individually, but simultaneous with their classmates and they are expected to do this in their own time. Schools did not provide the students with time to complete the game during school hours. In the game students learn to interact with a virtual girl, Lisa, suffering from depressive symptoms. The students perform actions in the game (over 5 days) which consist of household tasks and/or offering Lisa help, and have the ability to talk to Lisa in a structured manner using preprogrammed options conversation). The aim is that they learn effective strategies when helping someone with depressive symptoms or to become more able to seek help for themselves. Students were prompted to play the game as reminders from the app would pop-up when Lisa’s house would open (7AM) and an hour before the house would close (10AM). As with any mobile app, students had the ability to turn of pop-ups from the app. Feedback is provided each day by gaining or losing points indicating a relationship score indicating the quality of the relationship with Lisa based on the action they did in the game. In addition, they receive written text messages from Lisa telling the students how Lisa felt about each action they performed. In this way, students knew why they had gained or lost points. These messages were sent after school hours, from 3PM until 7PM.
After approximately seven days, students are brought back together again for the debriefing session. This debriefing session is an in-person classroom session lead by the LEW during a regular school class which are between 40 and 50 minutes long depending on the school. The LEW was aware of the length of each sessions beforehand. The LEW talks about his or her personal experience (approximately 10 minutes) and relates these personal experiences with depression to the game, which is then related to the students’ experiences with the game. The LEWs are required to discuss the five first aid strategies from the teen Mental Health First Aid (MHFA): (1) look for warning signs, (2) ask how their friend or peer is doing, (3) listen without judgement, (4) help them connect with an adult, and (5) your friendship is important [ ]. The five strategies are reviewed and wrapped up as take-home messages for the students during the debriefing sessions. For this the LEWs can choose to use the PowerPoint slides that were made available to them during their training. In the PowerPoint slides show some example questions to launch discussions about the five aid strategies, but the LEWs were free to use these slides and adapt it to their personal preference as long as the five strategies are discussed. Moreover, the structure of the debriefing session was deliberately left open so LEWs could adapt it to their personal preference and make impromptu responses to the themes brought up by the students.
In the current trial, a teacher trained as gatekeeper and a researcher were always present during both classroom sessions. However, for future implementation only a teacher would need to be present, but there is no need for an additional researcher to be present as well. A teacher could take over the role of the researcher in the first introductory classroom session. Teachers’ presence is needed for the debriefing classroom session with the LEW as they are familiar with the students in the class and to ensure the LEW can focus on debriefing rather than keeping order in the classroom. Also, the teacher, trained as gatekeeper, will be able to guide students towards school mental health professionals. Further details about the content of Moving Stories and its development are described extensively elsewhere [ ].

## Recruitment and training of lived experience workers
The LEW were recruited via a post on the Facebook page of the Trimbos Institute (Netherlands Institute of Mental Health and Addiction) and GGZ Oost Brabant (Mental Health Service). Additionally, we contacted several lived experience organizations. Requirements were that the LEW had some prior lived experience with depression. LEWs were informed during the recruitment process that they were required to tell their personal story to students in their second year of high school and that they would need to complete a training beforehand. Any LEW that applied was invited to participate in the training (n = 37).
The LEWs first had to complete an 8 hr training. This training for LEWs was designed by the authors, and a researcher who is also a LEW and was an experienced trainer. The training sessions were provided by these researchers as well. At the start of the training, participants were asked to play the serious game to fully understand what the students have done prior to their debriefing session.
The training itself consisted of a theoretical part and a practical part. During the theoretical part (3hrs) the LEWs learned more about the STORM program, its delivery and the goals of the Moving Stories intervention, and what their role was in the Moving Stories intervention. In the practical training (5hrs), the LEWs had the opportunity to practice telling their personal story in 10–15 minutes, and introducing the five MHFA strategies. The discussion of the five strategies from the MHFA was the most important component of the debriefing session and the LEWs were required to discuss all five strategies. Additionally, LEWs had to prepare themselves for questions that students might ask regarding their experiences, difficult topics (such as students having suicidal thoughts) and the game.
The LEW were provided with training materials (PowerPoints used during the training session) and a PowerPoint that they were free to use or adapt to their liking for the debriefing session. This PowerPoint consisted of a few example questions that the LEW could ask students as well as a slide with the five strategies from the MHFA.
The training sessions took place from September to December in both years indicating a time lapse of one to six months between training and the debriefing session. In the meantime the LEWs were updated on planning by the researchers via email and WhatsApp, but any other contact between the researchers and LEWs was minimal during the training and debriefing sessions. By design, LEWs always led the debriefing sessions in the presence of a gate keeper-trained teacher and a researcher, with the researcher taking notes.

## Data collection
Data was collected during the STORM trial. The medical ethics committee (Commissie Mensgebonden Onderzoek Region Arnhem-Nijmegen) in The Netherlands approved this study (NL61599.091.17). Informed consent from adolescents and their parents was obtained for the STORM trial. During the second trial year participation in Moving Stories was allowed on voluntary basis for students not participating in the STORM trial. At all times, students were informed that a researcher would be present during the debriefing sessions who might take anonymous notes.
Data that were collected are 1) data on preparing the delivery of Moving Stories, 2) quantitative data of offering Moving Stories, see Supplemental Materials, and 3) qualitative data on offering Moving Stories.
The data on preparing the delivery of Moving Stories included number of LEWs recruited and trained (and ensuing costs), number of trainings needed for classroom sessions, number of classroom sessions, and number of trained LEWs versus LEWs that actually provided debriefing session.
The quantitative data of offering Moving Stories included app usage data of the game and costs associated with debriefing sessions. App usage data was collected, anonymously, through a secure website. Data that were recorded include number of downloads, days played per student, and number of students playing each day. The app only collects fully anonymous data; players could not be identified as researchers were fully unaware of the identity of participating students and received only aggregated data.
In total, 49 debriefing sessions were provided by 11 LEWs. Notes were taken of 18 debriefing sessions to record what the LEW and students discussed during the debriefing sessions: 8 during study year of 2017–2018 and 10 during 2018–2019 with at least one debriefing session per school (see ). These notes were kept by four researchers to ensure that topics noted were not the results of reporter bias.
 

## Data analysis
Descriptive statistics such as means and standard deviations were computed in SPSS Version 27 [ ]. With regards to the qualitative data from the notes, first we checked in how many debriefing sessions the required five aid strategies were discussed by the LEW. Additionally, we checked whether common themes arose across the different debriefing sessions. These themes were not pre-determined as there was no specific theme the LEW had to discuss with regard to their personal experiences or depressive symptoms in general. Instead, they were free to discuss several aspects of both the game and their personal experience with depressive symptoms and were encouraged to interactively tailor the session to the interests expressed by the students. Discussed topics were considered a theme if a topic occurred in at least two of the recorded notes. A researcher read and coded all notes using MAXQDA 2020 Version 2.4.0 [ ]. Quotes representative for themes were then exported into Excel.

## Results

## Preparing moving stories
A total of 37 LEWs were trained divided over seven training sessions consisting of 6 participants on average. Overall, a total of 56 hours were spent on training sessions. The costs for each training are divided in costs of the trainer (hourly fee and travel expenses) and costs of the LEWs (travel expenses). The LEWs did not receive any compensation for time spent in training. However, opportunity costs in the Netherlands are valued at €15 per hr, indicating €4,440 total opportunity costs. There were no costs for renting the venue where training sessions were held. However, the costs of renting a training location are €350 per training, suggesting €1,400 for rent. The total costs of the trainer were €3748 and €50 for travel expenses. The travel expenses for the training of all the 37 LEW was €874 in total during the current trial.

## Offering moving stories
The introductory lessons took approximately 30 minutes per class. A teacher was present during these introductory sessions, so they were aware of what their students would be doing and also to keep order in the classroom. For future implementation, a gate-keeper trained teacher would be expected to lead the introductory lesson. Teachers would need to be instructed first in order to provide these classes. This would take one hour and would cost €30–85. To ensure that each student was able to participate, regardless of smartphone possession, ten smartphones were purchased and made available for students at €1,750 total costs.
The total amount of students that were asked to participate in Moving Stories were 1,016 in study year 2017–2018 and 846 in study year 2018–2019 across the seven school locations. A total of 339 students downloaded the game during the study year 2017–2018 and 643 students during 2018–2019, indicating a coverage rate of 33.4% and 76% respectively across all second-year students. A number of students (n = 166, 16.9%) that downloaded the app did not complete any actions for the duration of their game in either year. It was noted that the number of students actively performing actions in the app gradually declined over the five consecutive days (see ), but on average more than half of the participating students played the game on each of the five days. The average amount of days played by students was three days (M = 3.14, SD = .64).
 In total, 49 separate debriefing sessions were provided by LEWs. Most sessions were provided by a single LEW. However, some LEWs preferred to provide classroom sessions with another LEW. This made them feel more comfortable as some of them were inexperienced in providing classroom sessions. They were matched with a LEW that did have prior experience. In total, four sessions were carried out by two LEWs instead of one. Not all trained LEWs were able to provide a debriefing session: 11 of 37 trained LEWs (29.7%) were able to provide debriefing sessions. Several LEWs indicated that classroom sessions interfered with other (volunteer) jobs. Most of them never responded to invitations to provide classroom sessions; and reasons for no-show remained largely unknown.
The costs for each classroom session were divided into an hourly fee and travel expenses for the LEW. Each LEW received an hourly fee of 30 euros for providing the debriefing sessions. The total costs for classroom sessions by LEW were €4,621, which included both the hourly fee and travel expenses. An overview of the costs in euros can be found in .
 Discussing the five first aid strategies of the teen MHFA program were a mandatory part of the debriefing classroom session and LEWs were asked to discuss all five first aid strategies with the students. We checked in the minutes of the 18 sessions whether all five first aid strategies were indeed discussed. This was the case for all 18 sessions.

## Debriefing sessions
The notes that were taken during the debriefing sessions were also used to identify themes that were brought up by the students. It was noticeable from the classroom sessions that Lisa’s (the main character in Moving Stories) behavior and responses triggered different reactions from students and captured many experiences from the LEW. Therefore, the themes that were discussed in classroom sessions were diverse, but it is worth noting that the LEW had the freedom to highlight how their experiences with depression was (dis)similar to Lisa’s. Considering the heterogeneous nature of depression, we do not view this as a problem. Additionally, students’ interests were different across sessions as well. For example, some classes were really interested in school pressure and perfectionism, whereas other classes talked more about suicidal behavior in depression.
Six themes that were identified during our review of the minutes are highlighted below. The order in which the themes are represented in this article does not reflect the order and in how many sessions these themes were actually discussed; the n represents the number of sessions in which these themes occurred. Below, the themes are ordered from the broader themes down to more specific ones. Moreover, there were several questions by students that were similar across debriefing sessions, which are also presented in theme 7. We have added quotes from students regarding several themes in italics: Quotes have been translated into English. The original Dutch quotes have been added in brackets for clarification.

## Theme 1: Recognition of depression and sad mood
During most classroom sessions (n = 15) it became clear that students recognized that Lisa was experiencing symptoms of depression. Students also were able to name several symptoms of depression, such as feeling sad, irritability, not wanting to do anything (apathy and feeling tired).

“The game was about Lisa, who was depressed and you needed to help her.” (in Dutch: “Het spel gaat over Lisa, die was depressief en moest je gaan helpen.”)

“She was depressed. She did not want anything, she became angry if you made a phone call to school or opened the curtains.” (in Dutch: “Ze was depressief. Ze wilde niks, ze werd boos als je school belde, of als je de gordijnen opendeed…”)

“Then you feel worthless, think you cannot do anything and feel sad.” (in Dutch: “Dan voel je je waardeloos, denk je dat je niets kunt en ben je verdrietig.”)

## Theme 2: Lisa’s dismissive behaviors
Students often mentioned how Lisa was very dismissive in her reactions towards students when they tried to be helpful (n = 15). They mentioned how she did not like anything they did, even though they intended well. Some students said her reactions were unexpected and not very nice. Most LEW recognized this behavior in themselves and explained how, even though they knew people were trying to be helpful, couldn’t bring themselves to respond in a less grumpy way. Often these themes linked up nicely to discussing the first aid strategies. Specifically, it was a way for the LEW to discuss that asking, talking to them, and being a friend are more important than specific actions.

“I made her a toasted sandwich the first day, which she enjoyed, but the second day she didn’t anymore. She didn’t want anything anymore.” (in Dutch: “Ik had de eerste dag een tosti voor haar gemaakt en dat vond ze lekker, maar de tweede dag ineens niet meer! Ze hoefde niks meer…”)

“It seemed like she didn’t want any help, it was annoying that she never approved anything you did.”(in Dutch: “Het leek niet of Lisa hulp wilde, het was irritant dat ze nooit iets goed vond wat je deed.”)

The following quotes from students illustrate how students realized that being in contact by talking to Lisa, being a friend and asking questions was more important than specific actions.

“If our relationship would have been better.” (In Dutch: “als onze relatie beter was geweest.”), in response to “What would have helped Lisa?” (in Dutch: “Wat had Lisa geholpen?”.)

“First, ask her (Lisa) if she was ready for you to call someone, that was the best way. Then, she didn’t mind that much.”. (In Dutch: “Eerst vragen of ze eraan toe was dat je iemand ging bellen, dat was de beste manier. Dan vond ze het niet zo erg.”)

## Theme 3: Students sharing personal experiences
In half of the recorded debriefing sessions (n = 12) students shared personal experiences of knowing someone with a depression or suicidal behavior. This was another reason why it was very helpful to have a teacher present. The research employee and LEW that were present would not be available for any additional support after the classroom session ended, whereas the teacher would be. For this reason, teachers had received a gatekeepers’ training as part of the STORM program in order to provide a safety net for students at their school.

## Theme 4: Help-seeking opportunities within school
One of the five first aid strategies is that they should consider “helping your peer/friend connect with an adult”. One important resource for students would be school, as this is where they spend most of their time. It was noticeable during several sessions (n = 10) that students were often unfamiliar with resources available at school or relied on outdated information (e.g., a counsellor who had left the school). In these cases it was very helpful to have a school teacher present during the sessions as they could provide the students with the correct information regarding counselors at school.
“I would first try to talk to a teacher, that feels less direct [rather than going to my mom/daddy].” (In Dutch: “Ik zou er eerst met een leraar over praten, dat is minder direct.”)
“I know the school has a counsellor, but I don’t know who he/she is. So, I would approach my mentor first.” (In Dutch: “Ik weet dat er een vertrouwenspersoon is op school, maar weet niet wie. Ik denk dat ik dus eerst mijn mentor* zou vragen.”)
* Note: A mentor is a teacher who also acts as a trusted guide for students in matters related to their study. Typically, a mentor is assigned at the start of school year to either one or more classes, while a class typically has some 20–30 students.
Question asked by LEW: “Does anybody know who you can approach to talk about depressive symptoms (red. for yourself or your friends)?” (In Dutch: “Weet iemand waar je naartoe kan hier op school als je met iemand wil praten over depressieve gevoelens?”) This resulted in students mentioning several different names, but they seemed unclear who to turn to. The teacher then explained who the counsellors at school were.

## Theme 5: Physical health and mental health
In order to illustrate and stimulate help-seeking behaviors among students, a couple of LEW (n = 2) used a comparison to how one would seek help for a broken leg. Also, one LEW preferred the comparison with the flu for Lisa remaining at home instead of going to school. This seemed to resonate with students more, as they had their own experiences with flu or comparable physical illnesses which required them to stay home.
LEW: “What if you had the flu and someone told you to get out of bed and pulled the blankets off you, how would you feel then?” Student: “I would not like that. If I have the flu, I just want to stay in bed and not talk to anyone.” LEW: “When you are feeling depressed it is very similar. It would not help me to feel better if someone would do those things.” (In Dutch: “Wat als je de griep had en iemand zie dat je maar uit bed moest komen en de dekens van je aftrok, hoe zou je dat vinden?”, “Dat zou ik echt niet leuk vinden. Als ik de griep heb dan leg ik me in bed en praat ik met niemand.”, “Als je depressie hebt dan is dat vergelijkbaar. Ik zou me echt niet beter voelen als iemand die dingen zou doen.”)
LEW: “If you are feeling ill, you’d rather not get out of bed.” Student: “So, is that the same as depression?” LEW: “Essentially yes, being forced out of bed or going outside does not help, unless you feel supported.” (In Dutch: “Als je ziek bent, blijf je toch ook liever in bed.”, “Is dat hetzelfde als wanneer je depressief bent?”, “Op zich wel, als iemand je dwingt om uit bed te komen of naar buiten te gaan helpt dat niet, tenzij je steun van iemand krijgt.”)

## Theme 6: Animals/Pets
The students seemed to enjoy the presence of Lisa’s cat in the house. It was mentioned or asked about in several sessions (n = 7), and often led to interesting discussions. It appeared that students really understood how the presence of a pet would help someone who is feeling sad. They mentioned how an animal could listen without judgement (it does not talk back at you).

“Animals cannot offend you.” (In Dutch: “Dieren kunnen je niet beledigen.”)

“You can talk to them and they always listen.” (in Dutch: “Je kunt er tegen praten en ze luisteren altijd naar je.”)

“Dogs/cats cannot judge and do not get mad. They just come over to cuddle you.” (In Dutch: “Honden/katten kunnen niet oordelen en worden niet boos. Ze komen gewoon naar je toe om te knuffelen.”)

## Theme 7: Frequently asked questions by students
Most question students asked were related to the personal experiences of the LEW (n = 10), illustrating that these experiences are interesting to adolescents and they do want to know more about it.

“Are you feeling depressed right now?” (In Dutch: “Ben je nu depressief”)

“How old were you when you first became depressed?” (In Dutch: “Hoe oud was u toen u depressief was?”)

“What do you feel when you are feeling depressed?” “And how about when you are doing something you enjoy/like?” (In Dutch: “Wat voel je als je depressief bent?” “En wat als je iets leuks aan het doen bent?”)

“How long have you been feeling depressed?” (In Dutch: “Hoe lang bent u al depressief?”)

“Does it help to provide classroom sessions?” (In Dutch: “Helpt het als je voor de klas staat?”)

Many questions were also related to the parents and the LEW relationships with their parents (n = 6).
The following quotes illustrate the questions students asked regarding the LEW’s relationships with their parents:
“How is your relationship with your parents now?” (In Dutch: “Hoe is de relatie met je ouders nu?”)

“How are your parents dealing with you being depressed?” (In Dutch: “Hoe gaan je ouders ermee om?”)

“Does your mother know that you are depressed?” (In Dutch: “Weet je moeder dat je depressief bent?”)

## Discussion
The aim of the current study was to assess the coverage, costs of preparing and offering the Moving Stories intervention across seven high-schools in the Netherlands, the fidelity with which the living experience workers (LEWs) reviewed all five mental health first aid (MHFA) strategies and to identify any additional themes that were brought up by the participating high-school students during the debriefing sessions. This was done to find areas where the implementation of the Moving Stories intervention could be improved and the feasibility of future scale-up of Moving Stories enhanced.

## Principal findings
Among the 1880 eligible students 982 (52%) downloaded the Moving Stories app and 83% of them played the game for at least one day with an average of three days out of the five days. The LEWs discussed the five MHFA strategies with students in all recorded sessions. The notes of the debriefing sessions indicated that sadness-like symptoms were readily recognized as indicative of depression, whereas dismissive or grumpy behaviors were not. The students showed great interest in the personal stories of the LEWs and in more than half of the debriefing sessions one or more students shared their own personal experiences with mental health and depressive symptoms. This may suggest that mental health literacy was enhanced and stigma reduced among students. The total cost of implementing Moving Stories across seven high schools was €11,043 (US$ 12,367), of which €4,672 (US$ 5,232) was spent on the training of the LEWs. However only 11 out of the 37 trained LEWs (30%) carried out their training in practice and led a total of 49 debriefing sessions. This suggests that selection and training of LEWs should be improved.

## Preparing Moving Stories
Recruitment and training of 37 LEWs costed €4,672 ($5,232) or €126 ($141) per LEW. The total costs (including recruitment and training costs of LEWs) of offering Moving Stories to 7 high schools was €11,034 ($12,357) or €1,576 ($1,765) per school. Since 982 students participated in Moving Stories, this amounted to €11 ($13) per participating student. This was achieved below the planned budget ceiling. However, it should be noted that of the 37 trained LEWs, only 11 led debriefing sessions, which suggests that recruitment and training of the LEWs should be improved.
For this project, every LEW who indicated they wanted to be involved in the project, was allowed to complete the training. Thus, it would be beneficial to develop a more specific set of criteria for selecting a LEW and make it very clear what is expected of LEW. Selection criteria that we would recommend are that the LEW has some prior experience in delivering their personal story to a public, preferably with high school students in classrooms. Recruitment of LEWs via lived experience organizations could help finding qualified LEWs.
The high drop-out rate among the LEWs further suggests the need to more intensively involve the LEWs in the design of the debriefing session and how it is implemented. After all, their engagement and sense of ownership may hold the key to their willingness to turn the debriefing sessions into a success. Ultimately, a sense of belongingness is important [ ]. In addition, the training session for the LEWs may need to be better geared towards acquiring the ability and confidence to provide debriefing sessions in the classroom setting [ ]. We refer to research by Chen et al. [ ] who identified four main activities that are needed to adequately prepare a LEW for contact-based interventions. First, LEWs need to be psychologically prepared: they need adequate support and confidence. Second, adequate knowledge and skills need to be built. Third, a LEW needs to develop their personal story in a way they can share it. Fourth, and most importantly, the LEWs need to be able to practice the entire session.
Therefore, we recommend more time is allocated to the practical part of the training such that each LEW has ample training time to develop and tell their personal story in 10–15 minutes, and where the LEW can practice how to introduce the five MHFA strategies and learns how to anticipate to the various reactions and questions that students might bring up in real debriefing sessions. As a case in point, a prior study found that a transient dip in one’s mood could occur within hours or first couple of days after having shared one’s personal experience related to mental—although in the long run one’s mental health will not be affected and LEWs may feel that sharing their story was beneficial to themselves and others [ ].
The high drop-out rate among the LEWs may also indicate that the level of contact between the research staff and the LEWs in the period between training and the debriefing sessions was too low. This suggests another area where improvement can be made. Unfortunately, the current study did not ask the LEWs how the level of contact with the researchers affected their engagement in the implementation of Moving Stories. For future evaluations, it is important that the experiences of LEW are evaluated to determine which aspects or processes might impede further participation especially during the implementation.

## Offering Moving Stories
Overall, the coverage rate was moderate as a little over half of eligible adolescents downloaded the game (53%). Once an adolescent had downloaded the game the uptake of the program for adolescents seemed quite high, considering most students playing more than half of the game days and few students who downloaded the game did not play. This is remarkable bearing in mind that students had to play the game-app outside of school hours in their own time and in addition to their regular homework. Notably, during the second year more students played the game overall, and more students also played each individual day than during the first year of implementation. The larger uptake rate could be explained by two things. First, during the second year a broader inclusion was allowed; students not participating in the STORM trial were still allowed to play Moving Stories when they so wanted. Students were encouraged to help each other in identifying strategies that could aid Lisa. As such, if more students are playing, more students are asking each other for help and in turn encouraging and enthusing each other to play. This self-reinforcing process could explain the difference in player frequency of each individual game day between the first and second year. Second, adolescents model their behavior mostly after peers [ , ] as to avoid the risk of social rejection [ ]. Accordingly, they are more likely to participate if more peers are engaged.
A potential facilitator for increasing uptake and coverage rates would be to fully embed Moving Stories in the school curriculum and make it possible for students to play the game during school hours (playtime is approximately 10–15 minutes per day). This would ensure that students have time to play the game, but would also underscore the importance of the game when it is part of the curriculum. Such an approach would also increase normalization of mental health education at school, but would require collaborative planning and coordination of the STORM program with schools.

## Debriefing sessions
During the debriefing sessions it became clear that the students recognized Lisa’s depression symptoms, which is in accordance with previous studies [ – ]. On the other hand, a study by Burns and Rapee [ ] found that adolescents were less likely to correctly identify a vignette without the obvious symptoms of sadness as having depression. This is consistent with our findings that Lisa’s dismissive and grumpy behavior was less readily recognized as part of her depression, because irritable behavior is not an obvious and well-known symptom of adolescent depression. As such, it is important to include these types of less obvious symptoms as well, rather than just focus on “sadness-like” symptoms. This is how depression is generally portrayed in media, but depression is much more heterogeneous than that. Considering the link between mental health literacy and help-seeking behaviors [ , ], it is important that adolescents have knowledge of symptoms such as irritability as part of depression in order to ask or look for help. This is especially the case for adolescents as these symptoms are considered key symptoms of adolescent depression and not in adult depression [ ].
It was clear from the notes from the debriefing sessions that students were willing to share personal experiences of friends and family with depression as well as their own experience with depression or other mental health difficulties. This indicates that there was a sense of trust and safety during these sessions where students felt comfortable enough to share their own stories and experiences. Moreover, this helped a number of young people realize that they were not alone with these experiences. This, in turn, could help to reduce the fear of stigma attached to depression as one could see that peers with depressive complaints were still participating in school and normal activities. Previous research has indicated that an reciprocal exchange in an open and safe space is vital in sharing personal experiences [ ]. As such, by first letting the LEW talk about their own experience, they create such an environment of reciprocity, making it easier for students to share their own stories. Moreover, when students feel comfortable to share their personal experiences with mental health, they are more likely to seek help [ ].
This underscores the importance of a teacher, who is trained as a gatekeeper, being present during the debriefing sessions. In the STORM program this was assured by providing gatekeepers’ training for suicide prevention to teachers. Additionally, it could be beneficial that the LEW is accompanied by a mental healthcare professional (i.e. a clinician). Furthermore, it is advisable that schools consider embedding universal prevention within a larger stepped prevention program considering students sharing such personal stories during these sessions. To illustrate, within the STORM program this was assured by offering students with an elevated level depressive symptoms a free indicated CBT-based preventive program, while also other pathways towards professional care were made available to the schools and their students.
The themes that really resonated with the students were the topics they could relate to or recognize in their daily life. Most students could recall a day they stayed home from school due to a cold or flu, and could see how a pet would be helpful owing to their own experiences with pets. Thus, it is important to consider relating complex issues such as mental illness to common experiences.
In similar vein, the students were especially interested in the LEW’s current and past relationship with parents. Clearly, in this age group, parents play a large part in their social interactions, but at the same time adolescents are trying to become more independent from their parents [ , ]. Yet, the most common mentioned help-seeking strategy among adolescents is to turn to their parents [ ]. Thus, involvement of parents in school-based depression programs could be beneficial [ ].

## Strengths and limitations
A strength of the study is that at each participating school at least one debriefing session was monitored to reduce selective sampling bias and to enhance external validity. Moreover, notes of the debriefing sessions were kept by four different note takers to reduce bias.
Several limitations are important to note. The study was carried out in a small region in the Netherlands (the South-East region of Brabant), and may therefore not be generalizable to other regions and countries.
The debriefing sessions were not tape-recorded and transcribed verbatim. Tape-recording would have legal implications as participants would be identifiable. Moreover, tape-recording has several disadvantages, namely when discussing personal issues, participants are less likely to discuss these freely [ , ]. Additionally, the recording of the notes was not completed in a pre-determined standardized format. This can be problematic as it could be that the minutes are somewhat skewed to outcomes deemed important by the reporter [ ]. However, the usage of multiple reporters may counter-balance reporter bias. Moreover, using an unstructured form also meant that possible unexpected topics were recorded.
Furthermore, the current study did not tap into the experiences of the students, the LEW, teachers and school administrators on how they experienced the Moving Stories program. Questions of interest could include how they rated the game and classroom sessions, and whether they would play the game again, or would recommend it to a friend or colleague. This would help to determine the acceptability of the intervention. With regards to the acceptability another study found that over 90% of students would recommend the Moving Stories game and 66% would recommend the debriefing session to a friend [ ].

## Conclusion
Concluding, implementation of Moving Stories during the STORM trial to prevent depressive symptoms in high-school students was feasible. However, there were few trained LEWs that were able to provide debriefing sessions suggesting that selection and training of LEWs needs to be improved. The role of the LEWs is important because they managed to grab the full attention of students and were able to launch frank discussions about depression and create a space wherein students were willing to share their personal experiences. This suggests that Moving Stories was successful in enhancing mental health literacy and reducing depression stigma.

## Supporting information
S1 Checklist

## Standards for reporting implementation studies: The StaRI checklist for completion.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Dataset

## Dataset moving stories playing days.
(SAV)
Click here for additional data file.

We would like to acknowledge Rian van den Boogaart (project manager at GGZ Oost Brabant) for her great contribution to design, practicability and execution of the study. Additionally, we would like to thank Wendy Rongen, Bianca van Hulst and Esma Ballafkir (the research assistants at the time) for their help in the data collection. Also, we want to acknowledge Anouk Tuijnman (PhD student at Radboud University/researcher at Trimbos Institute) and IJsfontein for developing Moving Stories. We are also grateful to the collaborating schools (Alfrinkcollege, Carrolus Borromeus College, Commanderijcollege, Dr. Knippenbergcollege, Jan van Brabant College, Hub van Doorne, Peellandcollege, St. Willibrord Gymnasium, Strabrecht College, Vakcollege Helmond, and Varendonck College), the health professionals of the Municipal Health Services “Brabant-Zuidoost”, mental health professionals of GGZ Oost Brabant, Marianne van Bakel for training the LEW, and the LEW providing the debriefing session for making this research possible.

## Abbreviations
LEWlived experience worker
MHFAMental Health First Aid
RCTrandomized controlled trial
STORMStrong Teens and Resilient Minds
 10.1371/journal.pone.0260224.r001Decision Letter 0
CalearAlison L.Academic Editor© 2021 Alison L. Calear2021Alison L. Calearhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
6 Jul 2021

PONE-D-21-17344
Implementing a serious game led by lived experience workers for depression prevention in high-school students: A process evaluation.
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Gijzen,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Aug 20 2021 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:

A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Alison L. Calear
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2.  In your Data Availability statement, you have not specified where the minimal data set underlying the results described in your manuscript can be found. PLOS defines a study's minimal data set as the underlying data used to reach the conclusions drawn in the manuscript and any additional data required to replicate the reported study findings in their entirety. All PLOS journals require that the minimal data set be made fully available. For more information about our data policy, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability.
Upon re-submitting your revised manuscript, please upload your study’s minimal underlying data set as either Supporting Information files or to a stable, public repository and include the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers within your revised cover letter. For a list of acceptable repositories, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-recommended-repositories. Any potentially identifying patient information must be fully anonymized.
Important: If there are ethical or legal restrictions to sharing your data publicly, please explain these restrictions in detail. Please see our guidelines for more information on what we consider unacceptable restrictions to publicly sharing data: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions. Note that it is not acceptable for the authors to be the sole named individuals responsible for ensuring data access.
We will update your Data Availability statement to reflect the information you provide in your cover letter.
3. Thank you for stating the following financial disclosure:
"Funding for the research project was provided by the municipalities of Asten, Deurne,
Geldrop-Mierlo, Gemert-Bakel, Helmond, Laarbeek and Someren, The Netherlands.
Moving Stories was funded by ‘Het Stimuleringsfonds,’ and OVK was funded by
ZonMw. GGZ Oost Brabant and the Trimbos Institute provided the program materials.
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to
publish, or preparation of the manuscript."
We note that one or more of the authors is affiliated with the funding organization, indicating the funder may have had some role in the design, data collection, analysis or preparation of your manuscript for publication; in other words, the funder played an indirect role through the participation of the co-authors. If the funding organization did not play a role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript and only provided financial support in the form of authors' salaries and/or research materials, please do the following:
a) Review your statements relating to the author contributions, and ensure you have specifically and accurately indicated the role(s) that these authors had in your study. These amendments should be made in the online form.
b) Confirm in your cover letter that you agree with the following statement, and we will change the online submission form on your behalf:
“The funder provided support in the form of salaries for authors [insert relevant initials], but did not have any additional role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. The specific roles of these authors are articulated in the ‘author contributions’ section.”
4. Thank you for stating the following in the Competing Interests section:
"Moving Stories was developed by IJsfontein and the Trimbos Institute in collaboration
with the Behavioural Science Institute of the Radboud University and 113
Zelfmoordpreventie.
Trimbos Institute has the exploitation rights of the Moving Stories. Trimbos Institute is a
not-for-profit WHO Collaborative Centre with the goals to disseminate best and
evidence-based practices. Trimbos Institute may licence third parties to use the Moving
Stories intervention within routine preventive services. FS, and MG are employees at
Trimbos Institute, but will not have a share in any possible licence revenues.
OVK2.0 was adapted by GGZ Oost Brabant in collaboration with the Behavioural
Science Institute of the Radboud University and Trimbos Institute and is published by
GGZ Oost Brabant."
Please confirm that this does not alter your adherence to all PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials, by including the following statement: "This does not alter our adherence to  PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.” (as detailed online in our guide for authors http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/competing-interests).  If there are restrictions on sharing of data and/or materials, please state these. Please note that we cannot proceed with consideration of your article until this information has been declared.
Please include your updated Competing Interests statement in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
Please know it is PLOS ONE policy for corresponding authors to declare, on behalf of all authors, all potential competing interests for the purposes of transparency. PLOS defines a competing interest as anything that interferes with, or could reasonably be perceived as interfering with, the full and objective presentation, peer review, editorial decision-making, or publication of research or non-research articles submitted to one of the journals. Competing interests can be financial or non-financial, professional, or personal. Competing interests can arise in relationship to an organization or another person. Please follow this link to our website for more details on competing interests: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/competing-interests
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Partly
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: N/A
Reviewer #2: N/A
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: This study presents a process evaluation of a large-scale study of a serious game delivered in secondary schools by a lived experience worker. The inclusion of people with lived experience in the delivery of the program is positive; however, a critical problem with this study, is that it states that it intends to do a process evaluation, but it appears to not be measuring the rollout of the program against a specific process to assess how effective it was. The study presents more as a feasibility study, but this is also problematic as not all groups were included as participants so that the true feasibility of the program can be appropriately evaluated e.g., the discussion makes some important points about how to recruit and support lived experience workers, but this information does not seem to have been gained through the current study results This is because the lived experience workers were not asked about their involvement in the program, e.g., what was difficult for them, and what could have helped – instead the authors rely on assumptions. This seems like a large oversight for the conclusions the authors wished to reach, and is also noted as a limitation – “Furthermore, the current study did not directly tap into the experiences of the students, the LEW, teachers and school administrators on how they experienced the Moving Stories program”. I think perhaps a reframing of the study would help, as I don’t believe that currently this study supports the “feasibility” of the program as stated in the conclusions because it did not tap into those critical experiences.
My specific comments to the authors are below:
Abstract
1. The abstract should be more specific about what was done and what was found – do not list what you will present in the paper later on, this information should be presented here as well. At the moment, the methods includes a description of the Moving Stories program, but not what was actually done – were there any participants, list these here, how was the data for the results collected? Also, more information should be given in the results – it says that “28.9% of trainees were able to carry out their training” – how many trainees were there overall?
Introduction:
2. “Depression symptoms, if ignored, are likely to develop into major depression disorder [1]” I believe this article is trying to demonstrate that the experience of major depression in childhood, increases the risk of depression in adulthood; thus, I would suggest revising the sentence.
Methods:
3. Participants: The age range seems very broad (11-15 years) for only 8th grade students – can you please clarify why this was the case?
4. Important to confirm if the ethics statement listed at the beginning in the table for the journal will be included in the final article, as otherwise I would list this here.
5. Procedure: Could you explain in more detail how the program was delivered? How many schools were involved, how many teachers, how many lived experience workers? This sort of information seems important for a process evaluation, it should be included in the methods (not just the results) and should also be included in the abstract where indicated above.
6. Did students have access to the program from January to May? Or just over the five days? If this could be described a bit more clearly that would be helpful.
7. What specific data analyses were conducted? List these here under a heading: Data analysis.
Results
8. The description of the training required (8 hrs for LEWs) should be included in the method, and then the cost analysis of this can be the results.
9. Again, the information listed here about the number of schools etc., needs to be in the methods. The results can remain, but it is important to list who was involved (participants) and what you did (procedure) in the methods first.
10. How were the themes for the ‘debriefing sessions” identified - if this qualitative analyses, this needs to be explained and listed in the method? Also what was the purpose of analysing this information – was it to use it to improve the program? Or just out of interest?
Discussion
11. Could you give an overview of what was found under the principal findings heading, it would be helpful to really identify what the key findings were and list them here.
12. There are some critical statements that are made in the discussion, which seem to overstep the findings of the current study. For example, it is not clear where the data that inform the statement “it is important that each person who has a role in the program feels involved in the program and is motivated to bring the program to success” – or “it is important that each person is aware of the program components” how do you know this, what data was uncovered in your study that tells you this is the case? There is very little in regard to information collected from either the schools or the LEWs, so it is difficult to see where these statements have come from.
13. “A more efficient method of selecting the LEW needs to be developed before LEW are offered a training as part of their involvement in the Moving Stories intervention” – what does this mean and how did you come to this conclusion from your data? Did you ask LEWs about their involvement and any barriers they faced? There is a line in the results that says that some indicated that it interfered with their work, but it is not clear if this information was collected as data for the current project (e.g., were LEWs participants in the study too?).
Conclusion
14. I am not sure that you can say the feasibility of the program has been demonstrated via this study. If anything, there seemed to be issues with the LEWs and their participation and there is no data collected from the schools about how it fit into the curriculum etc., so it is unclear how this statement was reached based on the data presented.
Reviewer #2: Manuscript title: Implementing a serious game led by lived experience workers for depression prevention in high-school students: process evaluation
General comments: This manuscript describes a process evaluation of a high-school-based universal depression prevention program, which combines a serious smartphone game and an in-person discussion session with a lived experience worker. Some interesting reflections are provided on the challenges of training and maintaining lived experience workers, and the successes of generating classroom discussions through a debriefing session delivered by a lived experience worker. However, greater clarity around the objectives, methods and interpretation of findings is needed. The manuscript may also benefit from incorporating some discussion of how the lessons learned from implementing Moving Stories can be applied to other similar programs. The manuscript is generally clearly written. While I have noted some points of ambiguity in my specific comments, I do recommend the authors review the manuscript for any typographical or grammatical errors that are not specifically noted during review. I have made a number of specific comments below, I hope they are helpful to the authors in revising the manuscript.
Specific comments:
Title and Abstract: Moving Stories is characterised as a serious game led by lived experience workers. This seems misleading, as the only lived experience involvement described in the manuscript is the role of the lived experience workers in delivering a debriefing session. This element of the program was delivered by people with lived experience, but there is no evidence of true lived experience leadership. Please clarify whether this program involved lived experience leadership (i.e., the game was developed by people with lived experience, the program was developed and run by people with lived experience). If this is not the case, please adjust the title and abstract to accurately represent the nature of the Moving Stories program.
Introduction:
Page 6, Lines 109-110: What is meant by “a game-based design was used for Moving Stories led by lived experience workers.” Was the design and implementation of the program led by lived experience workers, or does this refer to the delivery of the briefing session? Please ensure the level of lived experience involvement is accurately characterised.
Page 6, Lines 117-118: What were the specific objectives of the process evaluation? What elements of program implementation did you plan to evaluate? Outlining these objectives in the Introduction section would provide more context for the methods and findings presented below. At the moment it is somewhat unclear why certain kinds of data were collected (e.g., costs) and others were not (e.g., perspectives of lived experience workers, school staff, and students on acceptability/feasibility).
Materials and Methods
Participants and Procedure, Page 6: How many schools were involved in the trial? Were different types of schools involved (e.g., government vs private funded)? What level of diversity did schools represent (e.g., average socioeconomic status of student population, range of geographical areas)?
Participants and Procedure, Page 7: How were students recruited? How did they provide informed consent (for app and research)? Were students required to participate in the research in order to access the Moving Stories program and participate in the debriefing session?
Intervention description, Page 7, Line 148: “Lived Experience Worker of depression” doesn’t quite make sense. I’d suggest changing this to “Lived Experience Worker with experience of depression” (or something similar) throughout the manuscript.
Intervention description, Page 7, Lines 149-150: This section should specify that the introductory lesson was led by a researcher. Additionally, please specify what information students were given in the introductory session (i.e., what were they told the aim of the program was? Is depression specifically mentioned?).
Intervention description, Pages 7-8, Lines 151-155: Some elements of program delivery need clarification. When did students complete the game – in class or in their own time? Were they prompted to play the game each day, if so how? Why could the game only be played for a limited time period in the morning, particularly if the game was played outside of class?
Intervention description, Page 7, Lines 160-163: How long was the debriefing session? Aside from the requirement to cover the five MHFA strategies, were there any other guidelines or requirements for the structure of the session?
Data collection, Page 9, Line 183: Information about the cost of the Moving Stories app was not reported. Please add this to the Results or remove this statement from the Methods.
Data collection Page 9, Line 188: Costs associated with debriefing sessions are already listed in the paragraph above, statement can be removed from this paragraph.
Data collection, Page 9, Lines 191-193: Was informed consent obtained from students and lived experience workers permitting the collection and reporting of session minutes? This is particularly important as individual students and workers have been quoted in the Results section.
Data collection, Page 9, Lines 191-193: The spread of recorded sessions across schools should be noted here.
Data collection, Page 9, Lines 194-199: Please describe the analysis methods used to produce themes from the debriefing session minutes.
Results:
Preparing delivery, Page 10: How were Lived Experience Workers recruited and selected? Were they required to have any previous experience? How was the training program developed? Was the training program developed with any lived experience input, or input from organisations with experience in delivering lived experience content in classroom settings? Who ran the training sessions? Were any materials provided to training participants for future reference/revision? Given the focus of the Discussion and Conclusion on the need to improve training and support of Lived Experience Workers, it is important to provide these details.
Preparing delivery, Page 10: The utility of reporting costs is unclear. Was a cost-benefit analysis conducted? How do these costs compare to other programs? From the information presented, it is not possible for the reader to determine whether the program represented good value for money.
Offering Moving Stories, Pages 10-11: Again, the utility of reporting costs is unclear. If costs are to be reported, perhaps summarising costs across preparation and implementation in a single table would clarify the total cost of running the program?
Offering Moving Stories, Page12, Lines 250-259: Is any information available about how Lived Experience Workers were communicated with and kept engaged with the program between training and classroom sessions? This may help shed some light on possible areas for improvement when next implementing the program.
Debriefing sessions, Page 13: Beyond the MHFA topics, was there any guidance on the structure of the debriefing sessions? This may have influenced what was most commonly discussed. It is important to outline the structure of the debriefing sessions in the Methods.
Debriefing sessions, Page 16, Line 359: Here and in a few other places in the manuscript, school mentors are referred to. What is a school mentor? This term needs defining for an international audience.
Discussion:
Program costs are not discussed in the Discussion section. This makes me unsure of the utility of reporting them – what was the purpose of assessing costs? What do the costs mean in practical terms?
Preparing Moving Stories, Pages 20-21, Lines 450-461: While some interesting points are made here, it is unclear how much of this content relates to the findings reported in the Methods section. Please clarify the links between these assertions and your process evaluation data. Additionally, this section feels like it is missing citations – please add in citations to reference materials as appropriate.
Preparing Moving Stories, Pages 21-22: Parts of the discussion around lived experience workers feels like it is focused on perceived weaknesses of the workers themselves (e.g., they may not be psychologically ready to work in a classroom), rather than focusing on elements of the program and its implementation that could be improved to better support a lived experience workforce. I do not think this is intentional, however, I think it would be beneficial to review the discussion points around the lived experience workers to ensure they are focused on evaluation findings about the program, rather than assumptions about the workers. It may also be helpful to highlight the lack of data on Lived Experience Worker experiences in these discussions – it is hard to propose effective support strategies without knowing what workers enjoyed about delivering the program and what they would change.
Preparing Moving Stories, Page 21, Line 465: Is efficient the best word to describe the improved recruitment strategy? Is ‘specific’ or ‘selective’ a more accurate term for what is meant here?
Preparing Moving Stories, Page 21, Lines 482-484: Was this a limitation of the implementation of recruitment and training – was the Lived Experience Worker role and what it involved inadequately explained before people volunteered for training?
Preparing Moving Stories, Page 22, Lines 487-496: This seems like a relevant place to discuss costs, if they are to be better incorporated into the manuscript.
Offering Moving Stories, Page 22, Lines 502-503: Please note this in the Methods section.
Offering Moving Stories, Page 22, Lines 506-509: Please note this context around difference in app access and encouragement of students to help each other play in the Methods section.
Offering Moving Stories, Page 23-24, Lines 529-538: Parts of this paragraph are covered in the Preparing Moving Stories section, perhaps it could be moved up and integrated with other Lived Experience Worker-related topics? Additionally, were there any indications from the evaluation data that a health professional would make Lived Experience Workers feel more comfortable? Or that workers were worried about the impact of delivering the session on their mental health? Making assumptions about the mental state of people who chose not to participate in delivering sessions is potentially stigmatising. As noted above, I recommend refocusing this discussion point to emphasise findings from the evaluation (e.g., students tend to share personal stories during debriefing and may thus benefit from direct access to a health professional, lived experience workers may feel more comfortable working in pairs), rather than assumptions about the Lived Experience Workers.
Debriefing sessions, Page 24, Lines 552-553: Citation for this sentence?
Debriefing sessions, Page 25, Lines 564-565: Citation for this sentence?
Strengths and Limitations, Page 26, Lines 586-588: This information should be noted in the Methods section.
Recommendations, Page 26, Line 608: While it is an interesting point, I am unsure how the data support the recommendation that partners in the program need to feel a sense of shared ownership, particularly as school staff and lived experience worker perspectives were not collected. Please clarify.
Recommendations, Page 27, Line 611: Do you mean lived experience organisation here (not patient organisation)?
Recommendations, Page 26-27: Do you have any recommendations for assessing whether these strategies are successful in improving program implementation?
Conclusions, Page 27, Line 625: Do you mean effectiveness of the preparation phase, rather than efficiency?
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0260224.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
20 Aug 2021

Many thanks for the elaborate comments of both reviewers. We appreciate the time and effort both reviewers took to review our manuscript. All of these comments helped to improve the manuscript. 
The comments of reviewers 1 and 2 are numbered; followed by our responses, while changes made in the manuscript are between quotation marks. 
We have numbered the reviewer comments. Certain replies include references to revisions beneath another reviewer comment as to reduce the wordiness of this document. 
The lines and page numbers correspond to the marked version of the revised manuscript. Thank you for your consideration of this revised manuscript. 
On behalf of all authors,
Mandy Gijzen, MSc. 
Reviewer #1: 
This study presents a process evaluation of a large-scale study of a serious game delivered in secondary schools by a lived experience worker. The inclusion of people with lived experience in the delivery of the program is positive; however, a critical problem with this study, is that it states that it intends to do a process evaluation, but it appears to not be measuring the rollout of the program against a specific process to assess how effective it was. The study presents more as a feasibility study, but this is also problematic as not all groups were included as participants so that the true feasibility of the program can be appropriately evaluated e.g., the discussion makes some important points about how to recruit and support lived experience workers, but this information does not seem to have been gained through the current study results This is because the lived experience workers were not asked about their involvement in the program, e.g., what was difficult for them, and what could have helped – instead the authors rely on assumptions. This seems like a large oversight for the conclusions the authors wished to reach, and is also noted as a limitation – “Furthermore, the current study did not directly tap into the experiences of the students, the LEW, teachers and school administrators on how they experienced the Moving Stories program”. I think perhaps a reframing of the study would help, as I don’t believe that currently this study supports the “feasibility” of the program as stated in the conclusions because it did not tap into those critical experiences.
My specific comments to the authors are below:
We agree, our study is better described as a feasibility study, not as a process evaluation. We changed the subtitle of the MS accordingly. The subtitle no longer reads “Process Evaluation”, it now reads “Feasibility of scaled-up implementation”
Abstract
1. The abstract should be more specific about what was done and what was found – do not list what you will present in the paper later on, this information should be presented here as well. At the moment, the methods includes a description of the Moving Stories program, but not what was actually done – were there any participants, list these here, how was the data for the results collected? Also, more information should be given in the results – it says that “28.9% of trainees were able to carry out their training” – how many trainees were there overall?
We re-wrote the abstract to better clarify the aims of the study and to include more information regarding participants, data collection and outcomes.
Changes in manuscript:
Background: Stigma and limited mental health literacy impede adolescents getting the help they need for depressive symptoms. A serious game coupled with a classroom session led by lived experience workers (LEWs) might help to overcome these barriers. The school-based Strong Teens and Resilient Minds (STORM) preventive program employed this strategy and offered a serious game, Moving Stories. The current study was carried out to assess the feasibility of scaled-up implementation of Moving Stories within the STORM program. 
Methods: Moving Stories was offered in three steps: (1) introductory classroom session, (2) students playing the game for five days, (3) debriefing classroom session led by lived experience worker. Data was collected on the number of participating students, costs of offering Moving Stories, and was further based on the notes of the debriefing sessions to check if mental health first aid (MHFA) strategies were addressed.
Results: Moving Stories was offered in seven high-schools. Coverage was moderate with 982 participating students out of 1880 (52%). Most participating students (83%) played the Moving Stories app three out of the five days. Qualitative data showed that the MHFAs were discussed in all debriefing sessions. Students showed great interest in lived experience workers’ stories and shared their own experiences with depression.
Conclusions: Implementation of Moving Stories to prevent depression in high-school students is feasible, but not without some struggles. Future implementation and scale-up of Moving Stories could benefit from improved selection and training of LEWs that played such an important role in grabbing the full attention of students and were able to launch frank discussions about depressive disorder and stigma in classrooms.
Introduction:
2. “Depression symptoms, if ignored, are likely to develop into major depression disorder [1]” I believe this article is trying to demonstrate that the experience of major depression in childhood, increases the risk of depression in adulthood; thus, I would suggest revising the sentence.
This sentence has been deleted as part of an extensive language review suggested by reviewer 2 to reduce wordiness.
Methods:
3. Participants: The age range seems very broad (11-15 years) for only 8th grade students – can you please clarify why this was the case?
We look at 8th grade students who usually fall into the age bracket of 13-14 years. However, as we did not want to exclude any 8th grade students the age range was expanded to 11-15 years old. We have added this information in our manuscript.
Changes in manuscript:
Methods, page 9, lines 183-186:
“During their second year of high school most student in The Netherlands are 13-14 years of age. However, there are few exceptions and we did not want to exclude any students. Therefore, a wide age range of 11-15 years was used for inclusion.”
4. Important to confirm if the ethics statement listed at the beginning in the table for the journal will be included in the final article, as otherwise I would list this here.
An ethics statement has been included in the Methods section.
Changes in manuscript:
Methods, page 14, lines 311-316:
“The medical ethics committee (Commissie Mensgebonden Onderzoek Region Arnhem-Nijmegen) in The Netherlands approved this study (NL61599.091.17). Informed consent from adolescents and their parents was obtained for the STORM trial. During the second trial year participation in Moving Stories was allowed on voluntary basis for students not participating in the STORM trial. At all times, students were informed that a researcher would be present during the debriefing sessions who might take anonymous notes.”
5. Procedure: Could you explain in more detail how the program was delivered? How many schools were involved, how many teachers, how many lived experience workers? This sort of information seems important for a process evaluation, it should be included in the methods (not just the results) and should also be included in the abstract where indicated above.
The Participants and Procedure section has been expanded to present all relevant information. Moreover, we have added a specific paragraph regarding the LEW. 
Changes in manuscript:
Methods, pages 8-9, line 169-180:
“In the context of the STORM trial, the program of Moving Stories was implemented in two consecutive study years, namely 2017-2018 and 2018-2019. In the Netherlands the study year generally starts around September and concludes around July. Moving Stories was offered from January to May in each study year. Fifteen high schools participate within the STORM trial, of which seven were randomly assigned to the experimental condition. Moving Stories was only offered at schools in the experimental condition.
Nearly one thousand (N = 982) eight grade high-school students across seven schools in the Southeast of the province North-Brabant participated in Moving Stories. Data from the STORM trial indicated that 11-13% of these eight grade students were screen positive for depressive symptoms as measured by the Children’s Depression Inventory 2, and 5-6% of them were screen positive on suicidal thoughts or behaviors.”
Methods, page 13, line 285:
“Any LEW that applied was invited to participate in the training (n = 37).”
6. Did students have access to the program from January to May? Or just over the five days? If this could be described a bit more clearly that would be helpful.
Students had access to the program for the five days. After five days they could no longer actively perform any actions within the game. This has been clarified in the Methods section.
Changes in manuscript:
Methods, pages 10-11, lines 224-228:
“Students then go on to play the game app for 10-15 minutes in the morning, between 7AM and 11AM, for 5 days. Students only had access to the app during the five days that they were asked to play, while they could still open the app students could no longer perform any actions or start over after the five playing days of their class was over.”
7. What specific data analyses were conducted? List these here under a heading: Data analysis.
We have added a new heading “Data analysis” as suggested by the reviewer. 
Changes in manuscript:
Methods, page 16, lines 350-360:
“Descriptive statistics such as means and standard deviations were computed in SPSS Version 27 [33]. With regards to the qualitative data in the form of notes, first we checked in how many sessions the required five aid strategies were discussed by the LEW. Additionally, we checked whether any common themes arose across the different debriefing classroom session. These themes were not pre-determined as there was no specific theme the LEW had to discuss with regard to their experiences or depressive symptoms in general. Instead, they were free to discuss several aspects of both the game and their personal experience with depressive symptoms and were encouraged to interactively tailor the session to the interests expressed by the students. Discussed topics were considered a theme if a topic occurred in at least two of recorded notes. A researcher read and coded all interviews using MAXQDA 2020 Version 2.4.0 [34]. Quotes representative for themes were then exported into Excel.”
Results
8. The description of the training required (8 hrs for LEWs) should be included in the method, and then the cost analysis of this can be the results.
Information regarding the training has been relocated to the Methods section under a new subheading: Training of Lived Experience Workers.
Changes in manuscript:
Methods, pages 13-14, lines 278-309:
“The LEW were recruited via a post on the Facebook page of the Trimbos Institute (Netherlands Institute of Mental Health and Addiction) and GGZ Oost Brabant (Mental Health Service). Additionally, we contacted several lived experience organizations. Requirements were that the LEW had some prior lived experience with depression. LEWs were informed during the recruitment process that they were required to tell their personal story to students in their second year of high school and that they would need to complete a training beforehand. Any LEW that applied was invited to participate in the training (n = 37).
The LEWs first had to complete an 8 hr training. This training for LEWs was designed by the authors, and a researcher who is also a LEW and was an experienced trainer. The training sessions were provided by these researchers as well. At the start of the training, participants were asked to play the serious game to fully understand what the students have done prior to their debriefing session.
The training itself consisted of a theoretical part and a practical part. During the theoretical part (3hrs) the LEWs learned more about the STORM program, its delivery and the goals of the Moving Stories intervention, and what their role was in the Moving Stories intervention. In the practical training (5hrs), the LEWs had the opportunity to practice telling their personal story in 10-15 minutes, and introducing the five MHFA strategies. The discussion of the five strategies from the MHFA was the most important component of the debriefing session and the LEWs were required to discuss all five strategies. Additionally, LEWs had to prepare themselves for questions that students might ask regarding their experiences, difficult topics (such as students having suicidal thoughts) and the game. 
 The LEW were provided with training materials (PowerPoints used during the training session) and a PowerPoint that they were free to use or adapt to their liking for the debriefing session. This PowerPoint consisted of a few example questions that the LEW could ask students as well as a slide with the five strategies from the MHFA. 
The training sessions took place from September to December in both years indicating a time lapse of one to six months between training and the debriefing session. In the meantime the LEWs were updated on planning by the researchers via email and WhatsApp, but any other contact between the researchers and LEWs was minimal during the training and debriefing sessions. By design, LEWs always led the debriefing sessions in the presence of a gate keeper-trained teacher and a researcher, with the researcher taking notes.”
9. Again, the information listed here about the number of schools etc., needs to be in the methods. The results can remain, but it is important to list who was involved (participants) and what you did (procedure) in the methods first.
Information regarding number of schools and participants have been added in the Methods section as can be found underneath the changes made for reviewer comment number 5.
10. How were the themes for the ‘debriefing sessions” identified - if this qualitative analyses, this needs to be explained and listed in the method? Also what was the purpose of analysing this information – was it to use it to improve the program? Or just out of interest?
Information regarding themes and analyses have been added in a new subsection: Data analysis. The changes in the manuscript can be found underneath the changes made for reviewer comment 7.
Discussion
11. Could you give an overview of what was found under the principal findings heading, it would be helpful to really identify what the key findings were and list them here.
We have added a paragraph with main findings under the Principal Findings heading as suggested.
Changes in manuscript:
Discussion, pages 27-28, lines 618-630:
“Among the 1880 eligible students 982 (52%) downloaded the Moving Stories app and 83% of them played the game for at least one day with an average of three days out of the five days. The LEWs discussed the five MHFA strategies with students in all recorded sessions. The notes of the debriefing sessions indicated that sadness-like symptoms were readily recognized as indicative of depression, whereas dismissive or grumpy behaviors were not. The students showed great interest in the personal stories of the LEWs and in more than half of the debriefing sessions one or more students shared their own personal experiences with mental health and depressive symptoms. This may suggest that mental health literacy was enhanced and stigma reduced among students. The total cost of implementing Moving Stories across seven high schools was €11,043 (US$ 12,367), of which €4,672 (US$ 5,232) was spent on the training of the LEWs. However only 11 out of the 37 trained LEWs (30%) carried out their training in practice and led a total of 49 debriefing sessions. This suggests that selection and training of LEWs should be improved.”
12. There are some critical statements that are made in the discussion, which seem to overstep the findings of the current study. For example, it is not clear where the data that inform the statement “it is important that each person who has a role in the program feels involved in the program and is motivated to bring the program to success” – or “it is important that each person is aware of the program components” how do you know this, what data was uncovered in your study that tells you this is the case? There is very little in regard to information collected from either the schools or the LEWs, so it is difficult to see where these statements have come from.
Our discussion has been streamlined to reflect only the findings that are mentioned in the Results section. As such we have deleted several paragraphs rearranged the order of certain paragraphs and revised our text.
Changes in manuscript:
Discussion, preparing Moving Stories, pages 29-31, lines 651-717:
“Recruitment and training of 37 LEWs costed €4,672 ($5,232) or €126 ($141) per LEW. The total costs (including recruitment and training costs of LEWs) of offering Moving Stories to 7 high schools was €11,034 ($12,357) or €1,576 ($1,765) per school. Since 982 students participated in Moving Stories, this amounted to €11 ($13) per participating student. This was achieved below the planned budget ceiling. However, it should be noted that of the 37 trained LEWs, only 11 led debriefing sessions, which suggests that recruitment and training of the LEWs should be improved.
For this project, every LEW who indicated they wanted to be involved in the project, was allowed to complete the training. Thus, it would be beneficial to develop a more specific set of criteria for selecting a LEW and make it very clear what is expected of LEW. Selection criteria that we would recommend are that the LEW has some prior experience in delivering their personal story to a public, preferably with high school students in classrooms. Recruitment of LEWs via LEW organizations could help finding qualified LEWs.
The high drop-out rate among the LEWs further suggests the need to more intensively involve the LEWs in the design of the debriefing session and how it is implemented. After all, their engagement and sense of ownership may hold the key to their willingness to turn the debriefing sessions into a success. After all, a sense of belongingness is important [35]. In addition, the training session for the LEWs may need to be better geared towards acquiring the ability and confidence to provide debriefing sessions in the classroom setting [36]. We refer to research by Chen et al. [37] who identified four main activities that are needed to adequately prepare a LEW for contact-based interventions. First, LEWs need to be psychologically prepared: they need adequate support and confidence. Second, adequate knowledge and skills need to be built. Third, a LEW needs to develop their personal story in a way they can share it. Fourth, and most importantly, the LEWs need to be able to practice the entire session.
 Therefore, we recommend more time is allocated to the practical part of the training such that each LEW has ample training time to develop and tell their personal story in 10-15 minutes , and where the LEW can practice how to introduce the five MHFA strategies and learns how to anticipate to the various reactions and questions that students might bring up in real debriefing sessions. As a case in point, a prior study found that a transient dip in one’s mood could occur within hours or first couple of days after having shared one’s personal experience related to mental – although in the long run one’s mental health will not be affected and LEWs may feel that sharing their story was beneficial to themselves and others [35]. 
 The high drop-out rate among the LEWs may also indicate that the level of contact between the research staff and the LEWs in the period between training and the debriefing sessions was too low. This suggests another area where improvement can be made. Unfortunately, the current study did not ask the LEWs how the level of contact with the researchers affected their engagement in the implementation of Moving Stories. For future evaluations, it is important that the experiences of LEW are evaluated to determine which aspects or processes might impede further participation especially during the implementation.” 
13. “A more efficient method of selecting the LEW needs to be developed before LEW are offered a training as part of their involvement in the Moving Stories intervention” – what does this mean and how did you come to this conclusion from your data? Did you ask LEWs about their involvement and any barriers they faced? There is a line in the results that says that some indicated that it interfered with their work, but it is not clear if this information was collected as data for the current project (e.g., were LEWs participants in the study too?).
We have added more information regarding the recruitment of the LEW in the Methods section. The changes in the manuscript can be found underneath the changes made for reviewer comment 8.
Additionally, we have revised the section in the Discussion regarding the training to reflect the findings from the Methods and Results. The changes in the manuscript for the Discussion can be found underneath the changes made for reviewer comment 12.
Conclusion
14. I am not sure that you can say the feasibility of the program has been demonstrated via this study. If anything, there seemed to be issues with the LEWs and their participation and there is no data collected from the schools about how it fit into the curriculum etc., so it is unclear how this statement was reached based on the data presented.
We have rewritten our conclusion to more adequately reflect the revised version of the Discussion.
Changes in manuscript:
Conclusion, page 37, lines 857-863:
“Concluding, implementation of Moving Stories to prevent depressive symptoms in high-school students is feasible. However, there were few trained LEWs that were able to provide debriefing sessions suggesting that selection and training of LEWs needs to be improved. The role of the LEWs is important because they managed to grab the full attention of students and were able to launch frank discussions about depression and create a space wherein students were willing to share their personal experiences. This suggests that Moving Stories was successful in enhancing mental health literacy and reducing depression stigma.”
 
Reviewer #2: 
Manuscript title: Implementing a serious game led by lived experience workers for depression prevention in high-school students: process evaluation
General comments: This manuscript describes a process evaluation of a high-school-based universal depression prevention program, which combines a serious smartphone game and an in-person discussion session with a lived experience worker. Some interesting reflections are provided on the challenges of training and maintaining lived experience workers, and the successes of generating classroom discussions through a debriefing session delivered by a lived experience worker. However, greater clarity around the objectives, methods and interpretation of findings is needed. The manuscript may also benefit from incorporating some discussion of how the lessons learned from implementing Moving Stories can be applied to other similar programs. The manuscript is generally clearly written. While I have noted some points of ambiguity in my specific comments, I do recommend the authors review the manuscript for any typographical or grammatical errors that are not specifically noted during review. I have made a number of specific comments below, I hope they are helpful to the authors in revising the manuscript.
We have reviewed the entire manuscript for any typographical or grammatical errors as well as to reduce wordiness and possible ambiguity. To reduce the wordiness of this reply, we have not pasted all changes made in this regard. They have been marked using track changes in the revised manuscript. 
Specific comments:
1. Title and Abstract: Moving Stories is characterised as a serious game led by lived experience workers. This seems misleading, as the only lived experience involvement described in the manuscript is the role of the lived experience workers in delivering a debriefing session. This element of the program was delivered by people with lived experience, but there is no evidence of true lived experience leadership. Please clarify whether this program involved lived experience leadership (i.e., the game was developed by people with lived experience, the program was developed and run by people with lived experience). If this is not the case, please adjust the title and abstract to accurately represent the nature of the Moving Stories program.
We have adjusted the title and abstract to accurately reflect that only the classroom debriefing session was led by lived experience workers. 
Changes in manuscript:
Title, page 1:
“Serious game coupled with a contact-based session led by lived experience workers for depression prevention in high-school students: feasibility of scaled-up implementation.” 
Abstract, page 3, lines 35-38:
“A serious game coupled with a classroom session led by lived experience workers (LEWs) might help to overcome these barriers.”
Introduction:
2. Page 6, Lines 109-110: What is meant by “a game-based design was used for Moving Stories led by lived experience workers.” Was the design and implementation of the program led by lived experience workers, or does this refer to the delivery of the briefing session? Please ensure the level of lived experience involvement is accurately characterised.
We agree that way the level of lived experience involvement could have been reflected on more accurately. We made the following changes in the manuscript.
Changes in manuscript:
Introduction, Page 7, lines 129-131:
“Therefore, Moving Stories was based in both approaches: education as well as direct-contact with a lived experience worker.”
3. Page 6, Lines 117-118: What were the specific objectives of the process evaluation? What elements of program implementation did you plan to evaluate? Outlining these objectives in the Introduction section would provide more context for the methods and findings presented below. At the moment it is somewhat unclear why certain kinds of data were collected (e.g., costs) and others were not (e.g., perspectives of lived experience workers, school staff, and students on acceptability/feasibility).
The specific objectives of the process evaluation have been added as suggested by the reviewer.
Changes in manuscript:
Introduction, page 7-8, lines 150-162:
“Therefore, the primary aim of the current study was to assess the feasibility of implementing Moving Stories as a universal preventive intervention within the STORM program. More specifically, we wanted to know (1) the number and percentage of high-school students that actively played Moving Stories (coverage rate), (2) the average number of playing days out of the five (participation rate), (3) how successful LEWs were in reviewing all five mental health first aid (MHFA) strategies during the debriefing sessions and to what extend students could identify depressive symptoms (fidelity), (4) what other themes were addressed and resonated with the students during the debriefing sessions, and how the students responded to the personal experiences of the LEWs. Finally, implementation costs were computed including the costs of recruiting and training LEWs for leading the debriefing sessions to see if money was spent wisely or requires reallocation. As recommended by Oakley et al. [31], assessing the feasibility of implementing an intervention is performed before the effectiveness data of the STORM trial are analyzed.”
Materials and Methods
4. Participants and Procedure, Page 6: How many schools were involved in the trial? Were different types of schools involved (e.g., government vs private funded)? What level of diversity did schools represent (e.g., average socioeconomic status of student population, range of geographical areas)?
Information regarding schools has been added in the Methods section. In addition, level of education of schools was added in the Results section in Table 1. 
Changes in manuscript:
Methods, Participants and procedure, page 8-9, lines 169-180: 
“In the context of the STORM trial, the program of Moving Stories was implemented in two consecutive study years, namely 2017-2018 and 2018-2019. In the Netherlands the study year generally starts around September and concludes around July. Moving Stories was offered from January to May in each study year. Fifteen high schools participate within the STORM trial, of which seven were randomly assigned to the experimental condition. Moving Stories was only offered at schools in the experimental condition.
 Nearly one thousand (N = 982) eight grade high-school students across seven schools in the Southeast of the province North-Brabant participated in Moving Stories. Data from the STORM trial indicated that 11-13% of these eight grade students were screen positive for depressive symptoms as measured by the Children’s Depression Inventory 2, and 5-6% of them were screen positive on suicidal thoughts or behaviors.”
5. Participants and Procedure, Page 7: How were students recruited? How did they provide informed consent (for app and research)? Were students required to participate in the research in order to access the Moving Stories program and participate in the debriefing session?
Information regarding consent have been added in the Data collection section. 
Changes in manuscript:
Methods, Data collection, page 14, lines 311-316:
“The medical ethics committee (Commissie Mensgebonden Onderzoek Region Arnhem-Nijmegen) in The Netherlands approved this study (NL61599.091.17). Informed consent from adolescents and their parents was obtained for the STORM trial. During the second trial year participation in Moving Stories was allowed on voluntary basis for students not participating in the STORM trial. At all times, students were informed that a researcher would be present during the debriefing sessions who might take anonymous notes.”
6. Intervention description, Page 7, Line 148: “Lived Experience Worker of depression” doesn’t quite make sense. I’d suggest changing this to “Lived Experience Worker with experience of depression” (or something similar) throughout the manuscript.
We have changed the term “lived experience worker of depression” to “lived experience worker with experience of depression” throughout the manuscript as suggested.
7. Intervention description, Page 7, Lines 149-150: This section should specify that the introductory lesson was led by a researcher. Additionally, please specify what information students were given in the introductory session (i.e., what were they told the aim of the program was? Is depression specifically mentioned?).
The intervention description of the introductory session has been expanded.
Changes in manuscript:
Methods, Intervention, page 10, lines 210-222:
“During the introductory lesson a researcher would explain to students how to download the app, what was expected of them and provided log-in codes. These sessions were delivered during a regular school class in a structured manner using a ready-to-use PowerPoint presentation to ensure every student received similar instructions. The aim of the game, as described to students, is that they will enter a virtual home where they will find a girl, Lisa, who is not feeling well. Students are asked to see if they can be of any help to Lisa. The term depression is not used during this introductory session. Although the game is played individually, the students are encouraged to help each other in identifying strategies that could be of any help to Lisa. Students were instructed to download the app during this introductory classroom session. After downloading the app, participants had to enter a passcode in order to receive access to the full app to ensure only adolescents from participating schools could actively use the app. As such, only participants that were enrolled in their second year of high school could participate.”
8. Intervention description, Pages 7-8, Lines 151-155: Some elements of program delivery need clarification. When did students complete the game – in class or in their own time? Were they prompted to play the game each day, if so how? Why could the game only be played for a limited time period in the morning, particularly if the game was played outside of class?
The intervention description of playing the game has been expanded.
Changes in manuscript:
Methods, Intervention, page 10-11, lines 224-244: 
“Students then go on to play the game app for 10-15 minutes in the morning, between 7AM and 11AM, for 5 days. Students only had access to the app during the five days that they were asked to play, while they could still open the app students could no longer perform any actions or start over after the five playing days of their class was over. Students play the game individually, but simultaneous with their classmates and they are expected to do this in their own time. Schools did not provide the students with time to complete the game during school hours. In the game students learn to interact with a virtual girl, Lisa, suffering from depressive symptoms. The students perform actions in the game (over 5 days) which consist of household tasks and/or offering Lisa help, and have the ability to talk to Lisa in a structured manner using preprogrammed options conversation). The aim is that they learn effective strategies when helping someone with depressive symptoms or to become more able to seek help for themselves. Students were prompted to play the game as reminders from the app would pop-up when Lisa’s house would open (7AM) and an hour before the house would close (10AM). As with any mobile app, students had the ability to turn of pop-ups from the app. Feedback is provided each day by gaining or losing points indicating a relationship score indicating the quality of the relationship with Lisa based on the action they did in the game. In addition, they receive written text messages from Lisa telling the students how Lisa felt about each action they performed. In this way, students knew why they had gained or lost points. These messages were sent after school hours, from 3PM until 7PM.”
9. Intervention description, Page 7, Lines 160-163: How long was the debriefing session? Aside from the requirement to cover the five MHFA strategies, were there any other guidelines or requirements for the structure of the session?
The intervention description of the debriefing session has been expanded.
Changes in manuscript:
Methods, Intervention, page 11-12, lines 245-266:
“After approximately seven days, students are brought back together again for the debriefing session. This debriefing session is an in-person classroom session lead by the LEW during a regular school class which are between 40 and 50 minutes long depending on the school. The LEW was aware of the length of each sessions beforehand. The LEW talks about his or her personal experience (approximately 10 minutes) and relates these personal experiences with depression to the game, which is then related to the students’ experiences with the game. The LEWs are required to discuss the five first aid strategies from the teen Mental Health First Aid (MHFA): (1) look for warning signs, (2) ask how their friend or peer is doing, (3) listen without judgement, (4) help them connect with an adult, and (5) your friendship is important [21]. The five strategies are reviewed and wrapped up as take-home messages for the students during the debriefing sessions. For this the LEWs can choose to use the PowerPoint slides that were made available to them during their training. In the PowerPoint slides show some example questions to launch discussions about the five aid strategies, but the LEWs were free to use these slides and adapt it to their personal preference as long as the five strategies are discussed. Moreover, the structure of the debriefing session was deliberately left open so LEWs could adapt it to their personal preference and make impromptu responses to the themes brought up by the students.”
10. Data collection, Page 9, Line 183: Information about the cost of the Moving Stories app was not reported. Please add this to the Results or remove this statement from the Methods.
This statement has been removed from the Methods section.
11. Data collection Page 9, Line 188: Costs associated with debriefing sessions are already listed in the paragraph above, statement can be removed from this paragraph.
The statement regarding “costs associated with debriefing session” have been removed.
12. Data collection, Page 9, Lines 191-193: Was informed consent obtained from students and lived experience workers permitting the collection and reporting of session minutes? This is particularly important as individual students and workers have been quoted in the Results section.
Information regarding consent have been added in the Data collection section. The revisions can be found under the changes made underneath reviewer comment 5. 
13. Data collection, Page 9, Lines 191-193: The spread of recorded sessions across schools should be noted here.
We have added further information regarding the recorded sessions.
Changes in manuscript:
Methods, Data collection, page 15, lines 332-335: 
“ In total, 49 debriefing sessions were provided by 11 LEWs. Notes were taken of 18 debriefing sessions: 8 during study year of 2017-2018 and 10 during 2018-2019 with at least one debriefing session per school (see Table 1). These notes were kept by four researchers to record what the LEW and students discussed during the debriefing sessions.”
14. Data collection, Page 9, Lines 194-199: Please describe the analysis methods used to produce themes from the debriefing session minutes.
We have added a section on Data Analysis.
Changes in manuscript:
Methods, Data analysis, page 16, lines 350-360:
“Descriptive statistics such as means and standard deviations were computed in SPSS Version 27 [33]. With regards to the qualitative data from the notes, first we checked in how many debriefing sessions the required five aid strategies were discussed by the LEW. Additionally, we checked whether common themes arose across the different debriefing sessions. These themes were not pre-determined as there was no specific theme the LEW had to discuss with regard to their personal experiences or depressive symptoms in general. Instead, they were free to discuss several aspects of both the game and their personal experience with depressive symptoms and were encouraged to interactively tailor the session to the interests expressed by the students. Discussed topics were considered a theme if a topic occurred in at least two of the recorded notes. A researcher read and coded all notes using MAXQDA 2020 Version 2.4.0 [34]. Quotes representative for themes were then exported into Excel.”
Results:
15. Preparing delivery, Page 10: How were Lived Experience Workers recruited and selected? Were they required to have any previous experience? How was the training program developed? Was the training program developed with any lived experience input, or input from organisations with experience in delivering lived experience content in classroom settings? Who ran the training sessions? Were any materials provided to training participants for future reference/revision? Given the focus of the Discussion and Conclusion on the need to improve training and support of Lived Experience Workers, it is important to provide these details.
We have added more information regarding the selection and recruitment of the LEW in the Methods section in separate section.
Changes in manuscript:
Methods, Recruitment and Training of Lived Experience Workers, page 13-14, lines 279-309:
“The LEW were recruited via a post on the Facebook page of the Trimbos Institute (Netherlands Institute of Mental Health and Addiction) and GGZ Oost Brabant (Mental Health Service). Additionally, we contacted several lived experience organizations. Requirements were that the LEW had some prior lived experience with depression. LEWs were informed during the recruitment process that they were required to tell their personal story to students in their second year of high school and that they would need to complete a training beforehand. Any LEW that applied was invited to participate in the training (n = 37).
The LEWs first had to complete an 8 hr training. This training for LEWs was designed by the authors, and a researcher who is also a LEW and was an experienced trainer. The training sessions were provided by these researchers as well. At the start of the training, participants were asked to play the serious game to fully understand what the students have done prior to their debriefing session.
The training itself consisted of a theoretical part and a practical part. During the theoretical part (3hrs) the LEWs learned more about the STORM program, its delivery and the goals of the Moving Stories intervention, and what their role was in the Moving Stories intervention. In the practical training (5hrs), the LEWs had the opportunity to practice telling their personal story in 10-15 minutes, and introducing the five MHFA strategies. The discussion of the five strategies from the MHFA was the most important component of the debriefing session and the LEWs were required to discuss all five strategies. Additionally, LEWs had to prepare themselves for questions that students might ask regarding their experiences, difficult topics (such as students having suicidal thoughts) and the game. 
 The LEW were provided with training materials (PowerPoints used during the training session) and a PowerPoint that they were free to use or adapt to their liking for the debriefing session. This PowerPoint consisted of a few example questions that the LEW could ask students as well as a slide with the five strategies from the MHFA. 
The training sessions took place from September to December in both years indicating a time lapse of one to six months between training and the debriefing session. In the meantime the LEWs were updated on planning by the researchers via email and WhatsApp, but any other contact between the researchers and LEWs was minimal during the training and debriefing sessions. By design, LEWs always led the debriefing sessions in the presence of a gate keeper-trained teacher and a researcher, with the researcher taking notes.”
16. Preparing delivery, Page 10: The utility of reporting costs is unclear. Was a cost-benefit analysis conducted? How do these costs compare to other programs? From the information presented, it is not possible for the reader to determine whether the program represented good value for money.
We have added in the Introduction a more specific aim of why we reported the costs. Moreover, in the Discussion we have added a section on costs. 
Changes in manuscript:
Introduction, page 8, lines 158-160:
“Finally, implementation costs were computed including the costs of recruiting and training LEWs for leading the debriefing sessions to see if money was spent wisely or requires reallocation.”
Discussion, page 29, lines 651-657:
“Recruitment and training of 37 LEWs costed €4,672 ($5,232) or €126 ($141) per LEW. The total costs (including recruitment and training costs of LEWs) of offering Moving Stories to 7 high schools was €11,034 ($12,357) or €1,576 ($1,765) per school. Since 982 students participated in Moving Stories, this amounted to €11 ($13) per participating student. This was achieved below the planned budget ceiling. However, it should be noted that of the 37 trained LEWs, only 11 led debriefing sessions, which suggests that recruitment and training of the LEWs should be improved.”
17. Offering Moving Stories, Pages 10-11: Again, the utility of reporting costs is unclear. If costs are to be reported, perhaps summarising costs across preparation and implementation in a single table would clarify the total cost of running the program?
We have added an overview of the costs in a table as suggested.
Changes in manuscript:
Results, Offering Moving Stories, page 20, lines 433-434:
Table 2. Overview of cost in euros.
 Costs Total Costs % of total costs
Preparation 4,672 42%
Trainer 3,798 
LEW 874 
Offering 6,371 58%
Materials 1,750 
LEW 4,621 
Total Costs 11,043 
18. Offering Moving Stories, Page 12, Lines 250-259: Is any information available about how Lived Experience Workers were communicated with and kept engaged with the program between training and classroom sessions? This may help shed some light on possible areas for improvement when next implementing the program.
We have added information regarding engagement with LEW throughout the intervention program in the “Recruitment and Training” section of the Methods as well as added this in the Discussion.
Changes in manuscript:
Methods, Recruitment and Training, page 14, lines 304-309:
“The training sessions took place from September to December in both years indicating a time lapse of one to six months between training and the debriefing session. In the meantime the LEWs were updated on planning by the researchers via email and WhatsApp, but any other contact between the researchers and LEWs was minimal during the training and debriefing sessions. By design, LEWs always led the debriefing sessions in the presence of a gate keeper-trained teacher and a researcher, with the researcher taking notes.”
Discussion, page 31, lines 711-717:
“The high drop-out rate among the LEWs may also indicate that the level of contact between the research staff and the LEWs in the period between training and the debriefing sessions was too low. This suggests another area where improvement can be made. Unfortunately, the current study did not ask the LEWs how the level of contact with the researchers affected their engagement in the implementation of Moving Stories. For future evaluations, it is important that the experiences of LEW are evaluated to determine which aspects or processes might impede further participation especially during the implementation.”
19. Debriefing sessions, Page 13: Beyond the MHFA topics, was there any guidance on the structure of the debriefing sessions? This may have influenced what was most commonly discussed. It is important to outline the structure of the debriefing sessions in the Methods.
We have expanded our description of the debriefing sessions in the Methods as can be found underneath the changes made for reviewer comment number 9.
20. Debriefing sessions, Page 16, Line 359: Here and in a few other places in the manuscript, school mentors are referred to. What is a school mentor? This term needs defining for an international audience.
The term school mentor has been deleted in most instances and replaced by the term “school teacher”. In the quotes by the students an explanatory note has been added. 
Changes in manuscript:
Results, page 24, lines 527-529:
“Note: A mentor is a teacher who also acts as a trusted guide for students in matters related to their study. Typically, a mentor is assigned at the start of school year to either one or more classes, while a class typically has some 20-30 students.”
Discussion:
21. Program costs are not discussed in the Discussion section. This makes me unsure of the utility of reporting them – what was the purpose of assessing costs? What do the costs mean in practical terms?
We have added a section on the program costs in the Discussion.
Changes in manuscript:
Discussion, Preparing Moving Stories, page 29, lines 651-657:
“Recruitment and training of 37 LEWs costed €4,672 ($5,232) or €126 ($141) per LEW. The total costs (including recruitment and training costs of LEWs) of offering Moving Stories to 7 high schools was €11,034 ($12,357) or €1,576 ($1,765) per school. Since 982 students participated in Moving Stories, this amounted to €11 ($13) per participating student. This was achieved below the planned budget ceiling. However, it should be noted that of the 37 trained LEWs, only 11 led debriefing sessions, which suggests that recruitment and training of the LEWs should be improved.” 
22. Preparing Moving Stories, Pages 20-21, Lines 450-461: While some interesting points are made here, it is unclear how much of this content relates to the findings reported in the Methods section. Please clarify the links between these assertions and your process evaluation data. Additionally, this section feels like it is missing citations – please add in citations to reference materials as appropriate.
We have deleted this section as it was not directly related to the key findings. 
23. Preparing Moving Stories, Pages 21-22: Parts of the discussion around lived experience workers feels like it is focused on perceived weaknesses of the workers themselves (e.g., they may not be psychologically ready to work in a classroom), rather than focusing on elements of the program and its implementation that could be improved to better support a lived experience workforce. I do not think this is intentional, however, I think it would be beneficial to review the discussion points around the lived experience workers to ensure they are focused on evaluation findings about the program, rather than assumptions about the workers. It may also be helpful to highlight the lack of data on Lived Experience Worker experiences in these discussions – it is hard to propose effective support strategies without knowing what workers enjoyed about delivering the program and what they would change.
We have revised our Discussion around the LEW to better reflect the findings reported in the Results.
Changes in manuscript:
Discussion, Preparing Moving Stories, pages 29-31, lines 660-717:
“For this project, every LEW who indicated they wanted to be involved in the project, was allowed to complete the training. Thus, it would be beneficial to develop a more specific set of criteria for selecting a LEW and make it very clear what is expected of LEW. Selection criteria that we would recommend are that the LEW has some prior experience in delivering their personal story to a public, preferably with high school students in classrooms. Recruitment of LEWs via LEW organizations could help finding qualified LEWs.
 The high drop-out rate among the LEWs further suggests the need to more intensively involve the LEWs in the design of the debriefing session and how it is implemented. After all, their engagement and sense of ownership may hold the key to their willingness to turn the debriefing sessions into a success. Ultimately, a sense of belongingness is important [35]. In addition, the training session for the LEWs may need to be better geared towards acquiring the ability and confidence to provide debriefing sessions in the classroom setting [36]. We refer to research by Chen et al. [37] who identified four main activities that are needed to adequately prepare a LEW for contact-based interventions. First, LEWs need to be psychologically prepared: they need adequate support and confidence. Second, adequate knowledge and skills need to be built. Third, a LEW needs to develop their personal story in a way they can share it. Fourth, and most importantly, the LEWs need to be able to practice the entire session.
 Therefore, we recommend more time is allocated to the practical part of the training such that each LEW has ample training time to develop and tell their personal story in 10-15 minutes , and where the LEW can practice how to introduce the five MHFA strategies and learns how to anticipate to the various reactions and questions that students might bring up in real debriefing sessions. As a case in point, a prior study found that a transient dip in one’s mood could occur within hours or first couple of days after having shared one’s personal experience related to mental – although in the long run one’s mental health will not be affected and LEWs may feel that sharing their story was beneficial to themselves and others [35]. 
 The high drop-out rate among the LEWs may also indicate that the level of contact between the research staff and the LEWs in the period between training and the debriefing sessions was too low. This suggests another area where improvement can be made. Unfortunately, the current study did not ask the LEWs how the level of contact with the researchers affected their engagement in the implementation of Moving Stories. For future evaluations, it is important that the experiences of LEW are evaluated to determine which aspects or processes might impede further participation especially during the implementation.”
24. Preparing Moving Stories, Page 21, Line 465: Is efficient the best word to describe the improved recruitment strategy? Is ‘specific’ or ‘selective’ a more accurate term for what is meant here?
In accordance with the reviewer's suggestion we have replaced the term “efficient” with “specific”. 
Changes in manuscript:
Discussion, Preparing Moving Stories, page 29, lines 661-663:
“Thus, it would be beneficial to develop a more specific set of criteria for selecting a LEW and make it very clear what is expected of LEW.”
25. Preparing Moving Stories, Page 21, Lines 482-484: Was this a limitation of the implementation of recruitment and training – was the Lived Experience Worker role and what it involved inadequately explained before people volunteered for training?
We have added a section on recruitment and training of LEWs in Methods section. Additionally, we have revised our discussion regarding the LEWs. The changes made in the discussion can be found underneath the changes made for reviewer comment number 23.
Changes in manuscript:
Methods, Recruitment and training of LEWs, page 13, lines 279-285:
“The LEW were recruited via a post on the Facebook page of the Trimbos Institute (Netherlands Institute of Mental Health and Addiction) and GGZ Oost Brabant (Mental Health Service). Additionally, we contacted several lived experience organizations. Requirements were that the LEW had some prior lived experience with depression. LEWs were informed during the recruitment process that they were required to tell their personal story to students in their second year of high school and that they would need to complete a training beforehand. Any LEW that applied was invited to participate in the training (n = 37).”
26. Preparing Moving Stories, Page 22, Lines 487-496: This seems like a relevant place to discuss costs, if they are to be better incorporated into the manuscript.
A discussion regarding the costs have been added to this paragraph. The revisions can be found underneath the changes made for reviewer comment number 21.
27. Offering Moving Stories, Page 22, Lines 502-503: Please note this in the Methods section.
This has been added in the Methods section.
Changes in manuscript:
Methods, page 11, lines 228-230:
“Students play the game individually, but simultaneous with their classmates and they are expected to do this in their own time. Schools did not provide the students with time to complete the game during school hours.”
28. Offering Moving Stories, Page 22, Lines 506-509: Please note this context around difference in app access and encouragement of students to help each other play in the Methods section.
This has been added in the Methods section.
Changes in manuscript:
Methods, Intervention, page 10, lines 216-218:
“Although the game is played individually, the students are encouraged to help each other in identifying strategies that could be of any help to Lisa.”
Methods, Data collection, page 14, lines 313-316:
“During the second trial year participation in Moving Stories was allowed on voluntary basis for students not participating in the STORM trial. At all times, students were informed that a researcher would be present during the debriefing sessions who might take anonymous notes.”
29. Offering Moving Stories, Page 23-24, Lines 529-538: Parts of this paragraph are covered in the Preparing Moving Stories section, perhaps it could be moved up and integrated with other Lived Experience Worker-related topics? Additionally, were there any indications from the evaluation data that a health professional would make Lived Experience Workers feel more comfortable? Or that workers were worried about the impact of delivering the session on their mental health? Making assumptions about the mental state of people who chose not to participate in delivering sessions is potentially stigmatising. As noted above, I recommend refocusing this discussion point to emphasise findings from the evaluation (e.g., students tend to share personal stories during debriefing and may thus benefit from direct access to a health professional, lived experience workers may feel more comfortable working in pairs), rather than assumptions about the Lived Experience Workers.
We have streamlined the paragraphs “Preparing Moving Stories” and “Offering Moving Stories” to both avoid duplication of information as well as focus them more on the specific results of the evaluation to avoid stigmatization of the LEWs. 
The revisions for “Preparing Moving Stories” can be found underneath the changes made for reviewer comments 21 and 23. Any discussion regarding the LEWs is now described in this paragraph and no longer underneath “Offering Moving Stories”. 
30. Debriefing sessions, Page 24, Lines 552-553: Citation for this sentence?
We have added a reference.
Changes in manuscript:
Debriefing Sessions, page 34, lines 774-777:
“This is especially the case for adolescents as these symptoms are considered key symptoms of adolescent depression and not in adult depression [46].”
References, page 42, line 1039-1040:
American Psychiatric Association, American Psychiatric Association. DSM 5. American Psychiatric Association. 2013;70.
31. Debriefing sessions, Page 25, Lines 564-565: Citation for this sentence?
We have added a reference.
Changes in manuscript:
Debriefing Sessions, page 34, lines 789-790:
“Moreover, when students feel comfortable to share their personal experiences with mental health, they are more likely to seek help [47].”
References, page 42, lines 1041-1043:
Corry DA, Leavey G. Adolescent trust and primary care: Help-seeking for emotional and psychological difficulties. Journal of Adolescence. 2017;54:1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.adolescence.2016.11.003
32. Strengths and Limitations, Page 26, Lines 586-588: This information should be noted in the Methods section.
This has been added to the Methods section.
Changes in manuscript:
Methods, page 15, lines 332-335:
“In total, 49 debriefing sessions were provided by 11 LEWs. Notes were taken of 18 debriefing sessions: 8 during study year of 2017-2018 and 10 during 2018-2019 with at least one debriefing session per school (see Table 1). These notes were kept by four researchers to record what the LEW and students discussed during the debriefing sessions.”
33. Recommendations, Page 26, Line 608: While it is an interesting point, I am unsure how the data support the recommendation that partners in the program need to feel a sense of shared ownership, particularly as school staff and lived experience worker perspectives were not collected. Please clarify.
Any statements and reflections regarding a sense of shared ownership have been deleted as they do not adequately reflect in the key findings of the current evaluation. 
34. Recommendations, Page 27, Line 611: Do you mean lived experience organisation here (not patient organisation)?
The recommendations have been integrated with the paragraphs regarding the findings in the Discussion.
35. Recommendations, Page 26-27: Do you have any recommendations for assessing whether these strategies are successful in improving program implementation?
The recommendations have been integrated with the paragraphs regarding the findings in the Discussion. We did adjust the terminology from patient organization to lived experience organization throughout the manuscript. 
36. Conclusions, Page 27, Line 625: Do you mean effectiveness of the preparation phase, rather than efficiency?
We have rewritten the entire Conclusions section to better reflect our revised version of the discussion.
Changes in manuscript:
Conclusion, page 37, lines 857-863:
“Concluding, implementation of Moving Stories to prevent depressive symptoms in high-school students is feasible. However, there were few trained LEWs that were able to provide debriefing sessions suggesting that selection and training of LEWs needs to be improved. The role of the LEWs is important because they managed to grab the full attention of students and were able to launch frank discussions about depression and create a space wherein students were willing to share their personal experiences. This suggests that Moving Stories was successful in enhancing mental health literacy and reducing depression stigma.”
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Reply reviewers_PLOSONE_PE_20210816.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0260224.r003Decision Letter 1
MordauntDylan AAcademic Editor© 2021 Dylan A Mordaunt2021Dylan A Mordaunthttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
18 Oct 2021

PONE-D-21-17344R1Serious game coupled with a contact-based session led by lived experience workers for depression prevention in high-school students: feasibility of scaled-up implementationPLOS ONE
Geachte Dr. Gijzen,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
I detail the recommendations in the section below. However, in summary there is a need to respond to some additional concerns. Barring any surprises, I anticipate that this would be able to progress to acceptance for publication but request that these be addressed first. I would anticipate that these wouldn't take long to address, and that I could likely review these without needing to go back to the reviewers for additional comment.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Dec 02 2021 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Met hartelijke groeten,
Dylan A Mordaunt, MB ChB, FRACP, FAIDH
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Additional Editor Comments (if provided):
Thank you for your submission. I took this over from another editor as well as not being able to get opinions from all original reviewers and therefore it has taken a little longer to pull together a decision for your resubmission.
One of the reviewers had provided previous suggestions and was subsequently satisfied with the responses. The other reviewer who was new to this review, has taken the perspective of this being an evaluation rather than an implementation study, and therefore made a recommendation to reject the submission.
I think the comments are important and that the authors should be given an opportunity to respond to them, but as you will see I have not agreed with the recommendation to reject but rather to put these criticisms to the authors. In particular, I put it to the authors to argue which of these warrants addressing pre-publication and which belongs post-publication. PLoS One criteria for publication are by design, a bit different to other journals (https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/criteria-for-publication), and I am not convinced that the problems identified by the second reviewer are so critical that the manuscript should be rejected. However, I think the reviewers comments were immensely valuable and that the authors should feel challenged to address these adequately for the open review process- that is the peer review record published alongside with the manuscript.
With regards specifically to the journal selection criteria:
1. The study appears to present the results of original research. It appears to be an implementation/scaling of an approach developed in an earlier clinical trial.
2. Results do not appear to have been published elsewhere. The second reviewer has raised the question of "salami slicing" and it would be helpful for the authors to clarify what approach has been taken with regards to the publication of results from the underlying study. My interpretation is that this could be considered an "extension phase" of the original trial, or as the authors have called it, an implementation study focused on the scaling of the capability developed and studies in the original trial. I do think implementation science is a separate issue to clinical trials, but I think clearly distinguishing this is important for the record.
3. Experiments, statistics, and other analyses are largely performed to a high technical standard and are described in sufficient detail. The second reviewer has raised the possibility of whether aspects such as the interviews being recorded with notes rather than with recordings/coding, constitute a critical flaw. In the context of this being an implementation study, I would put it to the authors to respond to this with regards to feasibility in particular. It has been commented on but given that we could anticipate that this might be a criticism post-publication, this may warrant expanding on.
4. Conclusions are presented in an appropriate fashion and are supported by the data.
5. The article is presented in an intelligible fashion and is written in standard English.
6. The research meets all applicable standards for the ethics of experimentation and research integrity.
7. The article adheres to appropriate reporting guidelines and community standards for data availability, however I would suggest that upon clarifying that this is an implementation study rather than an extension phase of a clinical trial, that the authors consider reviewing the manuscript for adherence to the Standards for Reporting Implementation Studies (StaRI) Statement (https://www.equator-network.org/reporting-guidelines/stari-statement/). This is particularly helpful if the manuscript is later included in a systematic review or other form of meta-research, in to maximise the assessed quality of the study (not withstanding any critical problems).
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: No
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: No
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #2: Thank you to the authors for their thoughtful and thorough response to my comments. All of my comments have been addressed to my satisfaction. I have no further comments or concerns.
Reviewer #3: This paper reports on the feasibility of one part of a four part program designed to prevent depression in young people. While the focus of the Moving Stories intervention and the broader STORM program is admirable, I have several significant concerns regarding the manuscript. First, it is not clear to me why this is a stand alone paper - it seems to me that the authors may be salami slicing data from the larger RCT when it could have been presented as a single hybrid effectiveness-implementation trial. Further, the analyses used in this study are very simple and do not provide meaningful outputs e.g. simply reporting on costs does not form the basis of an economic analysis. It is difficult to judge if the intervention is cost effective or not as it is not compared to anything. Further, the description of the qualitative analysis is concerning - note taking rather than recording and transcribing verbatim limits the authenticity of the qualitative data, and there is no qualitative framework provided to the approach for analysis. I have some additional smaller concerns, but unfortunately, the ones outlined above are difficult to overcome. As such, I don't think this is suitable for publication in PLOS ONE.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0260224.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
3 Nov 2021

Mandy Gijzen
Trimbos Institute
P.O. Box 725, 3500 AS, Utrecht, 
The Netherlands.
01-11-2021
Response to the Editor and the Reviewer
Ref: PONE-D-21-17344R1
Title: Feasibility of a serious game coupled with a contact-based session led by lived experience workers for depression prevention in high-school students
Journal: PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Mordaunt,
We would like to thank you for the opportunity to respond to the comments of reviewer 3 to improve and further clarify our manuscript. The comments of the editor in italics; followed by our response, while changes made in the manuscript are between quotation marks. 
1. The study appears to present the results of original research. It appears to be an implementation/scaling of an approach developed in an earlier clinical trial.
2. Results do not appear to have been published elsewhere. The second reviewer has raised the question of "salami slicing" and it would be helpful for the authors to clarify what approach has been taken with regards to the publication of results from the underlying study. My interpretation is that this could be considered an "extension phase" of the original trial, or as the authors have called it, an implementation study focused on the scaling of the capability developed and studies in the original trial. I do think implementation science is a separate issue to clinical trials, but I think clearly distinguishing this is important for the record.
In regard to comments 1 and 2:
In short,
1. The preventive STORM program (consisting of several interventions) is currently being evaluated in an RCT
2. During the trial one preventive intervention -Moving Stories- proofed hard to execute as several obstacles were met during the trial.
3. This raised questions about the feasibility of rolling out Moving Stories in the future, once the STORM program effectiveness has been ascertained. 
4. Hence the need for a feasibility study to look into the barriers and facilitating factors for implementing Moving Stories 
Therefore, our study is
• Not an implementation study in the sense of STaRI (which has to be conducted once the interventions has been proven to be effective)
• Neither a hybrid implementation-evaluation study (with some amount of salami slicing on our part)
• But a feasibility study looking into the barriers and facilitating factors for Moving Stories’ future role out should STORM has been proven to be effective.
In our Abstract and Introduction we have added a clarification of the specific aim and intent of the study. 
In the title of our MS we used terms to describe to study’s methodology: originally Process Evaluation and after revision Feasibility of Scaled-up Implementation. Now we begin to see that these qualifiers were unhelpful and may have caused confusion about the purpose of our study. Hence, we have changed the title of the MS once again (please, see below) and tried to do a better job in clarifying the purpose of the MS in both the Abstract and Introduction (please, see below).
Changes made in manuscript:
Title: 
“Feasibility of a serious game coupled with a contact-based session led by lived experience workers for depression prevention in high-school students”
Abstract, page 2:
Lines 30-32:
“The current study was carried out to assess inhibiting and promoting factors for scaling up Moving Stories once its effectiveness has been ascertained.”
Lines 43-44:
“Bringing Moving Stories to scale in the high-school setting appears feasible, but will remain logistically somewhat challenging.”
Introduction, page 6, lines 118-127:
“Therefore, the primary aim of the current study was to assess the feasibility of implementing Moving Stories as a universal preventive intervention within the STORM program as this intervention was newly added within the STORM approach. More specifically, during the STORM trial we aimed to record (1) the number and percentage of high-school students that actively played Moving Stories (coverage rate), (2) the average number of playing days out of the five (participation rate), (3) how successful LEWs were in reviewing all five mental health first aid (MHFA) strategies during the debriefing sessions and to what extend students could identify depressive symptoms (fidelity), (4) what other themes were addressed and resonated with the students during the debriefing sessions, and how the students responded to the personal experiences of the LEWs.”
Methods, page 12, line 255:
“Data was collected during the STORM trial.”
3. Experiments, statistics, and other analyses are largely performed to a high technical standard and are described in sufficient detail. The second reviewer has raised the possibility of whether aspects such as the interviews being recorded with notes rather than with recordings/coding, constitute a critical flaw. In the context of this being an implementation study, I would put it to the authors to respond to this with regards to feasibility in particular. It has been commented on but given that we could anticipate that this might be a criticism post-publication, this may warrant expanding on.
We have added a clarification on the chosen method of recording in our Methods. 
Changes made in manuscript:
Methods, Data collection, page 12-13, lines 275-279:
“In total, 49 debriefing sessions were provided by 11 LEWs. Notes were taken of 18 debriefing sessions to record what the LEW and students discussed during the debriefing sessions: 8 during study year of 2017-2018 and 10 during 2018-2019 with at least one debriefing session per school (see Table 1). These notes were kept by four researchers to ensure that topics noted were not the results of reporter bias.”
Discussion, Strengths and Limitations, pages 29, lines 672-675: 
“Tape-recording would have legal implications as participants would be identifiable. Moreover, tape-recording has the disadvantage participants are less likely to discuss personal issues freely [52, 53].”
4. Conclusions are presented in an appropriate fashion and are supported by the data.
5. The article is presented in an intelligible fashion and is written in standard English.
6. The research meets all applicable standards for the ethics of experimentation and research integrity.
7. The article adheres to appropriate reporting guidelines and community standards for data availability, however I would suggest that upon clarifying that this is an implementation study rather than an extension phase of a clinical trial, that the authors consider reviewing the manuscript for adherence to the Standards for Reporting Implementation Studies (StaRI) Statement (https://www.equator-network.org/reporting-guidelines/stari-statement/). This is particularly helpful if the manuscript is later included in a systematic review or other form of meta-research, in to maximise the assessed quality of the study (not withstanding any critical problems).
Please find the STaRI checklist, as requested 
Once again, many thanks for allowing us to make these revisions.
On behalf of all authors,
Mandy Gijzen
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Reply reviewer_PLOS_20211101.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0260224.r005Decision Letter 2
MordauntDylan AAcademic Editor© 2021 Dylan A Mordaunt2021Dylan A Mordaunthttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
5 Nov 2021

Feasibility of a serious game coupled with a contact-based session led by lived experience workers for depression prevention in high-school students
PONE-D-21-17344R2
Dear Dr. Gijzen,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Dylan A Mordaunt, MB ChB, FRACP, FAIDH
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Thank you for your submission. I am satisfied that the previous comments have been addressed adequately and that the manuscrupt now meets the criteria for publication.
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0260224.r006Acceptance letter
MordauntDylan AAcademic Editor© 2021 Dylan A Mordaunt2021Dylan A Mordaunthttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
17 Nov 2021

PONE-D-21-17344R2 
Feasibility of a serious game coupled with a contact-based session led by lived experience workers for depression prevention in high-school students 
Dear Dr. Gijzen:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Dylan A Mordaunt 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE