3755maternalchildMaternal & Child NutritionMatern Child NutrWileyPMC8189222818922281892223378012810.1111/mcn.13178Addressing obesity in the first 1000 days in high risk infants: Systematic review
RossiterChris ChengHeilok AppletonJessica CampbellKaren J Denney‐WilsonElizabeth 1Susan Wakil School of Nursing and Midwifery, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia2Institute for Physical Activity and Nutrition (IPAN), Deakin University, Burwood, Victoria, Australia3Sydney Institute for Women, Children and their Families, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia4Tresillian Family Care Centres, Belmore, New South Wales, Australia*Correspondence, 
Chris Rossiter, Susan Wakil School of Nursing and Midwifery, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia. 
Email: christine.rossiter@sydney.edu.au
✉Corresponding author.
2932021173e13178e131781662021© 2021 The Authors. Maternal & Child Nutrition published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.

## Abstract
Early intervention is critical for addressing the challenge of childhood obesity. Yet many preventive interventions do not target infants most at risk of future overweight or obesity. This systematic review examines interventions delivered before 2 years that aim to ameliorate excess weight gain among infants at high risk of overweight or obesity, due to sociodemographic characteristics, parental weight or health status, infant feeding or health behaviours. We searched six databases for interventions: (a) delivered before age two, (b) specifically aimed at infants at high risk of childhood obesity and (c) that reported outcomes by weight status beyond 28 days. The search identified over 27,000 titles, and 49 papers from 38 studies met inclusion criteria: 10 antenatal interventions, 16 postnatal and 12 conducted both before and after birth. Nearly all targeted infant and/or maternal nutrition. Studies varied widely in design, obesity risk factors, outcomes and quality. Overall, nine interventions of varying quality reported some evidence of significantly improved child weight trajectory, although effects tended to diminish over time. Interventions that improved weight outcomes tended to engage parents for a longer period, and most offered health professional input and support. Two studies of limited quality reported significantly worse weight outcomes in the intervention group.
Keywords: childhood obesity, infant feeding, infant growth, maternal nutrition, physical activity, systematic review

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2021 Feb 14; Received 2020 Sep 3; Accepted 2021 Feb 16; Collection date 2021 Jul.

## Key messages
Early intervention is critical to addressing unhealthy weight gain during infancy, to avoid obesity and related comorbidities in childhood, adolescence and adulthood.
Although many nutrition interventions are aimed at general populations of infants, fewer are targeted specifically to infants with identified risks of overweight and obesity related to socio‐demographic factors, feeding behaviour or parents' weight status.
Studies of targeted interventions vary widely in design, duration, target population and quality.
Successful interventions involved early childhood health professionals and recruited participants early, in order to support infants' health and well‐being.
There is scope for high‐quality research investigating longer term effects of targeted interventions delivered in infancy and prior to birth.
1.

## INTRODUCTION
Childhood obesity is a persistent global health issue. The World Health Organisation (WHO) estimates that in 2018, 40 million children under age five experienced overweight or obesity (World Health Organization,  ). The consequences of childhood obesity are vital, both for the health and wellbeing of individuals and for national health systems. Childhood overweight and obesity are associated with higher risk of obesity in adolescence and adulthood (Herman et al.,  ), and multiple comorbidities (Guh et al.,  ).
Overweight and obesity in childhood and beyond are associated with several early life factors such as maternal and infant characteristics, sociodemographic attributes (Dubois & Girard,  ; Lamb et al.,  ), and some cultural factors including preferences for larger infants (Cartagena et al.,  ; Hill et al.,  ; Kuswara et al.,  ; Rehayem et al.,  ; Wandel et al.,  ). Childhood overweight and obesity are associated with poor early nutrition, including limited or no breastfeeding, and early introduction of complementary foods (Appleton, Russell, et al.,  ; Mihrshahi & Baur,  ; Monasta et al.,  ; Woo Baidal et al.,  ). Excess weight gain may also relate to limited physical activity (Mihrshahi & Baur,  ), birthweight, unsettled infant sleep patterns (Taylor et al.,  , ) and parenting behaviour, including pressure to eat or use of food as reward (Russell et al.,  ). Another risk factor is rapid weight gain (RWG), defined as an increase in weight‐for‐age z‐score of >0.67 standard deviations, that is, the crossing of two or more weight percentile lines, between birth and 2 years (Goodell et al.,  ). The antenatal period is critical, given evidence on how prenatal exposures influence the weight trajectories of infants and children. Longitudinal studies have identified greater risks of overweight among children of parents with overweight and obesity; those exposed to diabetes in utero (Catalano & Shankar,  ; Gademan et al.,  ; Isganaitis et al.,  ; Lamb et al.,  ; Liao et al.,  ; Weng et al.,  ; Woo Baidal et al.,  ; Yu et al.,  ); or those born via elective caesarean section (Cai et al.,  ; Liao et al.,  ).
Given the early genesis of many risk factors, intervention is essential before dietary and activity behaviours become habitual. Interventions for school‐aged children miss the opportunity to change behaviour early, as increasing numbers start school with existing overweight or obesity (Mihrshahi & Baur,  ). Pregnancy and infancy present ideal opportunities for action; parents often seek health advice during this period of rapid change and may be willing to adopt healthier behaviours to protect infants against later obesity (Birch & Ventura,  ).
To address this challenge, health practitioners and researchers have developed and evaluated initiatives targeting the rich opportunity offered during the 1,000 days from conception to age two (Blake‐Lamb et al.,  ; Reilly et al.,  ; Woo Baidal et al.,  ). These approaches aim to support parents to adopt healthy eating and increase physical activity prior to birth or in early in infancy (Blake‐Lamb et al.,  ; Campbell & Hesketh,  ; Hennessy et al.,  ; Hesketh & Campbell,  ; Laws et al.,  ; Matvienko‐Sikar et al.,  ; Redsell, Edmonds, et al.,  ). Many interventions take a population‐wide approach to preventing excess weight gain, targeting all pregnant women or all infants during infancy (Blake‐Lamb et al.,  ; Ciampa et al.,  ; Hennessy et al.,  ; Hesketh & Campbell,  ; Matvienko‐Sikar et al.,  ; Rotevatn et al.,  ). Despite widespread evidence about potential risk factors, early interventions that focus specifically on infants who already have an increased risk of obesity are less common than universal programmes. A focus on interventions targeting children at higher risk could yield valuable insights for obesity prevention internationally and help target scarce health resources.
Several recent systematic reviews have focused on obesity prevention interventions for infants under 2 years (Blake‐Lamb et al.,  ; Ciampa et al.,  ; Matvienko‐Sikar et al.,  ; Redsell, Edmonds, et al.,  ; Rotevatn et al.,  ). Two more specifically considered young children from disadvantaged backgrounds (Laws et al.,  ; Russell et al.,  ), but not other risk factors. A recent narrative review of systematic reviews on infant feeding interventions for children aged 0–2 years focused on general interventions aimed at preventing overweight and obesity (Koplin et al.,  ). Similarly, systematic reviews of antenatal interventions typically focus on general populations (Blake‐Lamb et al.,  ; Redsell, Edmonds, et al.,  ), although they may include individual studies involving women with risk factors such as high body mass index (BMI) or gestational diabetes. Many reviews of interventions for overweight and obesity during pregnancy report only maternal or neonatal outcomes such as birthweight or complications (Dodd et al.,  ; Flannery et al.,  ). Currently, we are not aware of reviews focussed exclusively on infants at increased risk of overweight or obesity that report outcomes beyond the neonatal period.
This systematic review therefore aims to explore interventions up to 2 years of age intended to prevent excess weight gain in infants specifically identified as having increased risk of developing overweight or obesity. It identifies interventions delivered during the postnatal period (0–2 years) and during pregnancy for parents whose characteristics increase their children's risk of excess weight gain, and it examines outcomes reported as infant or child weight status beyond 1 month of age.

2.

## METHODS
2.1.

## Research questions
This systematic review addresses the following questions:

What health, behavioural or demographic factors (including baseline sociodemographic characteristics) do researchers use to predict infants at increased risk of overweight or obesity, for example, income or maternal education?
What are the elements of interventions aiming to prevent excess weight gain in infants at increased risk?
What interventions (or specific elements of interventions) are effective in reducing the risk of obesity among these young children?

The reviews followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta‐Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines for systematic reviews (Moher et al.,  ). The review protocol was registered with Prospero (https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/), number CRD100138.

2.2.

## Inclusion criteria
2.2.1.

## Study design
The review included original experimental and quasi‐experimental studies, including pre‐test/post‐test design, regardless of underlying theoretical base. We excluded systematic reviews from the results but assessed all studies included in these systematic reviews for eligibility.

2.2.2.

## Participants
The review focused on two interrelated groups:

Healthy infants aged 0–2 years at increased risk of overweight and obesity. Regardless of the evidence regarding risk factors, we included studies where the authors stated specifically that they targeted characteristics potentially associated with childhood obesity, including low maternal education, specific ethnic backgrounds (e.g., Latin or native American families), low family income [e.g., families eligible for Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women's, Infants, and Children (WIC)], high birthweight, prenatal exposure to tobacco, formula feeding, early weaning, short sleep duration and RWG before age two (Appleton, Laws, et al.,  ; Collings et al.,  ; Pearce et al.,  ; Taveras et al.,  ; Van Den Berg et al.,  ; Weng et al.,  ; Woo Baidal et al.,  ; Wright et al.,  ; Zheng et al.,  ).
Parents with one or more characteristics linked to increased risk of childhood overweight and obesity, including high pre‐pregnancy BMI, previous infants born large‐for‐gestational‐age, excess gestational weight gain and/or with gestational or type 1 diabetes, and elective caesarean section (Cai et al.,  ; Monasta et al.,  ; Olson et al.,  ; Pei et al.,  ; Weng et al.,  ; Woo Baidal et al.,  ; Yu et al.,  ; Zhu et al.,  ). We also considered environmental and behavioural factors (e.g., parental smoking or intention to formula feed) (Liao et al.,  ).

2.2.3.

## Interventions
The review focused on interventions aimed at preventing and managing excessive weight gain among infants identified with specific risk factors. Interventions were commenced prior to the age of 2 years, including pregnancy. Although formula feeding is a well‐established obesity risk factor, we excluded studies that compared different compositions of infant formula, for example, levels of protein, given considerable literature on this topic (Escribano et al.,  ; Gruszfeld et al.,  ; Koletzko et al.,  ), including reviews (Patro‐Golab, Zalewski, Kolodziej, et al.,  ; Patro‐Golab, Zalewski, Kouwenhoven, et al.,  ).

2.2.4.

## Comparison
Intervention studies were included if they utilised a control or comparison group receiving ‘usual care’, or a different intervention, or compared results with outcomes prior to programme implementation.

2.2.5.

## Outcomes
The review selected studies reporting at least one quantitative weight outcome based on measures used in routine clinical care of infants (weight and length). Outcomes were reported as specified in the studies and included mean weight, proportions with overweight or obesity (defined by study authors), BMI, weight‐for‐length, weight‐for‐age and/or associated z‐scores. We excluded anthropometric outcomes that require specialised equipment or training to measure.

2.2.6.

## Setting
The review included research from any country, conducted in clinical and home‐based settings, but not schools, pre‐schools or childcare centres. Centre‐ and community‐based interventions tend to be universal and not targeted to individual risk factors.

2.2.7.

## Exclusion criteria
We excluded studies not published in peer‐reviewed English‐language journals or prior to 2008, the cut‐off date for a comprehensive review of obesity prevention interventions for children aged 0–5 years old (Hesketh & Campbell,  ). We also excluded studies reporting: non‐primary research; instrument development; non‐human subjects; the causes, prevalence or effects of obesity; intervention cost‐effectiveness; attitudes or knowledge of health professionals or parents; infant formula composition; weight gain in infants whose growth is compromised by illness, prematurity or undernutrition; centre‐based interventions; or universal interventions not targeted to a defined risk factor. We also excluded observational studies of cohorts that did not receive an intervention or those that did not report a quantifiable weight outcome.

2.2.8.

## Information sources
During June–July 2018, we searched six databases: Cumulative Index of Nursing and Allied Health Literature (CINAHL), EBM Reviews Complete, Embase, Joanna Briggs Institute EBP, Medline and ProQuest Nursing and Allied Health. We updated the database search in June 2020. Further, we hand‐searched reference lists and forward citations of selected articles using Scopus for further relevant studies.

2.3.

## Search
After a preliminary search to identify potential search terms, we used the terms in Table  , combining all terms within each column with OR, then combining the three columns with AND.
 
2.4.

## Study selection
The output from the database searches was transferred to Covidence for screening and to eliminate duplicates (https://www.covidence.org). One reviewer (CR) then removed titles clearly outside the scope of the review (pre‐2008, animal studies and studies of older children/adolescents). Two reviewers (CR and HC) then independently screened the titles and abstracts of articles to assess relevance to the review questions. They then independently examined full text articles to confirm eligibility for the review. Disagreements about whether to include articles were resolved by the senior researcher (EDW). The search and review process is summarised in a PRISMA chart (Moher et al.,  ).

2.5.

## Data extraction
One author extracted data on study characteristics (Table  ) including participant characteristics and risk factors, research design, outcomes and key findings relevant to the review questions, summarised to show differences between intervention and control cohorts, using measures and levels of statistical significance as reported by authors. This table summarises results that are often complex and multifaceted, especially in studies using stratified samples or multiple weight outcome measures. Another table presents further detail of interventions (theoretical framework, content, setting, provider, frequency and duration) (Table  ). Data extraction was cross‐checked by another author.
 
2.6.

## Quality assessment
Two researchers (CR and HC) independently assessed individual studies for research quality using the Mixed Methods Assessment Tool (MMAT) (Pluye et al.,  ), taking account of different study designs. Conflicts were resolved by the senior researcher (EDW). Ratings on relevant criteria are in Table . For MMAT items on completeness of outcome data, we adopted an acceptable drop‐out rate of 20% for studies up to 12 months after intervention and 30% for longer follow‐up.

2.7.

## Synthesis of results
Given the heterogeneity of the interventions, outcome measures and the age at which children were assessed in identified studies, meta‐analysis of the findings was inappropriate. Results are synthesised narratively.

3.

## RESULTS
3.1.

## Identification of studies
The database searches yielded 27,363 citations; subsequent hand‐searching identified another 196 potential titles. After screening titles and abstracts, we reviewed 665 full‐text articles and excluded 616 (Figure  ). The most common reason for excluding studies was that they were systematic reviews (n = 115) or did not target infants with specific risk factors for later overweight (n = 101). Overall, 49 articles met all inclusion criteria.
 
3.2.

## Study characteristics and risk factors
The 49 articles reported 38 separate interventions. Table  summarises the studies, stratified by the main risk factor targeted by each intervention. All but three (da Costa Louzada et al.,  ; Navarro et al.,  ; Schwartz et al.,  ; Vitolo et al.,  ) were conducted in high‐income countries. A majority (18/38) were conducted in the United States and five in Australia. Three studies were conducted in the United Kingdom, and two each in Brazil, Denmark and Finland. The remaining studies were undertaken in the Dominican Republic, France, Ireland, Puerto Rico, Sweden and one conducted across Australia and New Zealand.
The most common risk factors targeted were high maternal pre‐pregnancy BMI or gestational weight gain (n = 13) (Carlsen et al.,  ; Claesson et al.,  ; Dodd, Louise et al.,  ; Dodd, McPhee, et al.,  ; Fiks et al.,  ; Gregory et al.,  ; Kong et al.,  ; McCormick et al.,  ; Mustila et al.,  ; Mustila et al.,  ; Parat et al.,  ; Patel et al.,  ; Phelan et al.,  ; Reifsnider et al.,  ; Tanvig et al.,  ; Vesco et al.,  ), although none addressed paternal BMI. Many interventions targeted individuals or regions with socio‐economic disadvantage, sometimes in conjunction with criteria such as adolescent mothers (Ordway et al.,  ; Schwartz et al.,  ) or formula feeding (Bonuck et al.,  ; Chaparro et al.,  ; Chaparro, Anderson, et al.,  ; Kavanagh et al.,  ). No studies explicitly focused on low parental education attainment, another potential risk factor (Van Den Berg et al.,  ).
Four antenatal interventions addressed gestational diabetes: two with medication (Ijäs et al.,  ; Rowan et al.,  , ) and two with dietary changes (Gillman et al.,  ; Kizirian et al.,  ). Five studies focused on formula‐fed infants (Bonuck et al.,  ; Chaparro, Anderson, et al.,  ; Chaparro, Wang, et al.,  ; Kavanagh et al.,  ; Lakshman et al.,  ; Tang et al.,  , ), but none targeted infants who commenced complementary foods earlier than the recommended 4–6 months. A few studies specifically targeted ethnic groups with increased risk of childhood obesity (Karanja et al.,  ; Palacios et al.,  ; Washio et al.,  ) or infants with disturbed sleep (Wake et al.,  ). Although several studies reported RWG as an outcome, none targeted infants with established RWG during early infancy as a risk factor. One study recruited women with previous infants born large‐for‐gestational‐age (Horan, Donnelly, et al.,  ; Horan, McGowan, et al.,  ). None addressed prenatal tobacco exposure.

3.3.

## Quality assessment
Few of the selected studies met all the relevant criteria of the MMAT (Table ). It was difficult to assess adherence to the intervention in several studies where this was not reported—participants may not accurately reveal the extent to which they complied with dietary guidelines or exercise regimes—so the effect of intervention fidelity is often unknown. Several randomised controlled trials (RCTs) did not report whether the outcome assessors were blind to the intervention, and some indicated this was not the case. Over half the papers reported substantial sample attrition—losing over 20% for 12‐month follow‐up or more than 30% over longer periods (Table ). Less than half reported an underlying theoretical base (Table  ).

3.4.

## Interventions
Table  summarises the 38 interventions. It demonstrates the heterogeneity of content, provider, setting, dose and frequency, as well as the theoretical bases informing intervention delivery.
3.4.1.

## Timing
Ten studies were antenatal interventions focused on the health characteristics of pregnant women, either gestational diabetes or overweight (Dodd, Louise, et al.,  ; Dodd, McPhee, et al.,  ; Gillman et al.,  ; Gregory et al.,  ; Ijäs et al.,  ; Kizirian et al.,  ; Kong et al.,  ; Patel et al.,  ; Rowan et al.,  , ; Tanvig et al.,  ; Vesco et al.,  ). Sixteen were conducted entirely in the postnatal period (Bonuck et al.,  ; Carlsen et al.,  ; Cloutier et al.,  ; da Costa Louzada et al.,  ; de la Haye et al.,  ; French et al.,  ; Kavanagh et al.,  ; Lakshman et al.,  ; Machuca et al.,  ; Palacios et al.,  ; Phelan et al.,  ; Scheiwe et al.,  ; Schwartz et al.,  ; Tang et al.,  , ; Vitolo et al.,  ; Wake et al.,  ; Washio et al.,  ; Watt et al.,  ), and twelve started during pregnancy and continued after birth (Chaparro et al.,  ; Chaparro, Anderson, et al.,  ; Chaparro, Wang, et al.,  ; Claesson et al.,  ; Fiks et al.,  ; Horan, Donnelly, et al.,  ; Horan, McGowan, et al.,  ; Karanja et al.,  ; McCormick et al.,  ; Mustila et al.,  , ; Navarro et al.,  ; Ordway et al.,  ; Parat et al.,  ; Reifsnider et al.,  ; Thomson et al.,  ; Wen, Baur, Simpson, et al.,  ; Wen et al.,  ).

3.4.2.

## Type of intervention
Twelve of 38 interventions incorporated home visits—all had postnatal components, although some commenced during pregnancy. In six studies, the home visitor was a health professional (Carlsen et al.,  ; de la Haye et al.,  ; Karanja et al.,  ; Ordway et al.,  ; Schwartz et al.,  ; Wen, Baur, Rissel, et al.,  ), three used volunteers (sometimes with extensive training) (Navarro et al.,  ; Scheiwe et al.,  ; Thomson et al.,  ; Watt et al.,  ), one used nutrition students (da Costa Louzada et al.,  ; Vitolo et al.,  ), one used trained community health workers without formal health professional qualifications (McCormick et al.,  ; Reifsnider et al.,  ) and one study did not indicate the providers' qualifications (Cloutier et al.,  ). Another 19 interventions involved face‐to‐face sessions with health professionals in a clinic (typically antenatal or well‐child clinics) (Bonuck et al.,  ; Claesson et al.,  ; Dodd, Louise, et al.,  ; Dodd, McPhee, et al.,  ; French et al.,  ; Gillman et al.,  ; Gregory et al.,  ; Horan, Donnelly, et al.,  ; Horan, McGowan, et al.,  ; Ijäs et al.,  ; Kavanagh et al.,  ; Kizirian et al.,  ; Lakshman et al.,  ; Mustila et al.,  ; Mustila et al.,  ; Parat et al.,  ; Patel et al.,  ; Rowan et al.,  , ; Schwartz et al.,  ; Tanvig,  ; Vesco et al.,  ; Wake et al.,  ; Washio et al.,  ). In some cases, these were routine visits where the intervention group received additional education or counselling regarding infant weight outcomes. Ten studies included groups (de la Haye et al.,  ; Fiks et al.,  ; Horan, McGowan, et al.,  ; Horan, Donnelly, et al.,  ; Kavanagh et al.,  ; Machuca et al.,  ; Navarro et al.,  ; Parat et al.,  ; Phelan et al.,  ; Tanvig et al.,  ; Vesco et al.,  ), sometimes in conjunction with other intervention elements (e.g., clinic or home visits); one utilised Facebook groups (Fiks et al.,  ). Five interventions involved telephone support (Carlsen et al.,  ; Dodd, Louise, et al.,  ; Dodd, McPhee et al.,  ; Karanja et al.,  ; Lakshman et al.,  ; Wen, Baur, Simpson, et al.,  ; Wen et al.,  ), two used short message service (SMS) (Palacios et al.,  ; Phelan et al.,  ) (one as the sole element of the intervention) and two used online support (Fiks et al.,  ; Phelan et al.,  ). Four studies with a physical activity focus facilitated participants' involvement by providing gym membership (Tanvig et al.,  ), aquarobics sessions (Claesson et al.,  ), pedometers (Patel et al.,  ) or a treadmill (Kong et al.,  ). Other interventions compared maternal or infant diets (low glycaemic index vs. high‐fibre, Kizirian et al.,  ; meat vs. dairy‐based complementary foods, Tang et al.,  , ), or alternate medications for gestational diabetes (Ijäs et al.,  ; Rowan et al.,  , ). One major intervention involved changes in the content of the WIC supplemental food packages available as vouchers for low‐income families (Chaparro et al.,  ; Chaparro, Anderson, et al.,  ; Chaparro, Wang, et al.,  ). Another study examined financial incentives for WIC recipients to continue breastfeeding (Washio et al.,  ).
Nearly all interventions focused on maternal and/or infant nutrition through promoting exclusive breastfeeding for 6 months, increasing fruit and vegetable intake and avoiding discretionary foods. Dietary initiatives were sometimes combined with other components such as increased physical activity for pregnant women or infants (Table  ). The remaining interventions that did not address nutrition were two antenatal interventions comparing alternative GDM medications (metformin vs. insulin treatment) (Ijäs et al.,  ; Rowan et al.,  , ); a brief antenatal intervention increasing maternal physical activity (Kong et al.,  ) and one postnatal study investigating a behavioural sleep strategy for unsettled infants (Wake et al.,  ).

3.5.

## Setting
The most common location for interventions were clinics and health facilities, for groups and face‐to‐face consultation with clinicians, either antenatally or postnatally (Table  ). In several studies, all participants (including controls) attended clinics, for standard well‐child or antenatal care, and intervention group members received additional education or counselling input related to the study objectives. Clinic visits were sometimes supplemented with other elements such as phone or online support to parents. Other settings included participants' homes and fitness centres (swimming pools and gyms). Some interventions were not linked to a specific setting, such as online interventions or the WIC programme food package changes (see Table  ).

3.6.

## Duration
Table  indicates that interventions ranged from simple interactions, such as one clinic‐based education class (Kavanagh et al.,  ) or weekly SMS messages over 4 months (Palacios et al.,  ), through to intensive contact between participants and providers; some continued for a sustained period, such as studies of dietary changes in the WIC programme food packages (Chaparro et al.,  ; Chaparro, Anderson, et al.,  ; Chaparro, Wang, et al.,  ), which can potentially last from pregnancy through to the child's fifth birthday if the family remains eligible.

3.7.

## Consumer involvement
There was limited consumer involvement in the design of interventions (Table  ). Three studies (Fiks et al.,  ; Karanja et al.,  ; Lakshman et al.,  ) involved community representatives or potential consumers in intervention development; three included them in developing or pilot‐testing resources (Bonuck et al.,  ; French et al.,  ; Lakshman et al.,  ).

3.8.

## Study design and measures
All selected studies used experimental research designs, and the majority were RCTs (22 RCTs, 7 cluster RCTs, 1 stratified RCT and 1 pilot RCT). The remaining non‐randomised studies used various designs (Table  ). Studies reported diverse outcomes at diverse time points, limiting synthesis of findings. Whereas some studies reported mean weight in each cohort, most standardised outcomes were reported by using mean BMI and/or z‐scores for weight‐for‐height (zWFH), weight‐for‐length (zWFL) or weight‐for‐age (zWFA). Some studies reported the proportions of infants with overweight or obesity, or in a ‘healthy weight range’, defined using criteria unique to each study. Most reported weight outcomes at one or more single time points. However, some studies reported RWG by comparing changes in standardised weight standard deviation score (SDS) over various time intervals (Kizirian et al.,  ; Lakshman et al.,  ; Mustila et al.,  ; Palacios et al.,  ; Parat et al.,  ; Phelan et al.,  ; Thomson et al.,  ).

3.9.

## Study outcomes
Nine of the 38 interventions reported a statistically significant positive impact on one or more measures of weight outcome (shown in bold in Table  ). These included two antenatal interventions (Ijäs et al.,  ; Vesco et al.,  ), two postnatal (Machuca et al.,  ; Phelan et al.,  ) and five spanning the period before and after birth (Chaparro et al.,  ; Chaparro, Anderson, et al.,  ; Chaparro, Wang, et al.,  ; Navarro et al.,  ; Ordway et al.,  ; Parat et al.,  ; Wen, Baur, Simpson, et al.,  ; Wen et al.,  ). Conversely, two postnatal trials reported significantly higher mean weight among the intervention cohorts compared with controls (Kavanagh et al.,  ; Watt et al.,  ) (Table  ).
Most of the successful postnatal interventions specifically targeted socio‐economically disadvantaged families (some in conjunction with other risk factors). Chaparro and colleagues used matched samples from national administrative datasets from 2003 to 2016 to compare children in families receiving WIC programme support before and after changes in the supplemental food package contents in 2009. The new package contained more fruit, vegetables and whole grains; less juice, whole milk, cheese and eggs; and lower amounts of infant formula. Children aged 1 year participating in WIC receiving the new food package had a significantly lower mean zWFH than other children receiving WIC, regardless of gender or initial weight status (low, average or high zWFH) (Chaparro et al.,  ). Among exclusively formula‐fed infants receiving WIC food packages, those who received the new child food package had significantly lower zWFH at age four than those receiving food packages before the programme change (Chaparro, Anderson, et al.,  ). A related study found significantly lower relative risk of obesity at 4 years among some groups of children who received the new food packages compared with matched children born before the change took effect, namely, children who were mostly breastfed (but not among those fully breastfed), and boys who were mostly or fully formula‐fed (Chaparro, Wang, et al.,  ).
The Well Baby Group trial in a disadvantaged area of New York provided a parenting support group facilitated by dietitians and paediatricians for 18 months. At 2 years, the researchers found a significantly lower proportion ≥85th BMI percentile, compared with infants receiving traditional well‐child care (Machuca et al.,  ). The Healthy Beginnings trial provided support to low‐income Australian families through home visits from trained community nurses, timed to fit with developmental milestones during the first 2 years, with additional phone support. By age two, the mean BMI was significantly lower in the home visiting group than those receiving usual care (Wen, Baur, Simpson, et al.,  ). However, by 3.5 and 5 years, there were no statistically significant differences in weight measures between the two cohorts (Wen et al.,  ). The Fit Moms/Mamas Activas programme in California provided online post‐partum support and information about children's weight, and regular face‐to‐face groups over 12 months for low‐income mothers with overweight or obesity. Intervention group infants experienced significantly lower increases in zBMI over the first 6 months, compared with control group infants whose families received standard WIC support and general weight loss information; however, differences were not maintained at 12 months (Phelan et al.,  ). The Minding the Baby programme provided parenting support to young mothers in medically underserved areas, through home visits from a social worker and paediatric nurse from late pregnancy to 24 months post‐partum. Significantly more intervention group infants had a ‘healthy’ weight at 2 years than controls. They had significantly lower rates of obesity and, among Hispanic participants, significantly lower rates of combined overweight and obesity (Ordway et al.,  ). Finally, a peer nutrition education intervention in the Dominican Republic aimed to reduce both malnutrition and the risk of overweight in infants under 2 years through group meetings and home visits provided lay community counsellors. During their second year, intervention group infants had a significantly lower zBMI score, and proportion of infants ≥85th BMI percentile (Navarro et al.,  ). This was the only study in a middle‐income country that reported improved outcomes.
Three trials that reported significantly improved child weight outcomes at follow‐up were targeted to maternal overweight. The Fit Moms/Mamas Activas programme targeted low‐income women with overweight and obesity, providing online and SMS support in addition to the standard WIC programme. Women received individual weight goals and monitoring and personal feedback, as well as online lessons and a weekly blog from peers, resulting in significant differences in mean infant zBMI between birth and 6 months (Phelan et al.,  ). The ETOIG trial reported lower prevalence of high BMI (>19 kg/m2) in infants aged 2 years, following a healthy lifestyle education intervention with mothers with pre‐pregnancy BMI over 25 kg/m2 (Parat et al.,  ). However, the result was only statistically significant using the per protocol or available data analyses, and not using intention to treat analysis where missing values were treated as excessive weight gain. There were no significant differences in RWG between birth and 2 years using any means of analysis. The Healthy Moms trial studied a diet and activity intervention for women with BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2, and found significantly lower mean weight and zWFA at 12 months but no significant differences in zWFL or proportions of WFL > 97.7th percentile (Vesco et al.,  ). Another study that found significantly lower mean weight and height at 12 and 18 months among infants whose mothers had received insulin treatment compared with metformin (Parat et al.,  ) for gestational diabetes but no difference in ponderal index, proportions with weight at or above the 95th percentile or high weight‐for‐length readings (Ijäs et al.,  ).
One common factor among the studies reporting significantly improved infant weight outcomes was their sustained duration. Nearly all studies conducted during the postnatal period continued to 12 months (Phelan et al.,  ), 18 months (Machuca et al.,  ), 24 months (Navarro et al.,  ; Ordway et al.,  ; Wen, Baur, Simpson, et al.,  ) or until withdrawal from the WIC programme, potentially at 5 years of age (Chaparro, Anderson, et al.,  ; Chaparro et al.,  ; Chaparro, Wang, et al.,  ). These interventions were typically provided regularly, with weekly or monthly support. Some successful antenatal interventions recruited women relatively early in pregnancy. The Healthy Moms study recruited from 10 to 20 weeks with a mean gestation of 15.1 weeks (Vesco et al.,  ). The ETOIG study continued from the first trimester through to 2 months of age (Parat et al.,  ). Six studies reporting improved outcomes were randomised controlled trials. However, these studies all contained some methodological limitations against the MMAT (Table ). Although randomisation appeared effective, three studies did not demonstrate comparable cohorts at baseline (Ordway et al.,  ; Phelan et al.,  ; Wen, Baur, Simpson, et al.,  ); one indicated that the intervention group had a significantly lower mean birthweight (Ordway et al.,  ) and another that controls had significantly lower zBMI and WFA before the intervention (Phelan et al.,  ). However, several intervention designs meant that participants were not blinded to researchers or that it was difficult to monitor adherence to the intervention by participants. Three of these studies experienced substantial sample attrition before follow‐up assessment (Ordway et al.,  ; Phelan et al.,  ; Vesco et al.,  ). The remaining non‐randomised interventions reporting improved weight trajectories included a population‐based study examining the impact of the changed WIC food packages (Chaparro et al.,  ; Chaparro, Anderson, et al.,  ; Chaparro, Wang, et al.,  ), which met all MMAT quality criteria with impressive sample sizes. Another well‐conducted study used a retrospective approach albeit with a relatively small intervention group (n = 47) (Machuca et al.,  ). The other study used a quasi‐experimental design in matched locations with sample attrition of one‐quarter, and uncertain adherence to the intervention strategy (Navarro et al.,  ).
Two postnatal RCTs reported higher mean weight among intervention groups at follow‐up. One US study of exclusively formula‐fed infants reported significantly higher mean weight after a 4‐month education programme about feeding to satiety compared with controls (Kavanagh et al.,  ). A UK study of home visits to low‐income families by volunteers to support improved infant feeding practices reported that intervention group infants had higher mean weight than control group infants at 12 months (bordering on statistical significance at p = 0.05). However, this difference was not significant by 18 months (Watt et al.,  ) or at 4 years (Scheiwe et al.,  ). Both studies had considerable loss to follow‐up and uncertain adherence to the intervention (Table ); one retained a small sample at follow up (n = 40 after 4 months) (Kavanagh et al.,  ).
The remaining studies reported no significant differences between intervention and comparison groups on weight‐specific measures (potentially due to sample size). However, several indicated improvements on other outcomes not assessed here regarding physical activity or nutrition behaviour, such as increased breastfeeding initiation and duration, delayed introduction of solid food, reduced consumption of sugar‐sweetened beverages, or greater parental knowledge about healthy nutrition.

4.

## DISCUSSION
This review explored the impact of interventions specifically targeting parents of infants with characteristics that increased risk of later obesity or overweight. Whereas previous reviews of early intervention studies have addressed effects among general populations of infants (Blake‐Lamb et al.,  ; Ciampa et al.,  ; Hesketh & Campbell,  ; Koplin et al.,  ; Laws et al.,  ; Matvienko‐Sikar et al.,  ; Redsell, Edmonds, et al.,  ; Rotevatn et al.,  ), this is the first review to focus specifically on those children who are most susceptible to unhealthy weight gain. Overall, this review provides limited evidence that a focus on the most at risk in early life can be beneficial with around one quarter of the studies identified showing significantly improved weight outcomes among intervention cohorts. Control groups in two studies demonstrated lower mean weight than intervention groups, with the remainder showing a null effect on measured weight outcomes.
The majority of studies focused on two important risk factors: low family income and/or maternal weight status, sometimes in conjunction with other characteristics. An earlier review found that over half the obesity prevention interventions for children 0–5 years involved low‐income populations (Hesketh & Campbell,  ). Targeting these populations is warranted given the disproportionate prevalence of overweight and obesity in low‐income populations (Woo Baidal et al.,  ). Low income often coincides with low educational attainment, another potential risk factor (Van Den Berg et al.,  ), although this was not specified in the studies identified. Interventions to support parents with limited formal education therefore require materials and approaches that do not rely on complex information or high reading‐ages. Peer educators and community health workers may also be more appropriate sources of advice. Thirteen studies targeted mothers with high BMI, including seven that that addressed maternal diet and exercise during pregnancy. However, none focused on paternal weight status, despite higher risks of overweight among children whose fathers have high BMI (Weng et al.,  ).
These findings correspond with Reilly et al. ( ), who examined the various risk factors targeted in studies identified in a comprehensive review by Blake‐Lamb et al., ( ), concluding that some factors (such as maternal smoking and short sleep duration) have been relatively overlooked in published research to date. We did not identify any studies targeting prenatal exposure to tobacco as a risk characteristic and only identified one eligible study that recruited infants with sleep problems (Wake et al.,  ) that met our inclusion criteria. This may be due to the specific research focus, demonstrating where health research may exist in silos. Further, our search terms did not specifically include ‘smoking’, ‘tobacco’ or ‘sleep’. Despite the established link between unsettled sleep and child overweight and emerging interest in this association, current research such as the POI study (Taylor et al.,  ) largely focuses on universal interventions. Many interventions have endeavoured to reduce parental smoking—to improve outcomes on multiple dimensions. However, anti‐smoking interventions typically stand alone, with the predominant aim of reducing exposure to tobacco for mother and infant, rather than focusing uniquely on infant overweight or obesity. As such, we did not identify any studies of anti‐smoking interventions that reported infant weight status beyond the immediate neonatal period.
Further, although some studies reported RWG as an outcome, none of the interventions targeted infants with early RWG, another significant risk factor for subsequent overweight (Monasta et al.,  ; Weng et al.,  ; Zheng et al.,  ). All the postnatal studies identified started at birth or within the first few months of life (Table  ), before RWG was established. This highlights the importance of monitoring early infant growth and communicating with parents as soon as RWG is identified to initiate behaviour change (Weng et al.,  ).
Risk factors for infant obesity are multifaceted and sometimes clustered (Redsell, Weng, et al.,  ; Weng et al.,  ), making it hard to distinguish the most influential to target. Further, children and their families exist within a wider social, economic and cultural environment, where complex and entrenched phenomena determine health outcomes. In addition to targeted and tailored advice, more intensive work is required to address the underlying forces that increase the risks of overweight in some population groups.
Of the nine studies that reported significantly improved weight outcomes among intervention groups, most targeted low‐income populations (Chaparro et al.,  ; Chaparro, Anderson, et al.,  Chaparro, Wang, et al.,  ; Machuca et al.,  ; Navarro et al.,  ; Ordway et al.,  ; Wen, Baur, Simpson, et al.,  ; Wen et al.,  ) or high maternal BMI (Parat et al.,  ; Phelan et al.,  ; Vesco et al.,  ). Studies of low‐income families also addressed other risk factors: young motherhood (Ordway et al.,  ) and formula feeding (Chaparro, Anderson, et al.,  ). One intervention treated women with gestational diabetes, regardless of whether or not they had other risk factors (Ijäs et al.,  ). These factors are readily identifiable and can guide health professionals where to target interventions.
The studies that reported significantly improved weight outcomes used a range of intervention modes. Three incorporated home visits as part of the intervention (Navarro et al.,  ; Ordway et al.,  ; Wen, Baur, Simpson, et al.,  ) and four utilised group sessions (Machuca et al.,  ; Navarro et al.,  ; Phelan et al.,  ). Only two successful interventions were limited to the antenatal period (Ijäs et al.,  ; Vesco et al.,  ); the remainder commenced during pregnancy or shortly after birth and continued postnatally. This suggests that interventions need to encompass both the antenatal period and continue postnatally to achieve success.
The two antenatal interventions targeting women with GDM reported significantly improved infant weight outcomes using diverse methods. One featured individual counselling and planning for participants, focusing on both diet and physical activity supplemented with group sessions (Parat et al.,  ), whereas the other compared insulin with metformin treatment (Ijäs et al.,  ). These findings highlight the limited research to date investigating longer term infant outcomes from antenatal interventions to prevent child obesity specifically among parents whose children have an increased risk.
Research by Chaparro and colleagues on changes to the content of the WIC supplemental food programme (Chaparro et al.,  ; Chaparro, Anderson, et al.,  ) highlights the importance of ready access to healthy food as a cornerstone of lifestyle intervention and change. It also demonstrates that policy‐driven social welfare (food availability) for identified population groups can support improved health outcomes on a larger scale than individual targeted behaviour change alone. However, WIC participation has declined since 2015–2016, with mothers of fully formula‐fed infants three times less likely to recertify at 1 year compared with mothers of fully breast‐fed infants (Almeida et al.,  ); subsequently, this may limit disadvantaged families' access to healthy food.
In terms of providers, one intervention was delivered by lay counsellors who worked with low‐income women in the Dominican Republic (Navarro et al.,  ), although other successful interventions were delivered by health professionals. Among these, some incorporated individualised counselling, health planning and goal‐setting to address potential barriers (Parat et al.,  ; Wen, Baur, Simpson, et al.,  ; Wen et al.,  ). The Minding the Baby study also focused on maternal reflexivity to promote attachment and ongoing healthy lifestyles during home visits (Ordway et al.,  ). Home visits and/or group sessions with health professionals are among the elements of effective obesity prevention programmes identified in other reviews (Blake‐Lamb et al.,  ; Matvienko‐Sikar et al.,  ). In women experiencing social or economic disadvantage, home visits may be a more achievable avenue for intervention in the early post‐partum period if transport or caring for other children are problematic.
Although the Fit Moms/Mamas Activas intervention incorporated face‐to‐face groups at WIC clinics, these were not well attended, and the intervention was primarily internet‐based, including online weight checking and education content, personalised feedback, internet diary and motivational text messages to reinforce learning. Even with limited personal contact, the intervention provided individualised information and support. Participants received incentives for positive weight changes and logging into the website (Phelan et al.,  ). As the successful components of this latter intervention did not involve high intensity and therefore high‐cost involvement of health care professionals, it could be a candidate for wide dissemination at relatively low cost.
As noted, most of the interventions with statistically significant improvements in infant weight engaged participants for a sustained period. However, two studies reported a diminished effect of the intervention on child weight measures over time: the Healthy Beginnings trial reported statistically significant differences in weight outcomes at 2 years, but not at the next follow‐ups (3.5 and 5 years); the Fit Moms/Mamas Activas study reported significant differences in zBMI between birth and 6 months, but not between birth and 12 months (Phelan et al.,  ; Wen et al.,  ). Other systematic reviews of less targeted interventions have also highlighted the difficulty of sustaining the early benefits of nutrition‐related interventions on infant weight outcomes beyond infancy (Koplin et al.,  ; Laws et al.,  ; Rotevatn et al.,  ). This highlights the importance of continued interaction between participants and health professionals to enhance engagement and adherence with the intervention. As Rotevatn and colleagues point out, the context and delivery of interventions is critical, as parents value tailored, consistent and non‐judgemental support and guidance (Rotevatn et al.,  ). This is common to all parents of young children as well as those whose children are vulnerable to unhealthy weight gain.
This review suggests that successful interventions to prevent excess weight gain in infants that target parental behaviours, related to both the mother and to infant feeding should be of sufficient duration to target key ages and stages where obesity promoting behaviours can be adopted. Many interventions may require relatively intensive or long‐term support from health care professionals, and the cost of programmes needs to be balanced against the long‐term cost of child obesity. Changes to the food supply for vulnerable families is one promising strategy.
4.1.

## Strengths and limitations
This review was broad in scope, embracing heterogeneous research designs, risk factors, outcomes and timeframes, precluding any meta‐analysis of results. The diversity of interventions and results limited our ability to synthesise study findings or generalise them to other populations of children at risk of excess weight gain.
It is possible that we overlooked some publications that met the review criteria, especially more recent research; however, the update and the extensive hand‐searching process minimised this risk. The review process may have generated some publication bias in study selection. Given the heterogeneity of approaches, we were unable to assess this statistically. However, several studies reported nil results, especially in weight measures, suggesting that at least some research is published notwithstanding its non‐significant findings.
The quality of the individual studies was variable using MMAT criteria; some studies reporting significantly improved weight outcomes did not rate strongly on all criteria (Ijäs et al.,  ; Navarro et al.,  ; Ordway et al.,  ; Phelan et al.,  ; Wen, Baur, Simpson, et al.,  ). We found little risk of selection bias. However, some articles could not preclude detection bias. Several had considerable loss to follow‐up, which was potentially detrimental to the aim of assessing longer‐term weight outcomes for children. Another persistent shortcoming was the limited information on participants' adherence to the interventions. The MMAT did not address reporting bias.
Although several studies used tailored interventions, to respond to participants' specific circumstances and needs, it is notable that very few involved consumers in codesigning interventions.

4.2.

## Implications for practice and policy
Given the necessity of early intervention to address childhood obesity, this review has demonstrated the importance of not only working with parents of infants under 2 years, including expectant parents but also targeting interventions to infants who face greater risks of excess weight gain. Parental and sociodemographic risk factors for later obesity are well established, and most can be identified early. It is vital that these infants are offered evidence‐based programmes early to prevent unhealthy weight gain. The review highlighted the importance of sustained duration including contact with health professionals. Most successful interventions recruited participants early, through maternity hospitals, community health clinics or WIC centres. These facilities offer scope for access to early childhood health professionals, at a time when parents may be particularly motivated to support their infants' health and well‐being.

4.3.

## Implications for further research
This review has highlighted the importance of follow‐up to examine the longer‐term effects of targeted interventions delivered in pregnancy and infancy; longitudinal research is thus particularly relevant. Further high‐quality research is also required into interventions that target risk factors not examined in the selected studies such as paternal weight status, exposure to tobacco smoke, sleep disturbances and in particular, interventions to assist infants with early RWG. There is likewise a need for research comparing the relative effectiveness of interventions that are targeted compared with universal programmes for obesity prevention, ideally with robust samples to identify whether weight trajectories differ among infants with established risk factors from those of general populations. There is clearly scope for interventions and research in low‐ and middle‐income countries, given the increasing prevalence of child obesity in these regions, the large populations potentially affected and the relative scarcity of peer‐reviewed research to date.

5.

## CONCLUSION
There is an extensive literature on obesity prevention interventions aimed at general populations, at children older than two, or that assesses behavioural outcomes related to diet and activity. This review identified a limited number of studies that met our narrower criteria: studies specifically targeted on infants with increased risk of child overweight and obesity that reported quantifiable weight outcomes. However, its findings were in line with other reviews of prevention interventions aimed at universal populations, with modest evidence of statistically significant improvement in weight outcomes (Koplin et al.,  ). The studies were of mixed quality and tended to show a diminishing effect over time.

## CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.

## CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors developed the review strategy under the guidance of EDW. CR conducted database searches and managed review software. HC, EDW and CR screened titles, reviewed full text articles and conducted quality appraisal. JA, HC and CR compiled tables. All authors contributed to the manuscript and approved the final version.

## Supporting information

Table S1: Quality assessment summary
Click here for additional data file.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are grateful to the Sydney Institute for Women, Children and their Families (Sydney Local Health District) for funding, and to Faye Southcombe for assistance with the initial search.

Rossiter C, Cheng H, Appleton J, Campbell KJ, Denney‐Wilson E. Addressing obesity in the first 1000 days in high risk infants: Systematic review. Matern Child Nutr. 2021;17:e13178. 10.1111/mcn.13178

## DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
As this article is a systematic review, the ‘data’ are articles published in academic journals that are already in the public domain. Data sharing is not applicable to this article.

## REFERENCES
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

Table S1: Quality assessment summary
Click here for additional data file.

## Data Availability Statement
As this article is a systematic review, the ‘data’ are articles published in academic journals that are already in the public domain. Data sharing is not applicable to this article.