277plosmedPLoS MedicinePLoS MedPLOSPMC8863261886326188632613519259810.1371/journal.pmed.1003927First dose ChAdOx1 and BNT162b2 COVID-19 vaccinations and cerebral venous sinus thrombosis: A pooled self-controlled case series study of 11.6 million individuals in England, Scotland, and Wales
KerrStevenData curation, Formal analysis, Methodology, Supervision, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing JoyMarkData curation, Formal analysis TorabiFatemehData curation, Formal analysis BedstonStuartData curation, Formal analysis AkbariAshleyProject administration, Writing – review & editing AgrawalUtkarshData curation, Formal analysis BeggsJillianProject administration, Writing – review & editing BradleyDeclanData curation, Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing ChuterAntonyInvestigation, Writing – review & editing DochertyAnnemarie BProject administration, Supervision, Writing – review & editing FordDavidProject administration, Supervision, Writing – review & editing HobbsRichardProject administration, Writing – review & editing KatikireddiSrinivasa VittalSupervision, Writing – review & editing LowthianEmilyData curation, Writing – review & editing de LusignanSimonProject administration, Writing – review & editing LyonsRonanProject administration, Writing – review & editing MarpleJamesData curation, Writing – review & editing McCowanColinSupervision, Writing – review & editing McGaghDylanData curation, Writing – review & editing McMenaminJimProject administration, Writing – review & editing MooreEmilyData curation, Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing MurrayJosephine-L KProject administration, Writing – review & editing OwenRhiannon KSupervision, Writing – review & editing PanJiafengData curation, Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing RitchieLewisSupervision, Writing – review & editing ShahSyed AhmarData curation, Writing – review & editing ShiTingData curation, Writing – review & editing StockSarahSupervision, Writing – review & editing TsangRuby S MData curation, Writing – review & editing VasileiouEleftheriaData curation, Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing WoolhouseMarkProject administration, Writing – review & editing SimpsonColin RProject administration, Writing – review & editing RobertsonChrisData curation, Formal analysis, Methodology, Supervision, Writing – review & editing SheikhAzizConceptualization, Project administration, Writing – review & editing CannegieterSuzanne CAcademic Editor 1Usher Institute, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom2Nuffield Department of Primary Care Health Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom3Population Data Science, Swansea University Medical School, Swansea, United Kingdom4School of Medicine, University of St. Andrews, St Andrews, United Kingdom5BREATHE–The Health Data Research Hub for Respiratory Health, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom6Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast, United Kingdom7 Public Health Agency, Belfast, United Kingdom8MRC/CSO Social & Public Health Sciences Unit, Glasgow, United Kingdom9Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh, NHS Lothian and Anaesthesia, Critical Care and Pain Medicine, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom10Public Health Scotland, Glasgow, United Kingdom11Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, United Kingdom12Academic Primary Care, University of Aberdeen School of Medicine and Dentistry, Aberdeen, United Kingdom13School of Health, Wellington Faculty of Health, Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand14Leiden University Medical Center, NETHERLANDSI have read the journal’s policy and the authors of this manuscript have the following competing interests. AS is a member of the Scottish Government Chief Medical Officer’s COVID-19 Advisory Group and the New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats (NERVTAG) Risk Stratification Subgroup and AstraZeneca’s COVID-19 Thrombocytopenia Taskforce; all roles are remunerated to AS or his institution. AS and SS are members of the editorial board of PLOS Medicine. CRS declares funding from the MRC, NIHR, CSO and New Zealand Ministry for Business, Innovation and Employment and Health Research Council during the conduct of this study. SVK is co-chair of the Scottish Government’s Expert Reference Group on COVID-19 and ethnicity, is a member of the Scientific Advisory Group on Emergencies (SAGE) subgroup on ethnicity and acknowledges funding from a NRS Senior Clinical Fellowship, MRC and CSO. CR is a member of the Scottish Government Chief Medical Officer’s COVID-19 Advisory Group, SPI-M, MHRA Vaccine Benefit and Risk Working Group. HRS is an advisor to the Scottish Parliament’s COVID-19 Committee. RKO is a member of the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) Technology Appraisal Committee. DB is employed by Queen’s University Belfast, the Public Health Agency and the Department of Health (Northern Ireland). DB is a member of several Northern Ireland and UK government COVID-19 advisory boards, including the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling and the UK Vaccine Effectiveness Expert Panel, and has represented Northern Ireland on the UK Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies and its subgroups. SdeL through his University holds grants from AstraZeneca, Eli-Lilly, GSK, MSD, Sanofi and Seqirus. He has been advisory board members for Astra Zeneca, Sanofi and Seqirus. MW is a member of UK government COVID-19 advisory group, SPI-M, and a member of Scottish Government COVID-19 Advisory Group. All other authors report no conflicts of interest.
✉* E-mail: steven.kerr@ed.ac.uk
2222022192e1003927e10039272322022© 2022 Kerr et alThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.See "Association of COVID-19 vaccines ChAdOx1 and BNT162b2 with major venous, arterial, or thrombocytopenic events: A population-based cohort study of 46 million adults in England", e1003926.

## Abstract

## Background
Several countries restricted the administration of ChAdOx1 to older age groups in 2021 over safety concerns following case reports and observed versus expected analyses suggesting a possible association with cerebral venous sinus thrombosis (CVST). Large datasets are required to precisely estimate the association between Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) vaccination and CVST due to the extreme rarity of this event. We aimed to accomplish this by combining national data from England, Scotland, and Wales.

## Methods and findings
We created data platforms consisting of linked primary care, secondary care, mortality, and virological testing data in each of England, Scotland, and Wales, with a combined cohort of 11,637,157 people and 6,808,293 person years of follow-up. The cohort start date was December 8, 2020, and the end date was June 30, 2021. The outcome measure we examined was incident CVST events recorded in either primary or secondary care records. We carried out a self-controlled case series (SCCS) analysis of this outcome following first dose vaccination with ChAdOx1 and BNT162b2. The observation period consisted of an initial 90-day reference period, followed by a 2-week prerisk period directly prior to vaccination, and a 4-week risk period following vaccination. Counts of CVST cases from each country were tallied, then expanded into a full dataset with 1 row for each individual and observation time period. There was a combined total of 201 incident CVST events in the cohorts (29.5 per million person years). There were 81 CVST events in the observation period among those who a received first dose of ChAdOx1 (approximately 16.34 per million doses) and 40 for those who received a first dose of BNT162b2 (approximately 12.60 per million doses). We fitted conditional Poisson models to estimate incidence rate ratios (IRRs). Vaccination with ChAdOx1 was associated with an elevated risk of incident CVST events in the 28 days following vaccination, IRR = 1.93 (95% confidence interval (CI) 1.20 to 3.11). We did not find an association between BNT162b2 and CVST in the 28 days following vaccination, IRR = 0.78 (95% CI 0.34 to 1.77). Our study had some limitations. The SCCS study design implicitly controls for variables that are constant over the observation period, but also assumes that outcome events are independent of exposure. This assumption may not be satisfied in the case of CVST, firstly because it is a serious adverse event, and secondly because the vaccination programme in the United Kingdom prioritised the clinically extremely vulnerable and those with underlying health conditions, which may have caused a selection effect for individuals more prone to CVST. Although we pooled data from several large datasets, there was still a low number of events, which may have caused imprecision in our estimates.

## Conclusions
In this study, we observed a small elevated risk of CVST events following vaccination with ChAdOx1, but not BNT162b2. Our analysis pooled information from large datasets from England, Scotland, and Wales. This evidence may be useful in risk–benefit analyses of vaccine policies and in providing quantification of risks associated with vaccination to the general public.

In a pooled self-controlled case series study, Steven Kerr and colleagues assess the association between first dose ChAdOx1 and BNT162b2 COVID-19 vaccination with cerebral venous sinus thrombosis in England, Scotland and Wales.

## Author summary

## Why was this study done?
There have been indications of a possible association between Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) vaccines—in particular, Oxford/AstraZeneca (ChAdOx1)—and cerebral venous sinus thrombosis (CVST), which is a rare type of blood clot in the brain.
Further evidence on this topic is required in order to inform vaccine policy deliberations.

## What did the researchers do and find?
We estimated the rate of CVST events in the 4 weeks following first dose vaccination compared with a 90-day period prior to vaccination.
The rate of CVST events in the 4 weeks following vaccination with Oxford/AstraZeneca was approximately twice as high compared to the baseline rate, implying an additional 0.25 events on average in this period per million people vaccinated.
We did not find an association between Pfizer-BioNTech (BNT162b2) and CVST.

## What do these findings mean?
We found evidence of a slight increased risk of CVST following first dose vaccination with ChAdOx1, but not BNT162b2.
Public health authorities may wish to take this evidence into account when communicating the benefits and risks associated with COVID-19 vaccines to the general public.
Our study had some limitations. Although the cohort was large, CVST is an extremely rare event, and this may have caused some imprecision in our estimates. In addition, there is a possibility that our model assumptions were not satisfied.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2021 Aug 20; Accepted 2022 Jan 21; Collection date 2022 Feb.

## Introduction
There have been concerns over possible associations between some Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) vaccines and hematological and vascular adverse events, including, in particular, cerebral venous sinus thrombosis (CVST) following ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 (Oxford/AstraZeneca; henceforth ChAdOx1). A number of case reports and case series of CVST following adenovirus vector COVID-19 vaccination have been published [ – ]. A potential link between ChAdOx1 was initially noted by the European Medicines Agency (EMA) in a safety update on March 29, 2021 [ ]. On April 8, 2021, the EMA issued an analysis of pharmacovigilance data covering the European Economic Area that found a safety signal for CVST following ChAdOx1 vaccination, risk ratio = 7.73 (95% confidence interval (CI) 5.35 to 10.80) [ ]. An observed versus expected analysis using data from the Mayo Clinic Health System in the United States found a relative risk of 1.50 (95% CI 0.28 to 7.10) of CVST in a combined analysis of COVID-19 vaccines [ ]. An observed versus expected analysis in Denmark and Norway found a standardised morbidity ratio of 20.25 (95% CI 8.14 to 41.73) for cerebral venous thrombosis following ChAdOx1 vaccination [ ]. A self-controlled case series (SCCS) using the QResearch database in England found incidence rate ratio (IRR) in the 8 to 28 days following vaccination of 2.37 (95% CI 1.34 to 4.21) for ChAdOx1 and 1.93 (95% CI 0.87 to 4.28) for BNT162b2 [ ]. Several countries suspended ChAdOx1 or restricted its use to older age groups due to these and other safety concerns [ ]. The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI), an independent UK-wide body that advises the government on vaccine approval, has recommended that adults under the age of 40 should be offered an alternative to the ChAdOx1 vaccine, if available [ , ].
At the time of writing, 3 vaccines are being administered in the UK: ChAdOx1, BNT162b2 (Pfizer-BioNTech), and mRNA-1273 (Moderna). They have all shown high levels of efficacy in Phase II and III clinical trials [ – ]. ChAdOx1 and BNT162b2 have also shown high levels of “real-world effectiveness” against COVID-19 hospitalisation and death [ , ]. Vaccine rollout in the UK started with BNT162b2 on December 8, 2020, followed by ChAdOx1 on January 4, 2021 and mRNA-1273 on April 7, 2021. Guidance from the JCVI included a list of priority groups with the elderly, frontline social and health care workers, and the clinically extremely vulnerable at the highest levels of priority ( ). Relatively few people in our cohort were vaccinated with mRNA-1273, so this study focused on BNT162b2 and ChAdOx1 only.
The aim of this study was to investigate possible associations between COVID-19 vaccines and CVST. We carried out a SCCS study of CVST events following first dose vaccination with ChAdOx1 and BNT162b2. The data platform used in this study consisted of linked primary care, secondary care, mortality and virological testing data stored in secure trusted research environments (TREs) in each of England, Scotland, and Wales. CVST is an extremely rare event, with an estimated incidence of 3 to 4 per million person years in adults [ ]. In our previous analysis exploring COVID-19 vaccine associations with thrombocytopenic, thromboembolic, and hemorrhagic events using Scottish national data, there were insufficient CVST events to undertake a statistical analysis [ ]. We were not able to reliably estimate the association between COVID-19 vaccines and CVST with any individual country-specific dataset due to the low number of events. In order to address this, we pooled incident CVST cases from each of the datasets and carried out a SCCS analysis to estimate IRRs for CVST in those who received a first dose of ChAdOx1 or BNT162b2 vaccines.

## Methods

## Study design and population
We followed a prespecified statistical analysis plan ( ). The datasets consisted of linked primary care, secondary care, mortality, and virological testing data stored in secure TREs in each of England, Scotland, and Wales ( ). These data were deterministically linked using unique patient identifiers—NHS number in England and Community Health Index (CHI) number in Scotland. In Wales, a combination of deterministic linkage based on NHS number and probabilistic linkage based personal identifiers was used. Anyone under the age of 16 at the date of event was excluded. A case was defined as anyone in our cohorts with a CVST event following the start of the COVID-19 vaccination programme in the UK. An incident case was defined as the first such event in the cohort time period. The cohort start date was December 8, 2020, and the end date was June 30, 2021.
 In accordance with our statistical analysis plan, we initially sought to carry out a meta-analysis of estimates from each country. However, there were too few events in each country for this to be feasible. As a result, we undertook a pooled analyses of aggregate count data from each country. We sought to carry out both a SCCS study and a case–control study using pooled data. However, the case–control study would have required sharing of individual-level information, which was not permitted under the data governance rules implemented by each country’s TREs. Therefore, we focused on the pooled SCCS study.
The observation period for the SCCS started 104 days before first dose vaccination and ended 28 days after first dose vaccination ( ). The reference period was defined as the first 90 days of the observation period. The prerisk period was defined as the 14-day period prior to first dose vaccination. The risk period was defined as 0 to 28 days post–first dose vaccination. No individual was censored because we examined incident cases only. We pooled data across the 3 nations on incident cases during the observation period around first dose vaccination with ChAdOx1 or BNT162b2 ( ). Each stratum consisted of an incident case during the reference, prerisk, and risk periods.
 

## Exposure
We defined an individual as exposed from the day they were administered their first dose of either the BNT162b2 or ChAdOx1 vaccines.

## Outcomes
The outcome of interest was incident CVST cases in the observation period. SNOMED codes were used to identify CVST events recorded in primary care electronic health records in England, and Read Codes (Version 2) were used in Scotland and Wales ( ). International Classification of Diseases-10th Revision (ICD-10) codes were used to identify CVST events in hospital admission records ( ). SNOMED and Read Codes have hierarchies that enable thromboembolic events to be grouped by their location. These enable recording of the diagnosis of an event of interest—for example, a thromboembolic event could be recorded as intracranial, with further subdivisions into CVST, intracranial thrombophlebitis, and thrombosis of cerebral veins, within the SNOMED hierarchy. The code lists used in this study were drawn up by the Early Assessment of Vaccine and antiviral Effectiveness (EAVE) II clinical team and validated by experts in neurology and hematology.

## Statistical analysis
The data governance procedure of the TREs in each country did not allow for individual level data to be shared. However, we obtained permissions to confidentially share counts of individuals stratified by categories, on the understanding that these would be combined in a pooled count. For a SCCS study of the rate ratios (RRs) of incident events in the observation time periods that does not include any covariates, the only information that is required to estimate the conditional Poisson model is event counts in the reference, prerisk, and risk periods. Analysts in each country had full access to their country’s data. Counts of incident cases in the reference, prerisk, and risk periods stratified by vaccine type received were collated in each nation. These were then gathered in the Scottish TRE and expanded into a full dataset with 1 row per individual and observation time period. Synthetic IDs were generated in order to distinguish distinct incident cases in the count data from each other and to label the strata in the model. The process of pooling the data is explained in more detail in the Supporting information ( ). IRRs and their 95% CIs were estimated using a conditional Poisson model, with cases during the reference, prerisk, and risk periods as the strata and an offset for the length of each time period. The reference period was taken as the baseline period for calculating IRRs. Conditional Poisson models have a likelihood function that is identical to the corresponding conditional logistic model [ ]. Furthermore, incident events can occur at most once. Thus, we used the clogit function for conditional logistic regression from the survival package in R to fit the model. Following a suggestion from one of the reviewers, we undertook 2 post hoc sensitivity analyses: The first excluded any cases who died within 90 days of their event in order to explore the SCCS assumption of event-dependent exposure, and the second focused only on CVST cases identified in secondary care records.

## Ethics and permission
In England, approvals were obtained from the Health Research Authority, London Central (reference number 21/HRA/2786). In Scotland, data approvals were obtained from the National Research Ethics Service Committee, Southeast Scotland 02 (reference number: 12/SS/0201), and Public Benefit and Privacy Panel for Health and Social Care (reference number: 1920–0279). In Wales, approval was provided by SAIL independent Information Governance Review Panel (IGRP) (Project 0911).

## Reporting
This study is reported in accordance with the REporting of studies Conducted using Observational Routinely-collected Data (RECORD) guidelines ( ) [ , ].

## Results
The cohorts started on December 8, 2020 and ended on June 30, 2021. Tables – show the marginal distributions of a number of characteristics in each country’s cohort. Clinical risk groups in these tables were derived from the QCovid algorithm [ ]. Among the approximately 4.95 million people vaccinated with ChAdOx1, there were 45 incident cases of CVST during the 90-day reference period and 27 incident cases of CVST during the 28-day postvaccine risk period. We found an IRR of 1.93 (95% CI 1.20 to 3.11) in the risk period following first dose vaccination with ChAdOx1 and an IRR of 0.78 (95% CI 0.34 to 1.77) in the risk period following first dose vaccination with BNT162b2 ( ). Assuming a baseline incidence of 3 to 4 cases of CVST per million people per year outside of the risk period, our estimates imply an absolute risk of 0.44 to 0.59 incident CVST cases per million people in the 4-week risk period following vaccination with ChAdOx1.
 We sought to carry out a post hoc sensitivity analysis focusing on CVST events identified in secondary care records only; however, there were too few events to permit useful estimation of IRRs. We carried out a post hoc sensitivity analysis excluding anyone who died within 90 days of their CVST event. The only estimate that changed from our main analysis was that for the risk period following vaccination with ChAdOx1, the IRR was 1.79 (95% CI 1.10 to 2.91) ( ).
Within each nation, we plotted histograms of event counts in the observation period in order to explore the suitability of the prerisk period to account for event-dependent exposure to vaccination. There appeared to be a reduction in events in the 2-week prerisk period, but no obvious reduction outside of that time period. We are unable to share these histograms due to the statistical disclosure principles enacted by the TREs that hosted this analysis.

## Discussion
Our pooled SCCS analysis of national datasets from England, Scotland, and Wales found an elevated risk of CVST in the 4-week period following vaccination with ChAdOx1. We did not find an association between BNT162b2 and CVST.
There have hitherto been few population-based studies estimating the association between COVID-19 vaccines and CVST. Such analyses are made challenging by the extreme rarity of CVST. Our study corroborates previous observed–expected analyses from the EMA [ ], the Mayo Clinic Health System [ ], a population-based study in Denmark and Norway [ ], and a SCCS using the QResearch database in England [ ]. Our results are broadly consistent with the latter study [ ], as would be expected due to the similar study design and population. Our estimated RRs are, however, notably smaller than risk ratios reported in [ – ]. This is likely due to the fact that we conducted a SCCS that implicitly controls for variables that are constant over the observation period, as opposed to an observed–expected analysis.
A limitation in the SCCS analysis is the assumption that occurrence of an event does not affect subsequent exposure [ ]. CVST is a serious adverse event that can be life threatening. Therefore, the assumption of event-independent exposure may not have been satisfied. This could have caused a selection effect where individuals who were more likely to have a CVST event were less likely to be vaccinated and thus less likely to be included in our analysis. A large multinational study of prognosis for CVST found a death rate of 4.3% and a death or dependency rate of 18.9% at hospital discharge, where dependency was defined as a score of >2 on the modified Rankin scale [ ]. On the other hand, among the JCVI priority groups for vaccination are “clinically extremely vulnerable individuals” (group 4), and “all individuals aged 16 to 64 years with underlying health conditions which put them at higher risk of serious disease and mortality” (group 6) ( ). It is possible that the vaccination programme created a selection effect for vaccination of people more prone to CVST events.
In order to explore the validity of the assumption of event-independent exposure, we carried out a sensitivity analysis excluding those who died within 90 days of their event. This had a small effect on the IRR for the risk period following vaccination with ChAdOx1, with all other estimates unchanged. We also included a prerisk period in the SCCS study design to account for the possibility that occurrence of a CVST event affected subsequent vaccination and plotted histograms of event counts over time in order to assess its suitability. Our statistical analysis plan included a case–control analysis, which may have been useful to further explore this assumption. However, this would have required sharing more detailed data between TREs, which was not possible under the permissions in place.
We estimated IRRs as opposed to RRs. Estimating RRs with pooled data across the 3 nations could be achieved if we were able to share individual-level data. However, this was not permitted under the statistical disclosure rules implemented by the data controllers. We do not believe that the estimates for RRs and IRRs would be significantly different because of the rarity of CVST events.
We plan to extend our analysis to mRNA-1273 and to second and booster dose vaccinations. To date, there have been very few studies that have estimated the association between COVID-19 vaccine and CVST events using large-scale nationally representative datasets [ – ]. Although we had access to a large, combined cohort, there were still relatively few events. Further evidence corroborating our results is required.
In conclusion, we found an increased risk of CVST following first dose vaccination with ChAdOx1. We did not find an increased risk following first dose vaccination with BNT162b2. This evidence may be useful in risk–benefit evaluations for vaccine-related policies and in providing quantification of risks associated with vaccination to the general public.

## Supporting information
S1 File

## STROBE and RECORD checklists.
RECORD, REporting of studies Conducted using Observational Routinely-collected Data; STROBE, STrengthening the Reporting of OBservational studies in Epidemiology.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 File

## Vaccine priority groups.
Context of vaccine roll-out in the UK: JCVI COVID-19 vaccination priority group list. COVID-19, Coronavirus Disease 2019; JCVI, Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 File

## Statistical analysis plan.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 File

## Code lists.
Read Codes and SNOMED CT codes for CVST. CVST, cerebral venous sinus thrombosis.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S5 File

## Data pooling procedure.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S6 File

## Sensitivity analysis.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.

## Acknowledgments
We thank Dave Kelly from Albasoft for his support with making primary care data available and James Pickett, Wendy Inglis-Humphrey, Vicky Hammersley, Maria Georgiou, and Laura Gonzalez Rienda for their support with project management and administration. Our thanks to J. Quint, R. Al-Shahi Salman, and Q. Hill for reviewing code lists. This work uses data provided by patients and collected by the NHS as part of their care and support. We would also like to acknowledge all data providers who make anonymised data available for research. We wish to acknowledge the collaborative partnership that enabled acquisition and access to the deidentified data in Wales, which led to this output. The collaboration was led by the Swansea University Health Data Research UK team under the direction of the Welsh Government Technical Advisory Cell and includes the following groups and organisations: the Secure Anonymised Information Linkage (SAIL) Databank, Administrative Data Research Wales, NHS Wales Informatics Service, Public Health Wales, NHS Shared Services Partnership, and the Welsh Ambulance Service Trust. All research conducted has been completed under the permission and approval of the SAIL independent IGRP (project number: 0911).

## Abbreviations
CHICommunity Health Index
CIconfidence interval
COVID-19Coronavirus Disease 2019
CVSTcerebral venous sinus thrombosis
EAVEEarly Assessment of Vaccine and antiviral Effectiveness
EMAEuropean Medicines Agency
ICD-10International Classification of Diseases-10th Revision
IGRPInformation Governance Review Panel
IRRincidence rate ratio
JCVIJoint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation
RECORDREporting of studies Conducted using Observational Routinely-collected Data
RRrate ratio
SCCSself-controlled case series
TREtrusted research environment

## Data Availability
The data used in this study cannot be shared publicly because they are based on de-identified national clinical records. The English data is stored in the ORCHID TRE. Access to data can be requested via https://orchid.phc.ox.ac.uk/index.php/orchid-data/. The Scottish data is stored in the Public Health Scotland TRE. To access these individual-level, confidential healthcare data, researchers will need to apply to HSC-PBPP (https://www.informationgovernance.scot.nhs.uk/pbpphsc/). The Welsh data are available in the SAIL Databank at Swansea University, Swansea, UK. All proposals to use SAIL data are subject to review by an independent Information Governance Review Panel (IGRP). Before any data can be accessed, approval must be given by the IGRP. The IGRP gives careful consideration to each project to ensure proper and appropriate use of SAIL data. When access has been granted, it is gained through a privacy protecting safe haven and remote access system referred to as the SAIL Gateway. SAIL has established an application process to be followed by anyone who would like to access data via SAIL at https://www.saildatabank.com/application-process.

## Funding Statement
This research is part of the Data and Connectivity National Core Study, led by Health Data Research UK in partnership with the Office for National Statistics and funded by UK Research and Innovation (grant ref MC_PC_20029, AS). EAVE II is funded by the Medical Research Council (https://mrc.ukri.org/) (UKRI MC_PC 19075, AS) with the support of BREATHE, The Health Data Research Hub for Respiratory Health (MC_PC_19004, AS), which is funded through the UK Research and Innovation Industrial Strategy Challenge Fund and delivered through Health Data Research UK. This work was supported by the Con-COV team funded by the Medical Research Council (grant number: MR/V028367/1, RL). This work was supported by Health Data Research UK, which receives its funding from HDR UK Ltd (HDR-9006, RL) funded by the UK Medical Research Council, Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council, Economic and Social Research Council, Department of Health and Social Care (England), Chief Scientist Office of the Scottish Government Health and Social Care Directorates, Health and Social Care Research and Development Division (Welsh Government), Public Health Agency (Northern Ireland), British Heart Foundation (BHF) and the Wellcome Trust. This work was supported by the ADR Wales programme of work (https://www.adruk.org/). The ADR Wales programme of work is aligned to the priority themes as identified in the Welsh Government’s national strategy: Prosperity for All. ADR Wales brings together data science experts at Swansea University Medical School, staff from the Wales Institute of Social and Economic Research, Data and Methods (WISERD) at Cardiff University and specialist teams within the Welsh Government to develop new evidence which supports Prosperity for All by using the SAIL Databank at Swansea University, to link and analyse anonymised data. ADR Wales is part of the Economic and Social Research Council (part of UK Research and Innovation) funded ADR UK (grant ES/S007393/1, RL). SVK acknowledges funding from NHS Research Scotland Senior Clinical Fellowship (SCAF/15/02, SVK), the MRC (MC_UU_00022/2, SVK), and the Scottish Government Chief Scientist Office (SPHSU17, SVK). The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

## References
 

PLoS MedicinePLoS Med10.1371/journal.pmed.1003927.r001Decision Letter 0
Gaynor-BrookLouiseSenior Editor© 2022 Louise Gaynor-BrookThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
23 Aug 2021

Dear Dr Kerr, 
Thank you for submitting your manuscript entitled "First dose ChAdOx1 and BNT162b2 COVID-19 vaccinations and cerebral venous sinus thrombosis: pooled self-controlled case series of UK datasets" for consideration by PLOS Medicine.
Your manuscript has now been evaluated by the PLOS Medicine editorial staff and I am writing to let you know that we would like to send your submission out for external peer review.
However, before we can send your manuscript to reviewers, we need you to complete your submission by providing the metadata that is required for full assessment. To this end, please login to Editorial Manager where you will find the paper in the 'Submissions Needing Revisions' folder on your homepage. Please click 'Revise Submission' from the Action Links and complete all additional questions in the submission questionnaire.
Please re-submit your manuscript within two working days, i.e. by .
Login to Editorial Manager here: https://www.editorialmanager.com/pmedicine
Once your full submission is complete, your paper will undergo a series of checks in preparation for peer review. Once your manuscript has passed all checks it will be sent out for review. 
Feel free to email us at plosmedicine@plos.org if you have any queries relating to your submission.
Kind regards,
Louise Gaynor-Brook, MBBS PhD
Senior Editor
PLOS Medicine
PLoS MedicinePLoS Med10.1371/journal.pmed.1003927.r002Decision Letter 1
Gaynor-BrookLouiseSenior Editor© 2022 Louise Gaynor-BrookThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
22 Sep 2021

Dear Dr. Kerr,
Thank you very much for submitting your manuscript "First dose ChAdOx1 and BNT162b2 COVID-19 vaccinations and cerebral venous sinus thrombosis: pooled self-controlled case series of UK datasets" (PMEDICINE-D-21-03598R1) for consideration at PLOS Medicine. 
Your paper was evaluated by three independent reviewers, including a statistical reviewer, and was discussed among all the editors here and with an academic editor with relevant expertise. The reviews are appended at the bottom of this email and any accompanying reviewer attachments can be seen via the link below:
[LINK]
In light of these reviews, I am afraid that we will not be able to accept the manuscript for publication in the journal in its current form, but we would like to consider a revised version that addresses the reviewers' and editors' comments. Obviously we cannot make any decision about publication until we have seen the revised manuscript and your response, and we plan to seek re-review by one or more of the reviewers. 
In revising the manuscript for further consideration, your revisions should address the specific points made by each reviewer and the editors. Please also check the guidelines for revised papers at http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/s/revising-your-manuscript for any that apply to your paper. In your rebuttal letter you should indicate your response to the reviewers' and editors' comments, the changes you have made in the manuscript, and include either an excerpt of the revised text or the location (eg: page and line number) where each change can be found. Please submit a clean version of the paper as the main article file; a version with changes marked should be uploaded as a marked up manuscript.
In addition, we request that you upload any figures associated with your paper as individual TIF or EPS files with 300dpi resolution at resubmission; please read our figure guidelines for more information on our requirements: http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/s/figures. While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the PACE digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at PLOSMedicine@plos.org.
We expect to receive your revised manuscript by Oct 13 2021 11:59PM. Please email us (plosmedicine@plos.org) if you have any questions or concerns.
***Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.***
We ask every co-author listed on the manuscript to fill in a contributing author statement, making sure to declare all competing interests. If any of the co-authors have not filled in the statement, we will remind them to do so when the paper is revised. If all statements are not completed in a timely fashion this could hold up the re-review process. If new competing interests are declared later in the revision process, this may also hold up the submission. Should there be a problem getting one of your co-authors to fill in a statement we will be in contact. YOU MUST NOT ADD OR REMOVE AUTHORS UNLESS YOU HAVE ALERTED THE EDITOR HANDLING THE MANUSCRIPT TO THE CHANGE AND THEY SPECIFICALLY HAVE AGREED TO IT. You can see our competing interests policy here: http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/s/competing-interests.
Please use the following link to submit the revised manuscript: 

https://www.editorialmanager.com/pmedicine/

Your article can be found in the "Submissions Needing Revision" folder. 
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
Please ensure that the paper adheres to the PLOS Data Availability Policy (see http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/s/data-availability), which requires that all data underlying the study's findings be provided in a repository or as Supporting Information. For data residing with a third party, authors are required to provide instructions with contact information for obtaining the data. PLOS journals do not allow statements supported by "data not shown" or "unpublished results." For such statements, authors must provide supporting data or cite public sources that include it. 
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript. 
Sincerely,
Louise Gaynor-Brook, MBBS PhD
Associate Editor 
PLOS Medicine

plosmedicine.org

-----------------------------------------------------------
Requests from the editors:
General comments:
Throughout the paper, please adapt reference call-outs to the following style: "... ChAdOx1 vaccine, if available [11,12]." (noting the absence of spaces within the square brackets).
Title: Please revise your title according to PLOS Medicine's style. We suggest “First dose ChAdOx1 and BNT162b2 COVID-19 vaccinations and cerebral venous sinus thrombosis: A pooled self-controlled case series study of 12 million individuals in England, Scotland and Wales” or similar
Abstract:
Abstract Background: Please specify which COVID-19 vaccines were restricted. “England, Scotland and Wales” would be preferable to “Great Britain” 
Abstract Methods and Findings:
Please provide brief demographic details of the study population (e.g. sex, age, ethnicity, etc)
Please provide the exact number of participants, population, the dates between which the study took place, length of follow up, and main outcome measures.
If possible, please provide the actual incidence of CVST in the study population in addition to IRRs 
Line 62 - Please revise to “Vaccination with ChAdOx1 was associated with an elevated risk…” 
In the last sentence of the Abstract Methods and Findings section, please describe 2-3 of the main limitations of the study's methodology.
Abstract Conclusions:
Please begin your Abstract Conclusions with "In this study, we observed ..." or similar, to summarize the main findings from your study, without overstating your conclusions. Please emphasize what is new and address the specific implications of your study, being careful to avoid assertions of primacy and general statements such as "these results have implications for policy". 
Author Summary:
At this stage, we ask that you include a short, non-technical Author Summary of your research to make findings accessible to a wide audience that includes both scientists and non-scientists. The Author Summary should immediately follow the Abstract in your revised manuscript. This text is subject to editorial change and should be distinct from the scientific abstract. Please see our author guidelines for more information: https://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/s/revising-your-manuscript#loc-author-summary
In the final bullet point of ‘What Do These Findings Mean?’, please describe the main limitations of the study in non-technical language.
Methods:
Please state that your study had a prospective statistical analysis plan early in the Methods section, and please include the relevant prospectively written document with your revised manuscript as a Supporting Information file to be published alongside your study, and cite it in the Methods section. A legend for this file should be included at the end of your manuscript. Changes in the analysis-- including those made in response to peer review comments-- should be identified as such in the Methods section of the paper, with rationale. If a reported analysis was performed based on an interesting but unanticipated pattern in the data, please be clear that the analysis was data-driven.
Please add the following statement, or similar, to the Methods: "This study is reported as per the REporting of studies Conducted using Observational Routinely-collected Data (RECORD) guideline (S1 Checklist)." 
Line 153 - sentence appears incomplete 
Results: 
Please provide a table showing the baseline characteristics of the study population as Table 1. 
Please replace ~ with approximately
Line 184 - please revise to ‘incident cases of CVST’
Please report the dates between which the study took place
Discussion:
Please present and organize the Discussion as follows: a short, clear summary of the article's findings; what the study adds to existing research and where and why the results may differ from previous research; strengths and limitations of the study; implications and next steps for research, clinical practice, and/or public policy; one-paragraph conclusion.
Line 202 - please temper assertions of primacy by adding ‘to the best of our knowledge’ or similar. “England, Scotland and Wales” would be preferable to “Great Britain” 
Tables:
Please define all abbreviations used in the table legend of each table.
References:
Please ensure that journal name abbreviations match those found in the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) databases, and are appropriately formatted and capitalised.
Please also see https://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/s/submission-guidelines#loc-references for further details on reference formatting, e.g. six authors are names prior to ‘et al’. 
Where websites are cited, please specify the date of access 
Supplementary files: 
Please see https://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/s/supporting-information for our supporting information guidelines. 
Comments from the reviewers:
Reviewer #1: "First dose ChAdOx1 and BNT162b2 COVID-19 vaccinations and cerebral venous sinus thrombosis: pooled self-controlled case series of UK datasets" is a concise self-controlled case series (SCCS) analysis on incident cerebral venous sinus thrombosis (CVST) events, on over 12 million individuals from England, Scotland and Wales. The extremely low incidences for CVST (<50 for 4.33 million ChAdOx1 doses, <15 for 2.32 million BNT162b2 doses) has made any conclusive determination of increased risk challenging. With the SCCS design that implicitly controls for time-invariant variables (by effectively comparing every individual against himself before [including a clearance period] and after dosing), a 2.66 (1.48-4.79) incidence rate ratio (IRR) was found for ChAdOx1, against 1.07 (0.22-5.31) for BNT162b2 (Table 2).
While the study framework appears to allow for the analysis of other potential side effects in addition to CVST, this submission remains a timely addition to the literature, with further work on mRNA-1273 and further doses already proposed (Line 236). Still, a few issues might be considered:
1. While the description of the data compilation is relatively comprehensive (Figure 1), the detailed selection of the cohort might stand to be defined in greater detail. For example, the starting point (all individual given at least one dose of either the ChAdOx1 or BNT162b2 vaccine?) and any exclusions (e.g. missing data) might be presented in a flowchart.
2. While simple cohort demographics are provided in Table 1, it appears relevant to also present other demographic variables (e.g. age, gender, ethnicity, etc.) stratified by vaccine received, which would moreover help to give an idea of whether the demographics for each vaccine are comparable (all the more as their administration appears non-random from S1 Table).
Moreover, it appears possible that the underlying demographics may remain important in the analysis of IRR (related to the selection bias raised in Line 218), despite the SCCS study design. For example, assume that a rare disease has effectively zero incidence below a certain age (e.g. 50 years). Then, if Treatment A were provided mostly to those below that age, and Treatment B mostly to those above that age, then the potential for incidence would appear biased towards Treatment B (before considerations on whether increased disease incidence due to vaccine dosing is itself affected by age and other variables). Notably, from Table 2, given the 25 pre-risk events for ChAdOx1 (4.33 million doses), about 13 pre-risk events would be expected for BNT162b2 (2.32 million doses). However, only 6 pre-risk events were observed for BNT162b2 in reality. A fuller evaluation of the demographics for each vaccine group might therefore be warranted.
3. Data coverage would seem to remain somewhat of a concern, especially for the English data (~10% GP coverage, from Figure 1). In particular, the validity of SCCS would seem to assume individuals remaining "in system" throughout, i.e. if CVST were to occur for an individual, this CVST incidence would be expected to be recorded whether in the pre-risk, clearance or risk period. Would this be a reasonable expectation, or is it possible that CVST be treated at a venue that is not included in the databases used (e.g. the ~90% of GP practices not covered, for England)?
Reviewer #2: Thank you for the opportunity to review this manuscript on a matter of importance to public health.
Major comments: 
1. 34 authors? Please elaborate.
2. Overall, the manuscript appears rushed and needs more attention. See e.g. line 153?
3. I do not understand the statistical approach. It is unclear what aggregation in each country and then expansion with so-called synthetic ID's is. If this means that you have first aggregated the true events and then tried to reconstruct synthetic events I am concerned. Please provide more detail and references that this is a valid approach. Alternatively, please estimate the association in each country and combine the three using e.g. inverse variance weighting.
4. Please provide sensitivity analyses supporting that the assumptions of the SCCS analysis is not violated.
5. Please provide a figure with two panels: each panel showing a histogram of the timing of event compared to date of vaccination with the two vaccines.
6. You need to convince the reader that the many SNOMED and READ codes you have included accurately reflect CVST. Have these been validated? 
7. Are you including GP information? Can you please provide a sensitivity analysis of only cases identified in a hospital setting.
8. What are you using laboratory data for?
9. You need to discuss your results in more detail in comparison to other studies. You report a <1 CVST case per 1 mil vaccinated. This is much less than what others have reported.
10. You conclude "Public health officials should take account of this evidence in designing policies on vaccination." What do you mean? Elaborate please?
Minor comments:
11. incidence rate ratio instead of incident rate ratio 
12. I am confused by the Sup table 1 mentioning Scotland only? 
13. In SCCS terminology, a pre-risk period is your clearance period and the reference period is your pre-risk period.
Reviewer #3: This is a straightforward analysis and methodological sound. However, I fail to see the novelty of the data as the association between CVT and vaccination has already been reported. Nonetheless, the study provides estimates for the British population. 
Some important data is missing and could add relevant information. Please provide data on mortality, demographic differences, or association with coagulation disorders. 
You might consider presenting you findings as a brief report or as a letter.
The figure legends are somewhat misplaced in the text.
Any attachments provided with reviews can be seen via the following link:
[LINK]
PLoS MedicinePLoS Med10.1371/journal.pmed.1003927.r003Author response to Decision Letter 1
2222022192e1003927e1003927Collection date 2022 Feb.

12 Nov 2021

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response letter.docx
Click here for additional data file.
PLoS MedicinePLoS Med10.1371/journal.pmed.1003927.r004Decision Letter 2
Gaynor-BrookLouiseSenior Editor© 2022 Louise Gaynor-BrookThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
1 Dec 2021

Dear Dr. Kerr,
Thank you very much for submitting your manuscript "First dose ChAdOx1 and BNT162b2 COVID-19 vaccinations and cerebral venous sinus thrombosis: A pooled self-controlled case series study of 11.6 million individuals in England, Scotland and Wales" (PMEDICINE-D-21-03598R2) for consideration at PLOS Medicine. 
Your paper was re-reviewed by three reviewers and discussed among all the editors here. The reviews are appended at the bottom of this email and any accompanying reviewer attachments can be seen via the link below:
[LINK]
In light of the statistical re-review, I am afraid that we will not be able to accept the manuscript for publication in the journal in its current form, but we would like to consider a revised version that addresses the reviewers' and editors' comments. Obviously we cannot make any decision about publication until we have seen the revised manuscript and your response, and we plan to seek re-review by one or more of the reviewers. 
In revising the manuscript for further consideration, your revisions should address the specific points made by each reviewer and the editors. Please also check the guidelines for revised papers at http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/s/revising-your-manuscript for any that apply to your paper. In your rebuttal letter you should indicate your response to the reviewers' and editors' comments, the changes you have made in the manuscript, and include either an excerpt of the revised text or the location (eg: page and line number) where each change can be found. Please submit a clean version of the paper as the main article file; a version with changes marked should be uploaded as a marked up manuscript.
In addition, we request that you upload any figures associated with your paper as individual TIF or EPS files with 300dpi resolution at resubmission; please read our figure guidelines for more information on our requirements: http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/s/figures. While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the PACE digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at PLOSMedicine@plos.org.
We expect to receive your revised manuscript by Dec 22 2021 11:59PM. Please email us (plosmedicine@plos.org) if you have any questions or concerns.
***Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.***
We ask every co-author listed on the manuscript to fill in a contributing author statement, making sure to declare all competing interests. If any of the co-authors have not filled in the statement, we will remind them to do so when the paper is revised. If all statements are not completed in a timely fashion this could hold up the re-review process. If new competing interests are declared later in the revision process, this may also hold up the submission. Should there be a problem getting one of your co-authors to fill in a statement we will be in contact. YOU MUST NOT ADD OR REMOVE AUTHORS UNLESS YOU HAVE ALERTED THE EDITOR HANDLING THE MANUSCRIPT TO THE CHANGE AND THEY SPECIFICALLY HAVE AGREED TO IT. You can see our competing interests policy here: http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/s/competing-interests.
Please use the following link to submit the revised manuscript: 

https://www.editorialmanager.com/pmedicine/

Your article can be found in the "Submissions Needing Revision" folder. 
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
Please ensure that the paper adheres to the PLOS Data Availability Policy (see http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/s/data-availability), which requires that all data underlying the study's findings be provided in a repository or as Supporting Information. For data residing with a third party, authors are required to provide instructions with contact information for obtaining the data. PLOS journals do not allow statements supported by "data not shown" or "unpublished results." For such statements, authors must provide supporting data or cite public sources that include it. 
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript. 
Sincerely,
Louise Gaynor-Brook, MBBS PhD
Associate Editor, PLOS Medicine

plosmedicine.org

-----------------------------------------------------------
Requests from the editors:
It is of concern that the results of your analysis appear to have changed substantially during your revision (Table 4) - in particular, the differences in numbers of events. Please provide clarification as to how the revised results were generated, including changes in the data used and methodology. This may be subject to statistical re-review. 
Comments from the reviewers:
Reviewer #1: Figure 2 defining the pre-risk, clearance and risk periods appears unchanged from the previous revision (R1). However Table 4 for reference/pre-risk/risk events/incidence rate ratios appears wholly different from Table 2 from the previous revision (R1). This might be clarified, since it appears the core of the analysis.
Reviewer #2: The authors have satisfactorily addressed my comments. Thank you.
Reviewer #3: all well addressed
Any attachments provided with reviews can be seen via the following link:
[LINK]
PLoS MedicinePLoS Med10.1371/journal.pmed.1003927.r005Author response to Decision Letter 2
2222022192e1003927e1003927Collection date 2022 Feb.

6 Dec 2021

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response letter 2.docx
Click here for additional data file.
PLoS MedicinePLoS Med10.1371/journal.pmed.1003927.r006Decision Letter 3
Gaynor-BrookLouiseSenior Editor© 2022 Louise Gaynor-BrookThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
14 Jan 2022

Dear Dr. Kerr,
Thank you very much for re-submitting your manuscript "First dose ChAdOx1 and BNT162b2 COVID-19 vaccinations and cerebral venous sinus thrombosis: A pooled self-controlled case series study of 11.6 million individuals in England, Scotland and Wales" (PMEDICINE-D-21-03598R3) for review by PLOS Medicine.
I have discussed the paper with my colleagues and the academic editor. I am pleased to say that provided the remaining editorial and production issues are dealt with we are planning to accept the paper for publication in the journal.
The remaining issues that need to be addressed are listed at the end of this email. Please take these into account before resubmitting your manuscript:
[LINK]
***Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.***
In revising the manuscript for further consideration here, please ensure you address the specific points made by the editors. In your rebuttal letter you should indicate your response to the editors' comments and the changes you have made in the manuscript. Please submit a clean version of the paper as the main article file. A version with changes marked must also be uploaded as a marked up manuscript file. Please also check the guidelines for revised papers at http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/s/revising-your-manuscript for any that apply to your paper. 
We expect to receive your revised manuscript within 1 week. Please email us (plosmedicine@plos.org) if you have any questions or concerns.
We ask every co-author listed on the manuscript to fill in a contributing author statement. If any of the co-authors have not filled in the statement, we will remind them to do so when the paper is revised. If all statements are not completed in a timely fashion this could hold up the re-review process. Should there be a problem getting one of your co-authors to fill in a statement we will be in contact. YOU MUST NOT ADD OR REMOVE AUTHORS UNLESS YOU HAVE ALERTED THE EDITOR HANDLING THE MANUSCRIPT TO THE CHANGE AND THEY SPECIFICALLY HAVE AGREED TO IT.
Please ensure that the paper adheres to the PLOS Data Availability Policy (see http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/s/data-availability), which requires that all data underlying the study's findings be provided in a repository or as Supporting Information. For data residing with a third party, authors are required to provide instructions with contact information for obtaining the data. PLOS journals do not allow statements supported by "data not shown" or "unpublished results." For such statements, authors must provide supporting data or cite public sources that include it.
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript.
Please note, when your manuscript is accepted, an uncorrected proof of your manuscript will be published online ahead of the final version, unless you've already opted out via the online submission form. If, for any reason, you do not want an earlier version of your manuscript published online or are unsure if you have already indicated as such, please let the journal staff know immediately at plosmedicine@plos.org.
If you have any questions in the meantime, please contact me or the journal staff on plosmedicine@plos.org.  
We look forward to receiving the revised manuscript by Jan 21 2022 11:59PM.   
Sincerely,
Louise Gaynor-Brook, MBBS PhD
Associate Editor 
PLOS Medicine

plosmedicine.org

------------------------------------------------------------
Requests from Editors:
Abstract Methods and Findings:
Please revise to “6,808,293 person years of follow-up”
If possible, please provide a brief demographic summary of the study population(s) (e.g. % female, mean age (SD), etc)
Please specifically use the term ‘limitations’ in section beginning “The self-controlled case series study design…”
Author Summary:
Please revise to “following first dose vaccination with either ChAdOx1 or Pfizer BioNTech (BNT162b2)”, or similar 
Please separate the text under ‘What Do These Findings Mean?’ into two separate bullet points. 
Please add a final bullet point to ‘What Do These Findings Mean?’ to describe the main limitations of the study in non-technical language.
Introduction:
Please revise to “...United States found a relative risk of 1.50 (95% CI 0.28-7.10) of CVST …”
Methods
Please provide your STROBE/RECORD checklist as (S1 Checklist)
Results: 
Please revise “4.95 million people total vaccinated”
PLOS does not permit ‘data not shown’; please provide the results generated in your sensitivity analysis (perhaps in a supplementary file) 
Tables:
Please define all abbreviations used in the table legend of each table e.g. COPD, BMI, CVST and so on.
Table 1 - please clarify what is meant by ‘Age (years%)’; please clarify whether mean(SD) and Median(IQR) are presented and whether % signs are appropriate for Age and Average Household Age 
Table 2 - please clarify what is meant by ‘Age (years%)’
Table 4 - please provide a reminder in the table legend as to what the different time periods represent (i.e. reference, pre-risk, risk) 
References:
Please try to be consistent in reference formatting - a DOI number for the full-text article is acceptable as an alternative to or in addition to traditional volume and page numbers. 
Please remove italicised text e.g. ref 11 and report journal names as found at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nlmcatalog/journals e.g. Lancet (ref 15), N Engl J Med (refs 1, 2, etc) 
Please see https://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/s/submission-guidelines#loc-references for further details on reference formatting. 
Supplementary files: 
Please provide your STROBE/RECORD checklist as (S1 Checklist)
Any attachments provided with reviews can be seen via the following link:
[LINK]
PLoS MedicinePLoS Med10.1371/journal.pmed.1003927.r007Author response to Decision Letter 3
2222022192e1003927e1003927Collection date 2022 Feb.

17 Jan 2022

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response letter 3.docx
Click here for additional data file.
PLoS MedicinePLoS Med10.1371/journal.pmed.1003927.r008Decision Letter 4
Gaynor-BrookLouiseSenior Editor© 2022 Louise Gaynor-BrookThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
21 Jan 2022

Dear Dr Kerr, 
On behalf of my colleagues and the Academic Editor, Prof. Suzanne Cannegieter, I am pleased to inform you that we have agreed to publish your manuscript "First dose ChAdOx1 and BNT162b2 COVID-19 vaccinations and cerebral venous sinus thrombosis: A pooled self-controlled case series study of 11.6 million individuals in England, Scotland and Wales" (PMEDICINE-D-21-03598R4) in PLOS Medicine.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. Please be aware that it may take several days for you to receive this email; during this time no action is required by you. Once you have received these formatting requests, please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes.
In the meantime, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pmedicine/, click the "Update My Information" link at the top of the page, and update your user information to ensure an efficient production process. 
PRESS
We frequently collaborate with press offices. If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper at this point, to enable them to help maximise its impact. If the press office is planning to promote your findings, we would be grateful if they could coordinate with medicinepress@plos.org. If you have not yet opted out of the early version process, we ask that you notify us immediately of any press plans so that we may do so on your behalf.
We also ask that you take this opportunity to read our Embargo Policy regarding the discussion, promotion and media coverage of work that is yet to be published by PLOS. As your manuscript is not yet published, it is bound by the conditions of our Embargo Policy. Please be aware that this policy is in place both to ensure that any press coverage of your article is fully substantiated and to provide a direct link between such coverage and the published work. For full details of our Embargo Policy, please visit http://www.plos.org/about/media-inquiries/embargo-policy/.
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
Thank you again for submitting to PLOS Medicine. We look forward to publishing your paper. 
Sincerely, 
Louise Gaynor-Brook, MBBS PhD 
Associate Editor 
PLOS Medicine
Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
S1 File

## STROBE and RECORD checklists.
RECORD, REporting of studies Conducted using Observational Routinely-collected Data; STROBE, STrengthening the Reporting of OBservational studies in Epidemiology.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 File

## Vaccine priority groups.
Context of vaccine roll-out in the UK: JCVI COVID-19 vaccination priority group list. COVID-19, Coronavirus Disease 2019; JCVI, Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 File

## Statistical analysis plan.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 File

## Code lists.
Read Codes and SNOMED CT codes for CVST. CVST, cerebral venous sinus thrombosis.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S5 File

## Data pooling procedure.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S6 File

## Sensitivity analysis.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response letter.docx
Click here for additional data file.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response letter 2.docx
Click here for additional data file.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response letter 3.docx
Click here for additional data file.

## Data Availability Statement
The data used in this study cannot be shared publicly because they are based on de-identified national clinical records. The English data is stored in the ORCHID TRE. Access to data can be requested via https://orchid.phc.ox.ac.uk/index.php/orchid-data/. The Scottish data is stored in the Public Health Scotland TRE. To access these individual-level, confidential healthcare data, researchers will need to apply to HSC-PBPP (https://www.informationgovernance.scot.nhs.uk/pbpphsc/). The Welsh data are available in the SAIL Databank at Swansea University, Swansea, UK. All proposals to use SAIL data are subject to review by an independent Information Governance Review Panel (IGRP). Before any data can be accessed, approval must be given by the IGRP. The IGRP gives careful consideration to each project to ensure proper and appropriate use of SAIL data. When access has been granted, it is gained through a privacy protecting safe haven and remote access system referred to as the SAIL Gateway. SAIL has established an application process to be followed by anyone who would like to access data via SAIL at https://www.saildatabank.com/application-process.