3329jmhAmerican Journal of Men's HealthAm J Mens HealthSAGE PublicationsPMC8383213838321383832133441483610.1177/15579883211035241“That’s Me I am the Farmer of the Land”: Exploring Identities,
Masculinities, and Health Among Male Farmers’ in Ireland
HammersleyConorMSc RichardsonNoelPhD MeredithDavidPhD CarrollPaulaPhD McNamaraJohnPhD 1Department of Science and Health,
National Centre for Men’s Health (NCMH), Institute of Technology, Carlow,
Ireland2Teagasc, Ireland’s agriculture and food
research and development authority, Ashtown Research Centre, Ashtown, Dublin,
Ireland3Centre for Health Behaviour Research,
Waterford Institute of Technology, Waterford, Ireland✉Dr Noel Richardson, Director of the
National Centre for Men’s Health, Institute of Technology Carlow, Kilkenny Rd,
Moanacurragh, Carlow, Ireland. Email:
Noel.Richardson@itcarlow.ie
208202115415579883211035241155798832110352412582021© The Author(s) 2021This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) which permits
any use, reproduction and distribution of the work without further
permission provided the original work is attributed as specified on the SAGE
and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).

## Abstract
Compared to other occupational groups, farmers in Ireland experience a
disproportionate burden of health problems, which impact farmers’ livelihoods
and farming sustainability. Internationally, farmers’ poor health outcomes are
associated with intersecting economic, environmental, socio-cultural, and
occupation-specific factors linked to changes in agricultural governance. This
qualitative study explored the challenges and stressors facing farmers in
Ireland and how changes in farming governance have impacted farmers’ identities,
masculinities and health. Eleven focus groups (n = 26 female,
n = 35 male, age-range 20s–70s) were conducted with both
male farmers (n = 3 focus groups; n = 13) and
key informants (n = 8 focus groups; n = 48, 22
male, 26 female). Utilizing Thematic Content Analysis, transcripts were coded
independently by the first and second author using open and comparative coding
techniques, with emerging themes grouped into primary and subthemes. Theme memos
and conceptual maps tracked evolving relationships between themes. The analysis
identified three broad themes. “Wrestling with challenges to autonomy and
control within farming” examines the impact of tighter regulatory frameworks
associated with changes to farming governance and unpacks other challenges
associated with scale and succession. “Farming masculinities and health”
explores how farming masculinities were closely aligned with farming practices
and health practices and were framed relationally. “Isolation and the demise of
rural communities” considers the impact of reduced social interaction on
loneliness among farmers, particularly among more “at risk” single and older
farmers. Findings provide unique insights into contemporary challenges and
stressors facing farmers and have important implications for informing the
design and roll-out of a national farmers’ health training program.
Keywords: farmers’ health, farming masculinity, farming governance, farmer stress

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2021 Mar 8; Revised 2021 Jul 7; Accepted 2021 Jul 8; Collection date 2021 Jul-Aug.

Internationally, farming has long been regarded as a stressful occupation prompting
widespread concern for farmers’ well-being ( ; ). The diverse and
complex range of stressors associated with farming has resulted in farming becoming
synonymous with more adverse health outcomes relative to other occupations ( ). The focus of this study is on male farmers’ health. Notwithstanding
the unique challenges that impact on female farmers’ health ( ), the rationale for
focusing on male farmers’ health is grounded in (i) particularly adverse health outcomes
for male farmers related to cardiovascular disease ( ; ), cancers ( ) and mental
health ( ; ); (ii) calls at a national men’s health policy level for more targeted
and gender-sensitive approaches to male farmers’ health ( ); and (iii)
efforts, as part of a wider study, to inform the design of a farmers’ health training
program under the auspices of ENGAGE—a national men’s health training program ( ; ; ).
Farmers’ poor health outcomes have a detrimental impact on farmers’ lives, resulting in
higher risk of farming injury, disability, premature death, and loss of farm
profitability ( ). Indeed, in the context of declining mortality rates more generally in
Ireland over recent decades, mortality rates among Irish farmers have decreased the
least of all socio-economic status (SES) groups ( ). This, as argue, is
a direct reflection of the decline in farm incomes during the same period and warrants a
more targeted policy response and prioritization of farmers and agricultural workers as
a high-risk group. International research has linked these adverse health outcomes to a
variety of factors, such as solitary work, high workload and time pressure, machinery
breakdown, unfavorable weather conditions, and financial aspects, for example, irregular
and uncertain income, and financial debt ( ; ; ). Additionally,
many social difficulties associated with farming have been noted, such as balancing work
and family and working with multigenerational family members ( ; ). Emerging literature ( ; ; ; ) draws attention to changes in agriculture governance as a critical
source of stress for farmers. Specifically, the shift from a “productivist” focus on
intensification—associated with negative environmental externalities within large scale
farming operations (predominantly cattle feedlots, large-scale poultry and grain
operations) to more “agri-environmental” farm practices (e.g., price supports for
biodiversity development, upkeep of rivers, reducing greenhouse gases, and animal/plant
welfare) has had significant implications for farmers’ work practices and
livelihoods.

## Farming Identities and Farming Masculinities
This changing nature of farming at a policy level has received mixed responses from
the farming community—with many farmers demonstrating resistance to such change
( ). Many
of the challenges arising from changes to farming governance are compounded by
aspects of farmer identity and more dominant or “hegemonic” constructions of farming
masculinity. theorized that hegemonic masculinity refers to the culturally
exalted position afforded at any given time to one form of masculinity over others,
and reflects men’s domination of women and a complex system of inter-male dominance.
The pursuit of hegemonic masculinity is therefore synonymous with the pursuit of
power and is defined against a range of subordinated and often stigmatized
masculinities. Connell also stressed that hegemonic masculinity is not a fixed
character type but rather represents “configurations of practice” that are
contextual and fluid. In other words, men construct masculinities in accordance with
their position within social structures, and their access to power and resources
that such positions afford them. Indeed, as the circumstances or conditions that
uphold a particular masculinity are challenged, hegemonic masculinity needs to be
reconfigured in order to sustain its dominant position. Subsequent seminal work
( ,
 ; ;
 ) highlighted how constructions of “hegemonic masculinity” were linked to
health practices and predicated on, among other behaviors, the suppression of
emotions and help-seeking. The contention in these studies was that the pursuit of
“hegemonic” masculinity was typically at the expense of health or engaging in
health-enhancing behaviors—with stating that men may deliberately engage in
health-damaging behaviors to actively perform masculinities and reinforce their
masculine identity.
An exploration of farming masculinities offers important insights into how farmers
relate to health and how the environment in which they live and work shapes this
relationship. Research from found that the pursuit of more dominant or “hegemonic”
farming masculinity within an Irish context revolved around the farmer as a hard
worker, battling against environmental/economic obstacles, exerting “his” authority
over the natural landscape, and prioritizing farm work over self-care. Similarly, in
a Canadian context, found that farmers often sacrificed rest in favor of a “relentless
worker” model to uphold their masculine image. note how farmers
are continually negotiating health practices in relation to hegemonic masculinity;
and that “doing health” is a form of “doing gender.” Indeed, the act of opposing
health-enhancing behaviors or help-seeking behavior could be seen as an active
demonstration of manliness for some farmers and a rejection of the more feminine
connotations of weakness and stigmatization associated with health ( ; , ). In this sense, the
cultural influences that shape farmers’ beliefs, attitudes, and practices are
synonymous with the pursuit of a hegemonic form of farming masculinity that can be
demonstrated in the avoidance of behaviors that show concern for health or that
require emotional expression or help-seeking on the basis that such practices might
position farmers as weak or vulnerable ( ; ; ; ). This does not imply
that masculinity in a farming context is a fixed or consistent concept ( ; ), but rather that masculinities of various kinds can attain relative
solidity in certain socio-cultural contexts and can be more fluid in other contexts
( , ; ).
Burton’s concept of “the good farmer”—rooted in symbolic demonstrations of
self-reliance, combatting adversity, and suppressing emotions—is intertwined with
farming identities, farming practices, and farmers’ sense of self-worth ( ). The term
seeks to capture the sets of behaviors and attitudes adopted, resisted or rejected
by farmers in the acquisition of objectified cultural capital through symbolic
means, visible in conventional farming cultures—primarily through symbols of
production—for example, large grain operations ( ; ), modern machinery ( ) or the
presence of quality livestock or crops ( ). The
acquisition and maintenance of such symbols are synonymous with status within one’s
community ( ). conceptualizes this as a product of the intensification of
production, underpinned by increased mechanization and technological use, leading to
an increased income for farm households. Indeed, observes that the increased
mechanization that accompanied the rise in productivist agriculture, was also
defined by a new masculinization of farming—in that, machinery became symbolic of
power, control and technical skill for the farmer ( ). This intensification of
farm practices became embedded in farming culture—in that, acquiring cultural
capital to achieve “good farmer” status became entrenched in productivist
agriculture methods ( ). However, the European Union (EU) agricultural policy reforms
in the early 1990s—prompted, in particular, by environmental concerns at a wider
societal level ( ) —contested this large scale agricultural production
model in favor of a range of agri-environmental policy measures. These measures
lowered the price supports for grain, beef and dairy production to curb excessive EU
agricultural production, which was deemed to be negatively affecting the environment
and animal welfare. This marked the phasing out of direct payments for production—a
development referred to as “decoupling” —in favor of a single farm payment (SFP)
system ( ). The SFP was subject to farmers’ adherence to good
agri-environmental practices in relation to biodiversity development, upkeep of
rivers, animal and plant welfare, and critically included regulation and inspection
from authorities ( ).
While some farmers willingly accepted these changes, others resisted, and tensions
emerged between the traditional farmer and contemporary society ( ). The
new role expected of farmers—to be custodians of the natural landscape and
environment—was a significant departure from the historically symbolic expressive
methods that attained social status and recognition by standards of “the good
farmer” ( ; ). Resistance to these new agri-environmental measures
associated with “the good farmer” has strong links to the construction of
masculinity in farming ( ; ). Tensions persist therefore between traditional and
contemporary constructions of farming masculinity against a backdrop of significant
shifts in agricultural policy. In particular, there is an apparent contradiction
between farmers’ self-representations as autonomous and independent on the one hand
and their clear obligations to be compliant with and subservient to regulations on
the other ( ). As farmers struggle to navigate an increasingly complex governance
environment and a precarious natural environment, many are left questioning the very
essence of who they are and whether their concerns are aligned with the goals of
wider society ( ).
Traditionally, there has been a strong gendered dimension to agriculture and to the
division of farming roles and responsibilities within farming families. Examples
include the patrilineal line of inheritance and gender inequalities in ownership of
farm assets, the invisibility of women’s farm work, the continuing male domination
of farming organizations and the farming media, and the assumption that women assume
the caring and nurturing responsibilities in farming households ( ; ).
Emerging literature suggests that despite increasing female representation in the
Irish labor market and changes to the position of females within the family
farm—with more females taking up off farm employment ( ), such changes have been slow to
cascade into a reconfiguration of farming roles and responsibilities. For example,
 reported that female partners in a farming household are acutely
aware of the challenges posed to male farmers’ identity and health, and will
actively assume a more subordinate role in order to elevate the identity of the
“strong male provider,” and to support his self-worth. Hence, male farmers’ pursuit
of a particular masculine ideal as “the provider” can be reinforced by female
partners. It has been argued that this emphasis on autonomy, stoicism, and
self-reliance associated with the construction of hegemonic masculinity fuels male
farmers’ negative attitudes toward emotional expression and help-seeking ( ; ; ).
It is crucially important therefore to frame farming masculinities within a gender
relations context and to consider the perspectives of wives/partners of farmers in
co-constructing the relationship between farming masculinities and health.

## Changes in Farming Governance and Impact on Rural Communities
The long-running process of agricultural restructuring has cascaded into a range of
collateral impacts on farmers and the wider fabric of rural communities, including
challenges related to farm succession, migration from rural communities, increased
mechanization and a rise in isolation and loneliness. A UK study, for example, noted
how socio-economic struggles had prompted a cultural shift in farming with parents
encouraging their children to pursue education over farm succession ( ).
Similarly, in Ireland, this has signified a shift away from traditional farm
succession and outward migration of young males to urban areas ( ). This
decline in farm successors has increased the solitary nature of farming,
particularly for older farmers who feel duty-bound to stay farming the land despite
their diminishing capabilities to do so ( ). Additionally,
increased mechanization has reduced the need for physical manual labor—hence,
farming has not only become less physically active but more solitary and isolating
( ;
 ).
Chronic social isolation has been noted as a high-risk factor for loneliness and
poor mental and physical health ( ; ; ). The
consequences and cost of loneliness to the individual can be far-reaching and
include disruption of social interactions and routines, reduced meaningful activity
and reduced social and emotional support ( ). Hence, loneliness
and its consequent impact on poor mental health in farming have been attributed to a
complex range of interconnected cultural, social, and psychological risk factors
( ; ; ). Different manifestations of loneliness have been attributed to
deficits in relationships at intimate partner, close friendships and wider community
levels ( ).
In addition to understanding what stressors are most strongly associated with changes
to farming governance, it is also important to understand how stress manifests and
is mediated by other factors. The stress process theory ( ), which focuses
attention on the sources, mediators, and manifestations of stress, helps explain how
the challenges farmers face can affect their psychological well-being. Sources of
stress can be either acute (e.g., economic market changes ( )) or
chronic (e.g., loss of autonomy associated with agricultural policy reforms ( )). Mediators
of stress include, for example, social support and coping ( ; ). In more remote rural areas, where access to social support can be
limited, manifestations of stress include increased rates of depression and suicide,
associated with reduced coping mechanisms ( ; ).

## The Present Study
In summary therefore, while farmers’ well-being has always been exposed to a range of
occupational stressors, the nature and implications of these stressors are evolving.
Compounding this, emerging literature suggests that farmers’ sense of identity and
masculinity, in particular, are being increasingly challenged by the evolution of
agricultural policy. Critically, when the ideals and practices upon which farmers
have built their reputation are no longer appreciated by wider society, this may
have negative consequences for farmers’ mental health. This is particularly
problematic given deeply entrenched masculine norms among the farming community,
which militate against farmers asking for help or accessing support. Notably, within
an Irish context, there is a gap in the literature on the challenges and stressors
currently facing farmers within the wider context of rural communities, the factors
underpinning these, how they impact on Irish farmers’ health, the socio-cultural
barriers that reduce farmers’ adaptive capacity to deal with these stressors, and
ultimately how these issues can be addressed. This study sought to address this gap
by exploring “male farmers” and other “key informants” experiences and perspectives
in relation to these issues within an Irish context. In doing so, we sought to
address three particular research questions; (i) how have changes in farming
governance impacted on farmers in terms of contemporary challenges and stressors;
(ii) what are the ripple effects of these challenges on farmers’ identities,
masculinities and health and is it time to contest the notion of the “the good
farmer”; and (iii) how have changes to farming governance impacted more broadly on
rural communities. This study is part of a wider study commissioned to inform the
design of a bespoke farmers’ health training program.

## Methodology
This study adopted a community-based participatory research (CBPR) approach ( ). This
involved collective and systematic inquiry in which researchers, statutory
organizations, and community stakeholders engaged as equal partners in all steps of
the research process with the goal of improving practice in relation to farmers’
health ( ; ; ). The study was overseen by a multi-stakeholder advisory group
comprising representatives from two government departments, the national health
service, four non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and academics representing
three third level institutes (n = 14, see ). This group offered guidance and
advice on the research process and design and assisted with recruitment of research
participants. Incidentally, four members of the advisory group hail from farming
households, with three working as part-time farmers.
 The study was approved by the Institute of Technology Carlow’s Ethics Committee
(Ethical Application Number 252). Eleven focus groups (45–60 min; n
= 29 female, n = 35 male, n = 63 total) were
conducted from Nov 2019–Mar 2020 with male farmers (n = 3 focus
groups, n = 13 participants) and other key informants
(n = 8 focus groups, n = 48 participants; 22
male, 26 female) ( ). Participants were recruited via purposive sampling ( ). The
three male farmer focus groups constituted participants from three different farming
enterprises—(i) dairy farmers (n = 3), (ii) dry-stock farmers (n = 5), and (iii) tillage/stock farmers (n = 5)). The key informants constituted agricultural
advisors from dairy (n = 8), dry-stock (n = 4) and
tillage (n = 7) backgrounds, wives/partners (working on farm,
n = 7; working off farm, n = 5) and farming
representative organizations (Irish Farmers Association, n = 6;
Macra na Feirme , n = 5). A gatekeeper for each focus group was initially
contacted by the lead author or by an advisory group representative. Gatekeepers
were identified on the basis of being strategically positioned to provide access to
and help convene a particular target group. For example, a regional agricultural
advisor helped convene the tillage and dry-stock farmer groups; a member of the
advisory group helped convene the dairy farmer group; while different members of the
advisory group helped convene the key informant groups. After participants agreed,
informally, to take part in the study via their respective gatekeeper, the lead
researcher sent an information sheet and consent form to participants via email. All
signed consent forms were returned to the lead author prior to each focus group
commencing.
 The criteria used for selecting the male farmer groups were based on convening a
diverse sample in terms of geographical location, farm enterprise and age-profile.
While specific age was not collected due to its sensitive nature ( ) and
on the advice of the advisory group, age category data from 20 to 80 in 10 year
increments was collected. The criteria used for selecting the “key informants” were
based on guidance from the advisory group—targeting those who, in a professional
and/or a personal capacity, had close relations with male farmers, had first-hand
knowledge and experience of the issues that impact on male farmers’ health, and were
likely to offer more in-depth insights into the key research questions for the
study. Agricultural advisors work closely with farmers offering advice and guidance
on agricultural matters, and are generally regarded as close confidants of farmers.
The agricultural advisor groups were selected based on diversity in terms of
geographical location, farm enterprise, gender and age. The wives/partners (working
on farm) and the wives/partners (working off farm) groups were selected based on the
traditionally strong gendered dimension to farming roles and
responsibilities—including many females acting as custodians of male farmers’ health
( ) —and the rationale for framing farming masculinities and health
within a gender relations context ( ; ). These groups were
selected based on diversity in terms of on/off farm work, geographical location and
age. The farmer representative organization groups were selected based on their
mandate of giving a voice to farmers and representing the interests of different
farming sectors. These groups were selected based on diversity in terms of
geographical location, gender and age.

## Data Collection
Focus groups were chosen as the preferred data collection tool to explore
potentially sensitive topics, whereby individuals with shared identity
characteristics could feel empowered and supported in the group setting ( ). A focus
group topic guide structured the process for both male farmers and key
informants ( ). The topic guide was the same for both “male farmers” and “key
informants” with the objective being to seek multiple perspectives on the same
research questions. This was constructed following an extensive review of the
literature and with input from the advisory group. Open-ended questions focused
on the impact on farmers of changes to agricultural governance and policy ( ),
broader challenges and stressors facing farmers, links between farmers’ health
practices and the construction of farming and rural masculinities ( ; ),
farmers’ attitudes and approaches to health ( ), and barriers
farmers face when engaging with health ( ). The lead author
drafted the focus group topic guide, with cross-reference and reflections from
the remaining authorship of this paper until consensus was reached.
 The focus group moderator was a young (mid-twenties), heterosexual, Irish white
male PhD student from rural Ireland, and who had an interest in farming
masculinities and health and had prior experience in qualitative research. The
second author, who has over 20 years’ experience in men’s health qualitative
research, conducted three workshops with the lead author (moderator), prior to
data collection commencing. In accordance with , p. 67), these workshops
focused on (i) engagement questions: introducing participants to and making them
comfortable with the topic of discussion, (ii) exploration questions: probing
questions that get to the heart of the discussion and (iii) exit question:
closing question that seeks any further comments regarding the topic, and to
check if anything was missed. The second author observed the lead author
(moderator) facilitate the first two focus groups, and provided detailed
feedback after each. At this point the principal investigator was confident in
the lead author’s capacity to moderate the focus groups efficiently, and
therefore the lead author solely facilitated all remaining focus groups.
The focus group topic guide ( ) was continually revised based
on reflection and evolving conceptualization. While the core questions remained
the same throughout, filter or prompt questions were modified or added as data
collection proceeded. For example, while “scale” was a prompt question under
“contemporary challenges facing farmers,” this was further refined (scale and
financial pressures; scale and workload; scale and farm viability) based on
on-going analysis. The topic guide was pilot tested with a small group of dairy
farmers (n = 3), convened with the help of an advisory group
member, prior to full implementation. This resulted in some minor adjustments to
the focus group schedule; for example, more attention was given to changing
farming policy and its implications for farming practice and farmers’ health
with particular consideration for farmers’ stress. All focus groups were
recorded using a digital dictaphone. Recordings were manually transcribed
verbatim at the earliest possible opportunity after the focus group by the first
author and subsequently read by the second author. Data collection ceased once
saturation was reached based on , p. 65) definition
of saturation “the point in data collection and analysis when new information
produces little or no change to the codes, and categories are comprehensively
explained so that a theory can emerge from the data.” Field notes and a
reflective journal were used to record observations and to contextualize these
verbal accounts during transcription and data analysis. For example, field notes
were used to document the tone of certain remarks (e.g., sarcasm, humor, anger)
to enable the author capture more nuanced and subtle meanings underpinning focus
group discussions ( ). This enabled the lead author to contextualize findings
appropriately. All focus groups took place in either a work venue or a local
community setting as agreed with each group.
All transcriptions from the focus groups were stored on a password-protected
computer and only accessed by the first and second author in accordance with the
requirements set out by the General Data Protection Regulation 2018. Audio
recordings were transferred to a password protected desktop computer and deleted
from the first author’s recording device. All participants were notified that
Information would be retained for a further 5 years in a secure environment
before being destroyed by deleting files permanently from computers and
shredding paper documents.

## Data Analysis
Thematic Content Analysis (TCA) was used to analyse the data. Initially this
involved the lead author engaging in “repeated reading” of the data and
searching for meaning and patterns ( ). The next
step involved coding the focus group data into categories based on the research
questions, breaking the codes into sub-categories, organizing the codes into
themes and comparing the themes internally, that is, within a theme, how are
participants acting these out ( ). Themes were
identified on patterned responses to the research questions and were decided
upon, as suggest, from capturing an important element that the study
sought to address. An initial thematic map ( ) contained five candidate
themes. As the analysis progressed it became evident that some of these
candidate themes did not have enough data to support them, or did not fit with
the research questions, while other candidate themes collapsed into a similar
stronger themes. Inter-rater reliability was explored with two transcripts
chosen at random on which both the first and second author carried out
line-by-line coding. Codes were cross-referenced, discussed, and refined until
consensus was reached. All transcripts were then coded iteratively using open
and comparative coding techniques, and emerging themes were grouped into
parent-themes, sub-themes, and sub-sub-themes ( ). Following
cross-referencing between the first and second author, three parent themes
emerged that captured the centrality of the research questions ( ). Theme memos
and notes, and conceptual maps were used to track evolving relationships between
themes ( ,
 , ). To add to the
trustworthiness and rigor of the data collection and analysis process, the study
complied key principles outlined by , namely; (i)
credibility—all focus group topics had a logical relationship with the research
questions, and were consistent in terms of their explanation; (ii)
dependability—the process adopted adhered to the key steps of thematic content
analysis outlined by ; (iii) confirmability—the lead author adopted a
reflexive approach in order to make visible personal biases that might have
influenced the research process; (IV) transferability—in line with CBPR, the
advisory committee had an input to the recruitment of research participants that
could provide rich and diverse perspectives on the key research questions.

## Results
The analysis identified three broad themes, and the findings are presented below
concerning each of these; “wrestling with challenges to autonomy and control within
farming”; “farming masculinities and health”; and “isolation and the decline of
rural communities.”

## Wrestling with Challenges to Autonomy and Control Within Farming
A range of distinct challenges emerged for male farmers that were seen as having
eroded the degree of autonomy and control they exercised over their farming
practices. These included tighter regulatory frameworks associated with changing
agricultural policy, pressures associated with scale, and succession and
inheritance.
Many farmers highlighted their struggles in adapting to the evolving nature of
farming roles that coincided with [common] agricultural policy (CAP) reforms. It
was felt that these reforms had changed the nature of farming from a traditional
focus on food production to a more administrative role revolving around farm
inspections, changes to farm subsidy payments, and scheme paperwork.

I think farming is kind of gone from your technical knowledge to
actually your farm business management. . .and that model is after
leaving a lot of farmers behind.
(FG003, female, 50–59)

Moreover, farmers felt they were being held to account more and more by what was
seen as increasingly punitive regulatory structures. This included living with
the threat of being reprimanded or facing sanctions (including financial
penalties) should they fail to meet various targets or deadlines—with one farmer
questioning “where does it stop at like?” (F008).
There was also a sense of loss in relation to the autonomy the farmer has with
his enterprise. Many felt they were increasingly “losing [their] grip” or
control of their farms. Older farmers in particular, were perceived by some, as
not having the skills to navigate these new roles, and them, more than most,
were being “left behind” by the evolving nature of farming.

. . .they [older farmers] have this fear of
Jesus if something’s wrong. . .I’m gonna get thrown under the
bus. . .they’re terrified to make any mistake.
(MNF003, male, 30 - 39)

Wider concerns about finance were underpinned by the uncertainty and volatility
of farming incomes and compounded by what were seen as increasingly paltry and
piecemeal financial returns. The change in agricultural policy from a focus on
“food security/production” to animal welfare and environmental concerns left
many farmers feeling undervalued, and as pawns in a wider power relations
contest.

With all the good intentions of money having to be directed
correctly to the right place – there is just no end to it. Before we
got a hundred euro for having a suckler cow but now we get twenty
euros if we weigh the cow, another twenty euros if we tag the calf,
it’s fragmented and it’s very frustrating.
(F011, male, 30–39)

Farmers’ frustrations with agri-enviornmental regulations were also deeply rooted
in a farming identity that was imbued with tradition, vocation and a deep sense
of pride in a particular way of farming. Many felt conflicted by having to
conform to these new regulations while simultaneously demonstrating an
unwillingness to change and striving to preserve this cultural farming capital,
framed around a productivist farming model.

All this is making life more difficult. They want us to look
after the environment along with all the other jobs – but we are not
environmentalists, we are tillage and beef farmers and we always
were and people before us the same.
(F010, male, 40–49)

For some farmers, their decision-making was motivated not just by economic
considerations but by core aspects of their identity. For example, while leasing
one’s farm might have made financial or work-life balance sense, it was
presented in more existentialist terms as emasculating and as a betrayal of
farming identity.

A lot of guys won’t do it [lease their land]
even though they wouldn’t be making that much. . . And it is
because they are associated so much as farmers. You know, you get up
and put on the working clothes, and ‘that’s me I am the farmer of
the land’.
(F001, male, 40 - 49)

The pressures associated with scale—particularly in dairy farming—also emerged as
a persistent threat to farmers’ autonomy. Scale coincided with an increase in
responsibilities that left many farmers floundering within a culture of “greed”
and unmanageable workloads. For many, the extra workload was necessary simply to
maintain a basic standard of living.

There’s greed in it. . .instead of calving 40 cows over 4 months
they’re calving 120 over 6 weeks. Farmers are running themselves
into the ground trying to keep up.
(AA015, male, 40–49)

Many “smaller farmers” faced an uphill task to remain viable, which inevitably
led to “double-jobbing,” and fitting their farming work around a full-time job.
Sleep deprivation was a significant issue for those farmers. Not surprisingly,
it was this constant, more insidious form of chronic financial stress or “cash
flow” problems that was more damaging in terms of farmers’ mental health.

I mean I love farming, but. . .anyone with a small farm and has
a family is probably working two jobs and you have very little time
for anything else outside working.
(FG002, female, 50–59)

They [farmers] are under constant financial
pressure. It’s not desperation, or it’s not ‘losing the farm’ kind
of pressure; it’s just a constant economic cash flow
pressure.
(P004, female, 50–59)

Tensions relating to succession and inheritance revolved around younger farmers’
uncertainty and lack of autonomy in not knowing when or if the farm might pass
to them. For the farmer “in waiting,” this inevitably led to feeling excluded
from key farm decision-making, not having a meaningful income, stagnation, and
falling behind one’s [professional] peers; all of which could have debilitating
and emasculating effects on the farmer’s self-worth.

It’s the stagnation. . .you are 20/30 working at home, you don’t
know where you stand, you’re making shit money. . .you have no
opportunity to stamp your own authority on it.
(F001, male, 40–49)

Succession within farming was also deeply imbued with tradition, which further
impacted on the incumbent farmer’s autonomy. Tradition dictated that the farm be
handed on to “a rightful heir” and that any part thereof not be sold.
Inheritance therefore came with a “burden” of expectation surrounding how to
engage with the land. Indeed, the prospect of not handing the farm on was
associated with a betrayal of one’s responsibility to maintain this
tradition.

My father always worked you know. He didn’t take weekends off,
it was just the farm. You feel that responsibility and to some
extent the burden of it.
(F008, male, 60–69)

For many, inheriting the land also brought additional caring responsibilities.
Farmers in the younger age category (20–39) reflected upon the challenge of
simultaneously caring for their own children as well as older relatives, while
at the same time trying to develop the farm and accumulate savings.

## Farming Masculinities and Health
Farming masculinities in this study were closely aligned with both farming
practices and health practices, and were framed in a relational way. The
construction of farming masculinities was shaped by working long hours, being
committed to hard physical work, and being stoic, self-sufficient, and “strong”
in the face of adversity. Indeed, to join the ranks of “tough men” required that
farmers’ bodies display these “signs of hard work”—the very essence and
embodiment of farming masculinity. This sense of obligation to put their bodies
on the line came with the resignation of a cost to their health and to their
bodies over time.

Yeah, I think it’s a pride thing, there are tough men out there
in all weathers working hard and have the signs of hard work all
over us.
(F009, male, 30–39)

By placing their bodies and health in a subservient role to the demands of their
farms, many farmers lost sight of the importance of their own health to the
welfare of the farm. Ironically, while most saw clear links between animal
welfare and farm productivity, the importance of farmers’ own health to the
farm’s welfare was more obscure.

But I don’t think farmers understand their own importance to the
farm. Like without them, the farm is nothing. They are the most
important cog in the wheel. . .
(FG003, female, 50–59)

Indeed, gendered health practices were also framed in a relational way. For
example, some [male] farmers proposed that women were overly vigilant or
hypochondriac about health issues and were, therefore, an inappropriate
yardstick against which to gauge how men should care for their health. This was
reinforced further by both male and female perceptions of women as gatekeepers
or custodians of men’s health.

But compared to women though, you wouldn’t go [to a GP]
a fraction of the time, sure they are always going.
(F002, male, 40–49)
It took me about three years to basically bully my husband into
going for a medical, you’d have to come up with all of these
excuses.(FG004, female, 50–59)

Prevailing farming masculinity norms frequently militated against farmers asking
for help or support during times of ill-health or distress, but rather their
“in-built” default position was to endure hardship and “soldier on.” Farmers’
reluctance to seek help was particularly prevalent regarding mental health. To
show vulnerability was seen as an admission of failure that would not be looked
on favourably in a tight-knit rural community.

I would say the old perception of ‘we are hardy and we are men,
and we are ok. We don’t have problems’. That’s the
perception.
(F003, male, 50–59)

The neighbour thing is a big problem also. Farmers are wondering
‘what will the neighbours think of this?’ You don’t want the
community knowing about it.
(AA011, male, 20–29)

Farmers’ approach to help-seeking was shaped by two critical aspects of their
professional practice; the ability to problem-solve and to draw on a
multi-disciplinary skillset to solve problems. Farmers handling of agricultural
problems essentially framed their approach to “fixing” health problems—to
“outsource” help for a health problem, only after drawing on all of one’s own
resources to solve the matter. Only then was it seen as acceptable to seek help.
To acknowledge vulnerability by seeking help was seen as an affront to one’s
capacity to care for one’s farm (and one’s family) and to be a “fixer.”

. . .he [farmer] works on his own and he is used
to problem-solving, so he is multi-disciplined, whereas you go into
another occupation they are trained in one stream of work, and if
they require help, they outsource it. You’re very self-sufficient as
a farmer, and the thing is to ask for help when you require
it.
(F009, male, 30–39)

For farmers in the older age categories in particular, there was, paradoxically,
the fear of finding out something was wrong, or opening up a “can of worms”—the
safer option being to “leave well enough alone.” However, other farmers’
experiences suggested that cultural norms associated with health and
help-seeking were not fixed and that given the right environment, where farmers
could share and talk openly about common problems, the “weight” of a problem
could be lessened. The experience of a health crisis, either personally or
through a loved one, also prompted a more proactive approach.

My father died of a heart-attack at 44 and I knew when I came to
43, I was getting my heart checked out. . .You are putting an awful
lot at risk by not simply going once in a while.
(F009, male, 30–39)

## Isolation and the Demise of Rural Communities
Rural isolation was a recurring theme across all transcripts. The demise of rural
communities more generally coupled with increased loneliness associated with
reduced social interaction, were seen as having left more “at risk” single and
older farmers particularly vulnerable. There were particular concerns about what
was seen as the unraveling of rural communities; underpinned by a wider backdrop
of a decline in the number of viable farm holdings, migration of rural dwellers
to urban areas for work, and more limited opportunities for social gatherings
(closure of rural shops and pubs). Being disconnected from human contact was
seen as inhibiting the development of meaningful conversations that could
sustain relationships. An important backdrop to these findings was the belief
that the traditional farming “meitheal” (mutual support and communal way of
working) and the passing on skills between generations was also being lost.

. . .you don’t actually meet enough people to develop the
conversation around things.
(F006, male, 60–69)

I have seen a marked change in rural society. . .help[ing] your
neighbor out; that has really suffered.
(F0013, male, 50–59)

Underpinning rural isolation was the perception of having been let down or
abandoned by the key pillars of civil society. For example, on the question of
security and rural break-ins, there was a perception of rural Ireland being
“left [to] fend for itself”
(F004). Thus, at the core of rural isolation was a lack of
control or agency, which with the onset of age saw a deepening of vulnerability
and perception of abandonment. Notably, some farmers felt neglected and let down
by their own farmer representative bodies whose primary role was to represent
their interests. For example, participants in the West of Ireland focus group
expressed anger at what they perceived as the failure of farming authorities to
appreciate or act upon the unique challenges that were characteristic of their
farming land.

Now I remember saying to (senior farming official). . .‘You put
a pair of waders on, and you come down to my farm. . .and you’ll
know what we in the West of Ireland want. . . you’ll see the
difference in where you are and where we are’.
(P006, female, 40–49)

The isolated nature of farming and the sheer invisibility of farmers relative to
other socially interactive occupations was a recurring concern among
participants. Older and middle-aged single farmers living with an elderly parent
were identified as being particularly vulnerable in terms of isolation and
loneliness. Additionally, some farmers were seen as being “at risk” of being
institutionalized by farming; consumed and locked into their routine of farming
work.

A man in his 40s or 50s still living with his mother, you have a
man that is definitely in trouble and needs help.(AC005, female, 60–69)

Isolation was also associated with a loss of perspective, as the isolated farmer
did not have anyone or anywhere to discuss or unburden his or her difficulties.
This was compounded by more entrenched masculine norms which militated against
farmers seeking help—hence, problems did not just remain unresolved, but rather
intensified, festered and became amplified over time. This ran the risk of
farmers dwelling on and apportioning blame to themselves for problems and
questioning their own self-worth as farmers. Farmers, who were more socially
engaged, on the other hand, were seen as being more resilient.

I think for the more isolated farmer, there is just no degree of
perspective, where there is a problem on the farm. For instance, if
a calf dies, they are ramming that around their heads all day;
whereas [for] someone else, that is forgotten about
by 11 o’clock.
(AC003, male, 40–49)

Indeed, it was felt that the ripple effects of isolation that prompted a deeper
sense of hopelessness and despair for many in rural communities that had the
potential to cascade into more pressing mental health problems. There was a
perception that the farmer who was both isolated and had underlying mental
health problems was the most difficult to engage.

Country people in general, their mental health has dropped, and
that’s because of isolation it has developed into mental illness.
People are not out. No engagement at all.
(F007, male, 50–59)

## Discussion
This study was commissioned to inform the design of a bespoke farmers’ health
training program to enable agricultural advisors in Ireland to play a more proactive
role in supporting male farmers on health issues. Against a backdrop of poor health
outcomes more generally among male farmers as well as substantial changes in farming
governance, this study explored how contemporary challenges and stressors currently
facing farmers, within an Irish context, impact on farmers’ identities,
masculinities and health, and examined the ripple effects for rural communities. The
focus of the study therefore was not to investigate specific health issues impacting
male farmers; rather it was hoped that findings would provide rich insights into
both the lived experiences of male farmers in Ireland as well as garnering the
perspectives of key informants on the issues impacting on male farmers’ health, that
would serve as an important backdrop to the design of the proposed farmers’ health
training program.
In the context of research question one, findings indicate that farmers in Ireland
are confronted by a range of distinct challenges that negatively impact the degree
of autonomy and control they currently exercise over their farm enterprises. Chief
among these are changing farming roles and being held to account by what they
perceive are regimented and punitive regulatory structures; the increase in
responsibilities and financial pressures associated with scale; as well as, for
younger farmers, the procrastination, uncertainty, burden of expectation and
additional caring responsibilities that are associated with succession. These
tensions were exacerbated by changes associated with the restructuring of
agricultural policy and structural features of farming / rural society, such as
concern for what neighbors might think or say. This latter point is reflected in
international and Irish studies that have found that farmers can be judgmental of
their counterparts ( ; ). Tensions ran exceptionally high among those farmers
who felt torn between more traditional endeavors to acquire cultural farming capital
- framed around a productivist farming model - and the modern requirement to conform
to agri-enviornmental regulation standards. This jarred with farmers in two critical
ways. Firstly, farmers’ new role as custodians of the natural landscape and
environment disrupted deeply entrenched notions of ‘the good farmer’ that
constructed farmers’ sense of self-worth and status within the community as a
product of the intensification of production ( ). Secondly, it marked a
particularly challenging transition for many farmers as they sought to retain a
degree of autonomy and control in the face of increasing regulation and inspection
( ).
Previous studies within an Irish context have highlighted the “burden of expectation”
associated with succession ( ). Factors associated with scale such as high workload,
financial pressure and limited social support were pre-cursors for mental and
emotional distress ( ). It is also well established that, for those farmers whose
identity is heavily invested in their farming, changes that threaten or undermine
that role can be particularly challenging. For example, a UK study found that where
male farmers’ identity was deeply rooted in the cultural and physical spaces of
farming, rates of suicide increased when their livelihood became threatened, and
they could not imagine a way of being other than “the farmer” ( ). Findings from this study
emphasize the importance of accounting for the ripple effects on farmers’ health and
wellbeing when considering wider changes to agricultural policy and
restructuring.
In the context of research question two, the concept of “the good farmer” also had
parallel links with the construction of farming masculinities as described in this
study. Having a strong work ethic and an appetite for hard physical work, and being
stoic, self-sufficient and “strong” in the face of adversity, were the active
ingredients that shaped more dominant or hegemonic farming
masculinities—characteristics that are consistent with previous findings ( ; ). Farming
masculinities in this study were deeply embedded in gender relations and farming
tradition—framed within the socio-cultural context of tight-knit rural communities.
They were conceptualized as being distinct from what was regarded as the more
feminine domain of health. Previous studies have noted how the intensification of
farming practices and increased mechanization that accompanied the rise in
productivist agriculture represented the new masculinization of farming ( ). Similarly,
resistance to more recent agri-environmental policy measures also has strong links
to the construction of farming masculinities ( ). For example, a U.S.
study found that farmers’ resistance to agri-environmental policy measures was
underpinned by “monologic” masculinity—characterized by rigid and strictly
negotiated performance outcomes rooted in controlling nature to facilitate
productivist agricultural methods ( ). This would suggest
that beneath the valorized methods of acquiring cultural capital among farmers is a
more profound association with masculine norms of autonomy and dominance. By
contrast, notion of “dialogic” masculinity was associated with less need for
control over nature and greater compliance with agri-environmental measures.
Findings from this study add to a significant body of literature on the concept of
the ‘the good farmer’ ( ) and its implications for how farmers relate to health.
Furthermore, we argue that an important starting point for any future endeavors to
promote farmers’ health must be to contest the notion of “the good farmer” in order
to facilitate a cultural shift that makes it more acceptable for farmers to engage
in health.
Findings from this study revealed that the pursuit of hegemonic farming masculinity
had ripple effects on farmers’ health and farmers’ bodies. Indeed the visible “signs
of hard work,” which manifested as wear and tear on farmers’ bodies, was a badge of
honor that embodied this masculine ideal. Inevitably, this conflicted with any
proposition to prioritize health needs or to show vulnerability and seek help. For
most farmers in this study, health was seen as “women’s business,” with feminine
connotations, and not something “hard-working men” had time to engage with ( ).
Notably, some farmers contested such framings, extolling the virtues of a more
responsible and proactive approach to health over more stoic and reactive
approaches. notes that men’s health engagements operate more on a pathway
rather than as a binary, single decision leading toward or away from health
services. We argue that more oncerted efforts are needed to promote an increased
focus on farmers’ health within Ireland that contest the essentially unhealthy
nature of the more dominant or hegemonic form of farming masculinity, and that
facilitate more farmers to move along the pathway to improved self-care. From a
gender relations and a gender equality perspective, such efforts are also warranted
to achieve a more equitable distribution of caring and nurturing responsibilities in
farming households ( ; ).
The act of seeking help for a mental health issue posed particular challenges for
farmers in this study and ran the risk of being consigned to a subordinate masculine
status within one’s community. Previous studies have shown how male farmers tend to
equate health practices with femininity ( ; ) and that help-seeking,
in particular, can be seen as compromising their allegiance to masculine norms of
independence and stoicism ( ; ). However, avoidance of help-seeking can escalate to
more pressing health problems, particularly mental health problems ( ;
 ). A
notable finding was a tendency by some farmers to count on what they saw as their
multi-disciplinary farming skillset to “fix” health problems—an option that, for
some, was more appealing than admitting “failure” or “opening a can of worms” by
deferring to medical expertise. This finding is consistent with how men engaged in
labor-intensive work and frequently adopt a more functional and mechanistic
conceptualization of health ( ). Nonetheless, it should be acknowledged that farmers’
help-seeking behaviors in this study were not static. For example, in response to a
“wake-up call,” some farmers were open to adopting a more pragmatic and proactive
stance on health issues. Previous studies have shown that experiencing a health
crisis (either personally or through a loved one) can prompt a heightened sense of
responsibility for health among men ( ). Similarly, increasing
awareness of their vulnerability to disease with age has been highlighted as a
catalyst for positive health behavior among older men ( ; ).
These findings therefore add to existing literature ( ; ) by highlighting how
rural masculine practices are fluid, rather than fixed or static, and demonstrate
that, with appropriate supports, farmers might be open to more actively engaging in
their health.
In the context of research question three, grave concerns were expressed about what
was seen as the unraveling of rural communities, underpinned in particular, by the
decline in the number of viable farm holdings, the closure of rural services and
social outlets, the loss of community spirit or “meitheal,” and by a sense of having
been let down or abandoned by the key pillars of the state. Moreover, this increased
the risk of isolation and loneliness and the “festering” of problems over time, with
single farmers caring for an elderly parent being seen as particularly vulnerable.
These findings are consistent with previous studies that highlight a change in farm
succession and more solitary farming practices ( ; ), resulting in a
pattern of diminishing social circles for farmers and inevitably leading to an
increase in loneliness, with ripple adverse effects on farmers’ well-being ( ;
 ; ). Chronic
social isolation has been identified as a high-risk factor for loneliness and poor
mental and physical health ( ; ). Loneliness has been
attributed to deficits in relationships from intimate partner to wider community
levels, with far-reaching costs to the individual ( ). Parallel
measures that seek to combat rural isolation and to restore the social fabric of
rural communities are critically important for greater social engagements among the
farming community. Against the broader backdrop of multiple challenges and stressors
in farmers’ lives highlighted in this study, the stress process theory ( )
provides a useful framework for any future attempts to tackle the sources, mediators
and manifestations of stress in farmers.

## Conclusion
This study’s findings provide important insights into the contemporary challenges and
stressors farmers experience and, in particular, how the evolving nature of these
stressors as well as changes in farming governance have impacted on farmers’
identities, masculinities, and health. Tensions were particularly evident among
those farmers whose ideals and allegiances were still based on “the good farmer” and
on a productivist agricultural model, but who were increasingly being constrained
and held to account by agri-environmental regulations. These tensions posed
particular challenges for farmers’ mental health. In particular, the valorized
pursuit of a “strong” masculine identity was at odds with male farmers’ willingness
or motivation to seek help. Notably, not all male farmers were resistant to caring
for their health, highlighting the fluidity of masculinities and, as highlighted by
 , men’s
relationship with health and help-seeking is a “trajectory or pathway,
rather than an isolated, single decision point leading toward or away from
medical services.”
Our findings raise several important implications in terms of informing the design of
a farmers’ health training program. The program needs to be situated within a
socio-ecological model ( , ) of farmers’ health that accounts in
particular for how farming identity and masculinities are shaped by economic,
environmental and socio-cultural factors within a dynamic and evolving rural and
farming context. It must also be acknowledged that farmers are not a homogenous
group and that diversity in terms of age, gender, geography, marital status, caring
responsibilities, enterprise and seasonal factors, predispose different sub-groups
of farmers to different health challenges. However, the proposed program cannot be
seen as a panacea for all farmers’ ills, but rather as one component of a broader
suite of measures—at a policy, advocacy, education and training, and service
delivery level—that seeks to cohesively address farmers’ health issues. At a
practice level, findings clearly demonstrate that safe spaces are needed for farmers
to contest more restrictive farming masculinities and notions of “the good farmer”
to address their resistant behavior to prioritizing their own health needs. Specific
support measures are needed to address the needs of more vulnerable and isolated
farmers, particularly from a suicide prevention perspective. Finally, parallel
measures that seek to combat rural isolation and restore the social fabric of rural
communities are critically important in optimizing the utility of the proposed
program in tackling the issue loneliness among farmers.

## Limitations
While this study aimed to seek the views of a diverse sample, the findings cannot
purport to represent the views of all target groups. The lead researcher’s
positionality must also be taken into account when interpreting the findings of this
study. As a young, healthy male in a position of authority within the focus groups,
he may have been perceived as an “expert” with the expectation of participants to
divulge information. Additionally, while all research participants were assured of
confidentiality and invited to speak candidly, some may have been guarded in sharing
their experiences. The study would have been enhanced by the inclusion of
non-conventional farmers (e.g., organic farmers) and more participants who engage
with farmers regularly, that is, mart managers, co-op managers, agri-business and
finance officials. Three part-time farmers were part of the advisory group—on
reflection, the inclusion of at least one full-time farmer would have been
beneficial and in keeping with the spirit of CBPR. When considering the qualitative
rigor of the study, the analysis of primary themes and sub-themes would have been
heightened through a third reviewer. Also in terms of qualitative rigor ( ),
particular limitations may lie in the transferability of the research findings to
the wider population of male farmers, with only 13 farmers represented among the
three male farming focus groups. However, the “key informant” focus groups give a
broader contextual voice to the farming population with respect to the research
questions. Whist focus groups represented diversity in terms of geographical
location, age-profile, gender and farming enterprise, the overall number of
participants represented across all focus groups was a limitation. Future research
should increase the breadth of research participants, and cross-reference research
findings with similar populations in other countries. Future research should also
focus on the specific challenges and stresses impacting on female farmers.

## Acknowledgments
Thanks to the participants of this study, as well as the Advisory Group members who
helped with the study’s direction, recruitment and data collection.

## Appendices

## Appendix 1: Sample of Memos and Notes Used from Focus Groups

But compared to women though you wouldn’t go [to GP] a fraction
of the time, sure they are always going.
F002

- Said flippantly and with a sense of humor. Other participants laughing
gently

To us now, in case we weren’t looking after our selves (yeah,
yeah). So our farmers are self-employed. We have to do it (we have
to do it) . . .that’s another thing then. (Yeah yeah) Teagasc are
looking after the lads out there. . .who is looking after us?
(Exactly, yea).
F008

- Said with a sense of despair and frustration

Well, look. We’ve known for a long time that unmarried men don’t
live as long as married men. So, do you put in place that every
fella should get married?
F009

- laughter among participants, followed by jokes to each other.

Because you know why. Modernization, technology and modern
farming methods – all of them things have left farmers like us
behind. I love farming but my farming isn’t valued anymore, nobody
cares about us. Before you could make a good living of having cattle
but not anymore.
F013

- Said with sadness and despair, and what seemed to be an element of
embarrassment in front of peers

Not an area (health) id be very strong in anyway
but I’ll do my best (laughs)
AA004

- Said in jest and other participants laughing
 

1Farming that is associated with livestock to produce milk products
2Farming that is associated with livestock to produce meat products
3Farming that is associated with cultivating the soil to produce crops
4Voluntary organization representing young farmers

## Footnotes
Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding: The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: This study was jointly
funded by the Institute of Technology Carlow in Ireland, the Health Service
Executive in Ireland and Teagasc, Ireland’s agriculture and food research and
development authority.
Ethical Considerations and Disclosure(s): The study was approved by Institute of Technology Carlow’s Ethics Committee
(Ethical Application Number 252).
ORCID iD: Conor Hammersley 
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6996-5164

## References