pmcPLoS Negl Trop DisPLoS Negl Trop Dis532plosntd101291488plosPLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases1935-27271935-2735PLOSPMC8496865PMC8496865.1849686584968653457080710.1371/journal.pntd.0009807PNTD-D-21-005721Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesViral DiseasesCovid 19Medicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsTropical DiseasesNeglected Tropical DiseasesMedicine and Health SciencesEpidemiologyMedical Risk FactorsPeople and PlacesGeographical LocationsAfricaGuineaPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsProfessionsSupervisorsMedicine and Health SciencesEpidemiologyPandemicsMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesInfectious Disease ControlSocial DistancingMedicine and Health SciencesPharmaceuticsDrug TherapyDrug AdministrationImplementation of mass drug administration for neglected tropical diseases in Guinea during the COVID-19 pandemic
Implementation of mass drug administration for NTDs during the COVID-19 pandemichttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-3819-9361SakhoFatoumataConceptualizationFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSupervisionWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9768-3239BadilaChristelly FloreConceptualizationData curationFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSupervisionValidationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6712-310XDembeleBenoitConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing DiabyAissatouConceptualizationFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSupervisionWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5222-8061CamaraAbdoul KarimConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologySupervisionValidation LamahLamineConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSupervisionValidationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8585-4894ReidSteven D.Funding acquisitionMethodologyProject administrationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5928-1570WengAngelConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisMethodologySoftwareValidationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5865-2528FullerBrian B.MethodologySoftwareWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1713-4809SanchezKatherine A.MethodologyProject administrationResources KaboreAchilleMethodologyProject administrationResourcesWriting – review & editing ZhangYaobiConceptualizationFormal analysisMethodologyValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing WeaverAngelaConceptualizationFunding acquisitionMethodologyProject administrationResourcesValidationWriting – review & editing 1
National Neglected Tropical Disease Control Program, Ministry of Health, Conakry, Guinea2
Guinea Office, Helen Keller International, Conakry, Guinea3
Regional office for Africa, Helen Keller International, Dakar, Senegal4
Headquarters, Helen Keller International, New York, New York, United States of America5
Family Health International 360, Washington DC, Maryland, United States of AmericaFreemanMatthew C.Editor OutbreaksCOVID-19

## Data Availability
All mass drug administration coverage data are contained in this paper, and checklist data are available in 

## Background
Neglected tropical diseases (NTDs) are a diverse group of infectious diseases predominately found in tropical and subtropical areas. They affect more than one billion people worldwide, disproportionately those living in poverty, and account for approximately 26 million disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) [ , ]. In addition to their impact on health, NTDs contribute to an immense social and economic burden resulting from social stigma, physical disabilities, disfigurement, blindness, discrimination, loss of social status, malnutrition, growth failure, and impaired cognitive development [ ].
The World Health Organization (WHO) promotes several strategies to control and eliminate NTDs, including preventive chemotherapy [ ]. The most prominent NTDs amenable to preventive chemotherapy (PC) include lymphatic filariasis (LF), onchocerciasis (OV), schistosomiasis (SCH), soil-transmitted helminthiasis (STH) and trachoma. The main approach for the control and/or elimination of this group of NTDs is the periodic administration of efficacious, safe, and inexpensive (usually donated) drugs to entire at-risk populations [ ]. This approach, known as mass drug administration (MDA), must be implemented continuously (usually once per year) and must achieve sufficient population coverage (effective coverage) for a number of years until disease-specific targets are met [ ]. Interruption of annual MDAs may prolong the process of achieving the control and/or elimination targets [ ].
LF, OV, SCH, STH and trachoma are geographically widespread in Guinea. At least one of these NTDs is endemic in each of the 38 country’s health districts (HDs), putting over 7 million people at high risk of contracting one or more of these diseases [ , ]. The overall objectives of Guinea’s National NTD Program (NTDP) are to eliminate LF and trachoma as public health problems by 2030 and 2024, respectively; to eliminate transmission of OV by 2025; and to control morbidity caused by SCH and STH by 2025 [ ]. In alignment with WHO recommended strategies [ ], Guinea conducts annual MDA with azithromycin for trachoma, ivermectin for OV, combined ivermectin and albendazole for LF (and OV and STH), praziquantel for SCH and albendazole for STH. The objectives of MDA are to achieve effective program and epidemiological coverage and 100% geographic coverage yearly.
Steady progress has been made in delivering interventions to control and eliminate NTDs in Guinea. By 2016, all PC NTDs had been mapped and MDA for each disease had been scaled-up to full geographic coverage, where needed. To date, 15 of 18 trachoma-endemic HDs have achieved the criteria to stop MDA [ ]. Additionally, all 24 LF-endemic HDs have implemented at least four rounds of MDA and are ready for or close to conducting epidemiological assessments to determine if LF elimination targets have been achieved. OV, STH, and SCH-endemic HDs continue to implement MDA in HDs endemic for each disease.
Along with these successes, Guinea has experienced significant challenges in implementing continuous rounds of MDA. For example, from 2013–2015, some rounds of MDA were not conducted due to national elections, political instability, and the Ebola virus epidemic. In 2019, all MDA activities were suspended due to social unrest caused by adverse events following the distribution of praziquantel in three HDs (Coyah, Dubréka and Fria). Most recently the COVID-19 pandemic has posed a major constraint for the safe and timely implementation of NTD interventions.
The NTDP began preparing for its 2020 MDA campaigns prior to the report of the first COVID-19 case in Guinea. By the time the first case was reported on March 12, 2020, the annual training-of-trainers had been completed in most HDs and NTD drugs had been delivered from the central level to each of the regions. Soon thereafter, a national state of emergency was declared, all land borders were closed, curfews were imposed, schools were closed, public gatherings were limited to 20 people, and mask-wearing became compulsory. Many health activities were paused [ ]. On April 1, 2020, in an effort to reduce the risk of COVID-19 transmission associated with large-scale community-based health interventions, the WHO recommended that mass treatment campaigns, active case-finding activities and population-based surveys for NTDs be postponed until further notice [ ]. Following this guidance, the Act to End Neglected Tropical Diseases | West Program (Act | West) and the Guinea MoH suspended all fieldwork required to prepare for MDAs.
To plan for the resumption of NTD interventions in the context of COVID-19, and preserve the progress made to date in Guinea, the NTDP and Act | West developed a national contingency plan. This plan focused on 1) a risk-benefit assessment to identify potential risks and actions to mitigate them, 2) a risk mitigation plan to guide implementation of barrier measures during MDA, and 3) a remote supervision plan to monitor compliance with COVID-19 barrier measures in real-time during MDA.
Following further guidance from the WHO on the restart of NTD field activities [ ], the Guinea MoH and Act | West resumed and completed MDA activities with strict risk mitigation measures in August–September 2020. A supervision checklist was created and used in the field supervision. The objectives of the study were to assess how the MDA was conducted during the COVID-19 pandemic with preventive and barrier measures and to assess the compliance to MDA and the COVID-19 mitigation measures during MDA. Here we present the experiences and lessons learned from preparing for and implementing MDA in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic in Guinea.

## Methods

## Ethics statement
Guinea MoH implements the national program to control and eliminate NTDs according to the WHO guidelines. Supervision is part of the routine program activities of the national NTD program for program quality as a standard public health measure, which does not require ethical approval. During the COVID-19 pandemic, Guinea introduced the COVID-19 mitigation measures as public health emergency measures. The supervisor’s checklist was used as a supervision tool during the routine program supervision to monitor the compliance of CDDs and participants with the national NTD program COVID-19 mitigation plan for MDA implementation. The use of a checklist was also considered a standard public health measure during the COVID-19 emergency and did not require specific ethical approval. Data were collected mostly by observation and some simple questions. Supervisors explained to participants the purpose of the supervision and the importance of observing the COVID-19 mitigation measures. Verbal consent was received from participants for giving their answers, due to complying with social distancing and avoiding contact. The CDDs or participants were free to decline to give answers. No personal information from observees or respondents was recorded.

## Risk assessment
The National NTD Program, with partners’ support, initiated and completed a COVID-19 transmission risk assessment to identify potential risks associated with the planned MDA during the COVID-19 pandemic in order to help stakeholders to avoid further transmission of the virus. The risk assessment considered the epidemic situation in each HD, including the reported COVID-19 cases, and the type of activities required to conduct MDA, such as CDD training and venue, drug distribution platforms (i.e. community-based MDA through door-to-door or fixed-point distribution, or school-based MDA), supervision, and travel of individuals from Conakry—the epicenter of COVID-19 in Guinea. The assessment also addressed risk factors leading to the community refusal to MDA in the pandemic context. Following the risk assessment, a mitigation plan was developed to enable MDA implementation for each step.

## COVID-19 mitigation plan
Following the risk assessment described above, a risk mitigation plan was then developed in accordance with national COVID-19 prevention guidance to reduce the risk of COVID-19 transmission during the MDA. All activities associated with the MDA implementation strategy, including social mobilization, training and drug distribution, were adapted. There was also mandatory COVID-19 testing for all participants leaving Conakry. Additionally, it was recommended that the vehicles travelling from Conakry have a maximum of two supervisors plus one driver in one vehicle.

## Social mobilization
Social mobilization materials on MDA and COVID-19 prevention were developed and provided to CDDs during their training. Messages were shared before and during the campaign in local languages at all levels through rural radio stations, and village town criers were involved in message dissemination. To mitigate the fear of population, additional messages relating to COVID-19 were added to those usually broadcast by town criers. For this, the town criers were briefed by the heads of health centers to reassure the population and invite them to take the NTD drugs. The key messages included social distancing of two meters, hand washing and wearing face masks. The routine national campaign launch ceremony was cancelled to prevent the gathering of large crowds. At the HD level, the launch ceremonies took place in the local chiefs’ houses and health centers in compliance with the COVID-19 barrier measures, as recommended by the NTDP. Overall, all media were informed and trained on COVID-19 by the MoH well before the MDA campaign.

## Training
The training of trainers was completed in Guinea before the first case of COVID-19 in the country. Therefore, no specific plan was developed for the training of trainers. However, for the training of CDDs, the training was conducted in groups of <30 people and in an open space or in a classroom with sufficient aeration and ventilation with open windows. During the training, all participants had to comply with the requirements including social distancing of two meters and wearing a mask in the training room. Handwashing stations provided by the government and its partners were positioned in front of each training site. As large grouping was prohibited, all participants (trainers as well as CDDs) had mandatory requirements to avoid congregating in groups when going to the training sites. Refreshments were not provided to the group during the break and participants were provided an allowance instead.

## Mass drug administration
MDA was carried out by the NTDP and its partners with a significant focus on COVID-19 prevention measures. It took place in 19 HDs as initially planned with the support of Act | West Program. These included 11 HDs treated with the combination of ivermectin, praziquantel and albendazole (IPA) and 8 HDs with ivermectin and albendazole (IA).
During previous MDAs, Guinea used both fixed-point and door-to-door community-based strategies and school-based drug distribution approach. Due to the strict measures required in the COVID-19 context, the community-based drug distribution strategy only utilized the door-to-door approach to treat people. A school-based strategy also commonly utilized during MDA in Guinea was not possible since schools were closed.
All CDDs, supervisors and town criers involved in the MDA were provided with locally-made (fabric) face masks by the MoH. Soap was provided for handwashing by the NTDP. CDDs were required to wash their hands before distributing drugs and were trained to inform household members to wash their hands before taking the drugs. Usually, CDDs directly measured the height of participants using the dose poles in their hands with close physical distance. However, in the COVID-19 context, the CDDs were instructed to attach dose poles to a wall, a tree or a standing object and ensured that the dose poles were not touched by participants during height measurement. CDDs were trained to measure the participants from a distance and to distribute the required number of tablets using the cap of the drug container or a spoon without touching the hands of participants.

## Supervision and checklist
A COVID-19 preventive and barrier measures checklist was developed to monitor compliance with COVID-19 barrier measures during MDA by field supervisors. The checklist included: 1) COVID-19 context related information, 2) CDDs and household participants’ practices during drug administration, and 3) perception of community and the supervisors (see ). Central level program staff and supervisors were tested for COVID-19 infection before leaving Conakry and only those with negative test results were allowed to travel to the districts to conduct the supervision. During supervision, while observing CDDs on the quality of drug distribution, supervisors also observed CDDs on their compliance with COVID-19 mitigation measures according to the checklist. While using the COVID-19 checklist, the national supervisors were able to confirm in real time whether the CDDs were complying with the COVID-19 mitigation measures during MDA. They were also able to remind field supervisors to comply with the measures during supervision and to make corrective instructions to the CDDs as needed.

## Study population and sampling
Five of 19 HDs started the MDA before the checklist was available. The checklists to monitor compliance with preventive measures and barriers against COVID-19 were used in 14 of the 19 HDs. Thus, the results presented here relate to adherence to the contingency plan for the implementation of MDA in the context of the COVID-19 epidemic in 14 HDs. The study population included CDDs in the 14 HDs and household members they visited. National supervisors were instructed to complete one checklist for each of CDD teams (two CDDs per team) they supervised without a specific quota. Supervisors used convenience sampling to select CDD teams for supervision at their convenience in the field without informing the selected CDDs in advance. One checklist was completed for each CDD team observed conducting MDA at one household (a household is defined as a house compound with one or several persons who live together and share meals). In total, 120 checklists for 120 different CDD teams (representing 240 CDDs) at 120 households were completed.

## Data collection and analysis
CDDs conducted a population census in communities during the MDA and used registers to record treatments for their catchment communities. MDA data were collected with these registers and summarized treatment numbers were reported to the NTDP and transferred to an . The MDA supervision information (registers filling, treatment record, respect of eligibility, dose pole usage etc.) was collected on paper as usual, while the compliance of COVID-19 preventive and barrier measures checklist was completed through electronic data capture using the open data kit (ODK)-based ONA platform.
Data were analyzed using Excel and Epi Info 7. Descriptive analysis was done for district MDA numbers and coverage. The epidemiological coverage of MDA for LF, OV and STH was calculated using projected total population in each district according to the national census 2017 [ , ] as denominators, while treatment coverage for SCH was calculated using the projected numbers of school-age children (SAC) from the population as denominators. The variables of interest were COVID-19 epidemic situation in the district, the practice of preventive and barrier measures during MDA observed by supervisors (mask wearing, hand washing, dose pole using, social distancing, etc.), and the reluctance of communities and CDDs to participate in MDA. We used an uncorrected Chi-squared test or Fisher’s exact test to compare adherence to COVID-19 mitigation measures between HDs with and without confirmed COVID-19 cases.

## Results

## MDA coverage
 summarizes the MDA results in 19 HDs. The epidemiological coverage rate for mass treatment for LF, OV and STH varied from 53% to 79%. Using the WHO-recommended required effective coverage (≥65%) threshold for LF [ ], the epidemiological coverage rate was ≥65% in 10 out of 19 HDs. Among the 9 districts where the coverage was <65%, 8 had reported positive cases of COVID-19 before the campaign. Among the 10 districts with a coverage ≥65%, 7 health districts had also reported positive cases of COVID-19. In total 4,548,942 people were treated for LF, OV and/or STH, among whom 53% were women (2,412,686/4,548,942), and 35.8% were school-aged children (SAC) (1,627,618 /4,548,942). In 11 districts targeted for SCH, the reported coverage ranged from 68.3% to 125.4%. Seven districts achieved the minimum required 75% as recommended by the WHO, while 4 districts fell below 75%.
 

## Adherence to COVID-19 preventive and barrier measures
There were confirmed positive COVID-19 cases in 15 of the 19 MDA health districts. The number of positive cases detected in the districts ranged from 1 to 504 at the time of the campaign.
Supervisors observed CDD teams distributing drugs at households and information on adhering to the COVID-19 mitigation measures according to the supervision checklist was collected and reported. A total of 120 checklists were completed, representing 120 CDD teams at 120 households. Washing or disinfecting hands when entering and leaving house compounds was practiced by CDD teams in 82 of 120 occasions (68.3%), compared to 54 of 120 occasions (45%) among households during the MDA campaign ( ). Face masks to cover the mouth and nose were worn by 79.2% (95/120) of CDD teams ( ), compared to a lower 23.3% among households (28/120) ( ). The social distancing of two meters was respected by 64.2% (77/120) of CDD teams during their distribution at households.
 In 105 (87.5%) out of 120 observations, household participants did not touch the dose pole while taking their height measurement to estimate the dose for medication. In 106 observations out of 120 (88.3%), CDDs did not touch the hand of the participants while giving the drugs.
A large majority of CDD teams (94.2% [113/120]) and household participants (94.2% [113/120]) were willing to participate in the MDA campaign despite ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Among the 120 observations, 20 were from districts without confirmed COVID-19 cases while 100 were from districts with confirmed COVID-19 cases. Adherence to the mitigation measures in districts where COVID-19 cases were reported was similar to that in districts where no case of COVID-19 was reported ( ). We did not find any statistically significant difference in practices or willingness to participate in MDA between CDDs and household members according to district status (with or without cases of COVID-19).
 

## Discussion
Guinea was one of the first countries in Africa to resume routine MDA activities during the COVID-19 pandemic. The successful restart of MDA implementation in the context of COVID-19 was a joint effort of the NTDP and its partners. The development of a risk mitigation plan and a method to monitor adherence to barrier measures were critical to this unprecedented effort.
The results demonstrate that implementation of MDA in the context of COVID-19 is programmatically challenging, but with appropriate planning, resources, and training, risk mitigation measures can be rapidly applied. Central to this effort was the commitment of the MoH to 1) procure personal protection equipment (PPE) for program staff and CDDs involved in the MDA, and 2) put in place a COVID-19 test rule requiring all fieldworkers and supervisors leaving the capital city of Conakry (the national COVID-19 epicenter) to be tested prior to travel. To the authors’ knowledge, this was a unique requirement not replicated elsewhere for MDA. The participatory approach, led by the NTDP, to develop the contingency plan contributed to wide acceptance of restarting the MDA from all key stakeholders (such as administrative, political and religious leaders at different levels in country, health personnel, donors and implementing partners, etc.).
MDA coverage was below what would be expected under non-pandemic circumstances, but given the context, we view this MDA as a success. Ten out of 19 HDs reached the minimum required coverage recommended by the WHO for LF (≥65% epidemiological coverage) and 7/11 HDs for SCH targeting SAC (≥75%) based on national census data. As the treatment was integrated for LF, OV and STH in some districts ( ), we used the coverage for LF as a representative for both LF, OV and STH. Separate coverage or treatment numbers for SAC for STH in such integrated MDA was not reported.
The vast majority (94.2%) of CDDs and household members observed were willing to participate in the MDA despite COVID-19. Poor coverage in certain districts may be explained by multiple reasons. Firstly, eight out of nine HDs of LF districts which did not achieve the minimum coverage had reported cases of COVID-19. Districts with reported cases of COVID-19 were similar in respecting the COVID-19 preventive and barrier measures during the MDA to districts where no case was confirmed ( ) and there was no difference in willingness between households and CDDs to participate in the MDA regardless the status of the districts. However, there was indeed a small proportion (5.8%, 7/120) of households with members who were reluctant to participate in the MDA, though this figure was confined to accessible areas (to supervisors) and may not reflect the reluctance in the overall population. Secondly, it is important to note that the MDA happened during the rainy season. It was originally planned in March and was delayed due to COVID-19 suspension but had to be implemented in August and September to avoid drug expiration. During the rainy season, access to the target population in some places is difficult and people are not often in the households during the MDA campaign.
Overall, the preventive and barrier measures were followed by CDD teams more than household members ( ). Washing hands was followed by 82 of the 120 (68.3%) CDD teams against 54 of the 120 (45.0%) households and wearing masks was followed by 95 of the 120 (79.2%) CDD teams against 28 of the 120 (23.3%) households. CDDs had received masks from the MoH and it was mandatory for the population to wear a mask according to the government policy to fight COVID-19 [ ]. In 15 of the 120 (12.5%) households supervised, some household participants were found to have touched the dose pole while they were having their height measured and in 14 of the 120 (11.7%) CDD teams supervised, CDDs were found to have touched the hand of household participants while distributing drugs. That a significant number of CDD teams and household members did not follow the rules for mitigation measures highlighted the challenge and need for more intensive training and communication on COVID-19 in changing perception and behavior in CDDs and communities. Infrequent use of face masks by household members may also highlight the lack of availability of face masks for households in rural communities. The MDA strategy (door-to-door) helped crowd control, and social distancing of two meters was observed in 64.2% of observations. Supervisors provided corrective suggestions when noncompliance with COVID-19 mitigation measures was observed during the supervision.
All the components and materials of the MDA campaign were reviewed as indicated in the methodology. The training was conducted in small groups for CDDs, and the COVID-19 module was added to the initial training agenda. These increased the workload of trainers in terms of extra number of sessions and duration of training. In fact, for the health centers with a high number of CDD teams (more than 30), the number of training sessions increased although they were held during the two days planned for the training. Thus, the heads of the concerned health centers and their deputies organized two training sessions per day with a two-hour break throughout the two days, compared with one training session on one day normally.
The increased measures to mitigate the risk of COVID-19 transmission during the drug distribution increased the workload of CDDs, with the adoption of the door-to-door strategy as the sole method of distribution across all districts and for the first time CCDs were doing the census of the people during MDA. In addition, the CDD teams needed to ensure that the dose pole was not touched by the participants during measurement and that each household member washed or disinfected his or her hand before taking the drugs. This extended the time taken by each CDD team to complete a household. Normally from the NTDP data, the CDD team target is 150 people per day for an MDA in Guinea; however, with additional mitigation measures, one CDD team was only able to cover 90–110 people per day.
It is important to note that with appropriate mitigation measures, implementation of MDA during the COVID-19 pandemic did not cause an observed increase in COVID-19 transmission in Guinea. According to the published records, during the five weeks between 10 August and 13 September 2020, the weekly total number of new cases reported were 690, 456, 333, 407 and 245 throughout Guinea and there was no increasing trend in new case reporting after 4 September when MDA ended [ ]. We did not specifically follow CDDs on COVID-19 infection after MDA, but any COVID-19 infection among them would have been reflected in the national new cases reported during the period. Furthermore, none of the supervisors after MDA reported having symptoms of COVID-19 or being tested positive for COVID-19 infection.
There are certain limitations in the data presented here. Firstly, the sample size was relatively small. The supervision checklist was introduced a week into implementation to monitor COVID-19 barrier and preventive measures during the MDA and the adherence was not monitored during the early days of the MDA implementation. Some districts started the campaign before the tool was available. The supervision checklist was used in 14 of the 19 HDs conducting MDA and supervisors were only able to supervise a limited number of CDD teams with convenience samples. Therefore, the data may not have reflected the true situation across all MDA districts. Secondly, one checklist form completed represented one CDD team at one household. The results did not consider the number of people involved during the MDA at the household and the data at individual level. If one person did not observe the rules this was noted on the form and therefore the results may have underestimated the true compliance. And finally, data for households were collected at the households that were covered by CDDs and reasonably feasible for supervisors to visit; the households were not randomly selected (convenience sampling). Therefore, in this case, the data may have overestimated the community willingness to participate in MDA. The unwillingness to participate in MDA by some households may have contributed to the relatively poor coverage reported in some districts in addition to other factors mentioned above.
In conclusion, the rapid development of COVID-19 contingency plans for MDA demonstrates the adaptability of the Guinea NTDP and its partners to respond to emerging issues. It also reinforces the commitment of the MoH to implement NTD programs and–even in the face of a global pandemic. The Guinea NTDP was one of the first to successfully implement MDA in the context of COVID-19, with relatively good coverage. A high proportion of household members and CDDs (94.2%) interviewed were willing to participate in MDA. The COVID-19 preventive and barrier measures were generally followed on the ground by both CDDs and household members.

## Supporting information
S1 Checklist

## COVID-19 Barrier Measures during MDA.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Database

## Adherence to COVID-19 mitigation measures during MDA.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.

The authors thank the populations in the endemic districts, community drug distributors and supervisors for their participation in the mass drug administration. Thanks are also given to some members of the Act | West team at Helen Keller International and Family Health International 360 for their participation in discussions in the resumption of the Guinean NTD field activities.
The contents are the sole responsibility of authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of USAID, the United States Government or the Government of Guinea.
 10.1371/journal.pntd.0009807.r001Decision Letter 0
CarabinHélèneDeputy EditorFreemanMatthew CAssociate Editor© 2021 Carabin, Freeman2021Carabin, Freemanhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
18 Jun 2021

Dear Dr DEMBELE,
Thank you very much for submitting your manuscript "Implementation of mass drug administration for neglected tropical diseases in Guinea during the COVID-19 pandemic" for consideration at PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases. As with all papers reviewed by the journal, your manuscript was reviewed by members of the editorial board and by several independent reviewers. The reviewers appreciated the attention to an important topic. Based on the reviews, we are likely to accept this manuscript for publication, providing that you modify the manuscript according to the review recommendations. 
Please prepare and submit your revised manuscript within 30 days. If you anticipate any delay, please let us know the expected resubmission date by replying to this email. 
When you are ready to resubmit, please upload the following:
[1] A letter containing a detailed list of your responses to all review comments, and a description of the changes you have made in the manuscript. 
Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out
[2] Two versions of the revised manuscript: one with either highlights or tracked changes denoting where the text has been changed; the other a clean version (uploaded as the manuscript file).
Important additional instructions are given below your reviewer comments. 
Thank you again for your submission to our journal. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive so far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Matthew C Freeman, MPH, Ph.D.
Associate Editor
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
Christine Petersen
Deputy Editor
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
***********************
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Key Review Criteria Required for Acceptance?

As you describe the new analyses required for acceptance, please consider the following:

Methods

-Are the objectives of the study clearly articulated with a clear testable hypothesis stated?
-Is the study design appropriate to address the stated objectives?
-Is the population clearly described and appropriate for the hypothesis being tested?
-Is the sample size sufficient to ensure adequate power to address the hypothesis being tested?
-Were correct statistical analysis used to support conclusions?
-Are there concerns about ethical or regulatory requirements being met?
Reviewer #1: - Are the objectives of the study clearly articulated with a clear testable hypothesis stated? yes but no hypothesis du to study design(report)
-Is the study design appropriate to address the stated objectives? Yes
-Is the population clearly described and appropriate for the hypothesis being tested? Yes only population is clearly described
-Is the sample size sufficient to ensure adequate power to address the hypothesis being tested? The sample signe like too small to be representative.
-Were correct statistical analysis used to support conclusions? yes
-Are there concerns about ethical or regulatory requirements being met? yes
Reviewer #2: Yes indeed the methods are well explained.
The authors need to better explain the following in the section of risk assessment “drug distribution platforms”
Please the following need more precision “travelers from Conakry avoid crowded vehicles.”
Please the following is a repetition and not well written “The MDA and prevention and protection against COVID-19 messages were disseminated by local media before and during the campaign.
Please rewrite the following part in social mobilization section “Some routine activities, such as the national campaign launch ceremony were cancelled to prevent the gathering of crowds.”
“Central level program staff and supervisors were tested for COVID-19 before leaving Conakry and only staff with negative results travelled to the districts and conducted the supervision. All supervisors observed COVID-19 mitigation measures during supervision visits, including wearing face masks, social distancing of two meters, and using hand sanitizer.” As a limit the authors did not indicated whether those negative while in the field respected confinement period before working because the newly infected will not be positive directly 
I will suggest to the authors to add study population section and sample size for more clarification
Reviewer #3: The objectives should be clearly articulated, preferably by stating the general objective and 2-3 specific objectives. These should be closely aligned to Similarly clear study questions. The discussion should then be restructured to speak to the objectives.
Reviewer #4: Minor revisions
- In the 1st sentence of the Methods section, the word “in” seems to be a typo, please double check it
- The break times are the riskiest periods during the training sessions, was there specific directions for these periods? If yes, please specify them
--------------------

Results

-Does the analysis presented match the analysis plan?
-Are the results clearly and completely presented?
-Are the figures (Tables, Images) of sufficient quality for clarity?
Reviewer #1: -Does the analysis presented match the analysis plan? Yes
-Are the results clearly and completely presented? Yes but should be more clear to compare MDA coverage with the results of previous MDA to measure the impact of COVID-19.
-Are the figures (Tables, Images) of sufficient quality for clarity? Yes bu need to be review with comment above
Reviewer #2: Yes the results are well presented
“Thus, the results presented here relate to adherence to the contingency plan for the implementation of MDA in the context of the COVID-19 epidemic (barrier and preventive measures against COVID-19) in 14 HDs.” Read this part carefully something is missing”
Tables and figures are good
Reviewer #3: No revision required
Reviewer #4: Minor revisions
- In table 1, please explain the coverage > 100% or discuss them in the appropriate section
- Please check this sentence of the last paragraph of the Results section « Adherence to the mitigation measures for districts reporting COVID-19 cases was similar compared to districts where no case of COVID-19 was confirmed (Table 2). »
- The last sentence of the Results sections contains a word that need to be checked and replaced; the same sentence seems to consider a p value =0.05 as statistically significant. A p value should be <0.05 to be considered statistically significant.
- Some of the small numbers in the last table seems to require a Fisher Exact test instead of an uncorrected Chi square test (i.e. Household participants reluctant to participate in MDA line), Please double check
--------------------

Conclusions

-Are the conclusions supported by the data presented?
-Are the limitations of analysis clearly described?
-Do the authors discuss how these data can be helpful to advance our understanding of the topic under study?
-Is public health relevance addressed?
Reviewer #1: -Are the conclusions supported by the data presented? Yes
-Are the limitations of analysis clearly described? Yes
-Do the authors discuss how these data can be helpful to advance our understanding of the topic under study? Yes but not sufficient
-Is public health relevance addressed? The study focuses on the proportions of actors who apply the barrier measures. It doesn't give much scientific interest. It would have been good to push the study by measuring the impact of the campaign on the occurrence of new cases of COVID-19 and especially if actors have developed signs after this campaign.
Reviewer #2: “The results demonstrate that implementation of MDA in the context of COVID-19 is programmatically challenging, but that with appropriate planning, resources, and training, risk mitigation measures can be rapidly applied.” I will suggest to remove “that”
Reviewer #3: No revision required
Reviewer #4: (No Response)
--------------------

Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications?

Use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity. If the only modifications needed are minor and/or editorial, you may wish to recommend “Minor Revision” or “Accept”. 
Reviewer #1: Minor Revision
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: No revision required
Reviewer #4: Minor modifications
Abstract: 
- A definition of the world CDDs team and Households would be helpful in understanding these concepts.
- At least 2 sentences started with numbers 
Background
- Please add a reference at the end of the first paragraph of the Background section
- Please split the last sentence of the 3rd paragraph into two sentences to gain in clarity
Discussion
- At the end of the second paragraph of the Discussion sections, it would be informative to name the key stakeholders evocated.
- Please check the 2nd sentence of the 4th paragraph “Firstly, six out of seven HDs of LF districts which did not achieve the minimum coverage had reported cases of COVID-19. » for clarity
- In the same paragraph and elsewhere in the manuscript, the authors seem to be using interchangeably « households » and « households’ members », please look at that carefully and adapt according to the meaning of the concept in each sentence throughout the manuscript.
References
- Many references used are not eligible for a peer reviewed paper 
- References that are not peer reviewed journal articles should have a web link and date of access
- The types of documents eligible for citation as a reference should be check on the Journal’s website
--------------------

Summary and General Comments

Use this section to provide overall comments, discuss strengths/weaknesses of the study, novelty, significance, general execution and scholarship. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. If requesting major revision, please articulate the new experiments that are needed.
Reviewer #1: The study is interesting but remains in the form of a report. The authors could have extended this study by taking into account the impact of the implementation of barrier measures on the transmission of COVID-19. If they were effective, the results could be used as evidence to be strongly recommended to other countries.
Reviewer #2: Please revise this section size “The participatory approach, led by the NTDP, to develop the contingency plan contributed to wide acceptance of restarting the MDA from all key stakeholders.”
Please read this again not sure if this statement is correct as it is “and it was not possible to calculate STH coverage for SAC only” . my question is why not even if it was integrated normally I will be possible to report
This need also to be taken into account in the mitigation plan like asking and get agreement with communities for the best tie during the day distribute the drugs “During the rainy season, access to the target population and some places are difficult and people are not often in the household during the MDA campaign.”
Reviewer #3: The study is relevant to the current realities of COVID-19 and provides useful insights on how programs can implement interventions to safeguard gains already made, while taking necessary precautions to minimize the risk of getting infected with the disease.
Reviewer #4: This paper describes a real and current issue that threatened interventions targeting NTDs. It provides with an attitude that is well described and could help in the future when similar situation is faced.
--------------------
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes: Dr. Sultani Hadley Matendechero
Reviewer #4: Yes: Yaya Ibrahim Coulibaly
Figure Files:
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org.
Data Requirements:
Please note that, as a condition of publication, PLOS' data policy requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions outlined in your manuscript. Data must be deposited in an appropriate repository, included within the body of the manuscript, or uploaded as supporting information. This includes all numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.. For an example see here: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5.
Reproducibility:
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
References
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article's retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: MDA experience in COVID-19 context Guinea.docx
Click here for additional data file.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: PNTD-D-21-00572_reviewer.pdf
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pntd.0009807.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
12 Jul 2021

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Responses to reviewer comments.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pntd.0009807.r003Decision Letter 1
PetersenChristine ADeputy EditorFreemanMatthew CAssociate Editor© 2021 Petersen, Freeman2021Petersen, Freemanhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
10 Sep 2021

Dear Dr DEMBELE,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'Implementation of mass drug administration for neglected tropical diseases in Guinea during the COVID-19 pandemic' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us now if you or your institution is planning to press release the article. All press must be co-ordinated with PLOS.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases.
Best regards,
Matthew C Freeman, MPH, Ph.D.
Associate Editor
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
Christine Petersen
Deputy Editor
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
***********************************************************
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Key Review Criteria Required for Acceptance?

As you describe the new analyses required for acceptance, please consider the following:

Methods

-Are the objectives of the study clearly articulated with a clear testable hypothesis stated?
-Is the study design appropriate to address the stated objectives?
-Is the population clearly described and appropriate for the hypothesis being tested?
-Is the sample size sufficient to ensure adequate power to address the hypothesis being tested?
-Were correct statistical analysis used to support conclusions?
-Are there concerns about ethical or regulatory requirements being met?
Reviewer #1: Are the objectives of the study clearly articulated with a clear testable hypothesis stated? Yes
-Is the study design appropriate to address the stated objectives? Yes
-Is the population clearly described and appropriate for the hypothesis being tested? Yes
-Is the sample size sufficient to ensure adequate power to address the hypothesis being tested? Yes
-Were correct statistical analysis used to support conclusions? Yes
-Are there concerns about ethical or regulatory requirements being met? Yes
Reviewer #2: the authors address all my previous comment and suggestions related to methods
Reviewer #3: The methods are clearly illustrated. Objectives are stated and well articulated.
**********

Results

-Does the analysis presented match the analysis plan?
-Are the results clearly and completely presented?
-Are the figures (Tables, Images) of sufficient quality for clarity?
Reviewer #1: Does the analysis presented match the analysis plan? Yes
-Are the results clearly and completely presented? Yes
-Are the figures (Tables, Images) of sufficient quality for clarity? Yes
Reviewer #2: the authors address all my previous comment and suggestions related to results
Reviewer #3: The result are well presented and analyses.
**********

Conclusions

-Are the conclusions supported by the data presented?
-Are the limitations of analysis clearly described?
-Do the authors discuss how these data can be helpful to advance our understanding of the topic under study?
-Is public health relevance addressed?
Reviewer #1: Are the conclusions supported by the data presented? Yes
-Are the limitations of analysis clearly described? Yes
-Do the authors discuss how these data can be helpful to advance our understanding of the topic under study? Yes
-Is public health relevance addressed? Yes
Reviewer #2: my concern about the conclusion part was also addressed
Reviewer #3: The conclusion is well captured and relevance to current circumstances clearly demonstrated.
**********

Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications?

Use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity. If the only modifications needed are minor and/or editorial, you may wish to recommend “Minor Revision” or “Accept”.
Reviewer #1: Accept
Reviewer #2: fine to me
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********

Summary and General Comments

Use this section to provide overall comments, discuss strengths/weaknesses of the study, novelty, significance, general execution and scholarship. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. If requesting major revision, please articulate the new experiments that are needed.
Reviewer #1: NA
Reviewer #2: i think the paper is now well presented and clear and will be helpful for others settings /countries to learn from this paper and prepare their mitigate plan for NTDS activities implementation under COVID 19 and others emergency infectious epidemic or pandemic.
Reviewer #3: All areas of previous concern have been adequately addressed.
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes: Dr. Sultani Hadley Matendechero
10.1371/journal.pntd.0009807.r004Acceptance letter
PetersenChristine ADeputy EditorFreemanMatthew CAssociate Editor© 2021 Petersen, Freeman2021Petersen, Freemanhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
23 Sep 2021

Dear Dr DEMBELE,
We are delighted to inform you that your manuscript, "Implementation of mass drug administration for neglected tropical diseases in Guinea during the COVID-19 pandemic," has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases.
We have now passed your article onto the PLOS Production Department who will complete the rest of the publication process. All authors will receive a confirmation email upon publication.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any scientific or type-setting errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. Note: Proofs for Front Matter articles (Editorial, Viewpoint, Symposium, Review, etc...) are generated on a different schedule and may not be made available as quickly.
Soon after your final files are uploaded, the early version of your manuscript will be published online unless you opted out of this process. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
Thank you again for supporting open-access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases. 
Best regards,
Shaden Kamhawi
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
Paul Brindley
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases