PLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLoS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC8363004PMC8363004.1836300483630043438817810.1371/journal.pone.0256074PONE-D-21-140891Research ArticleSocial SciencesSociologyCommunicationsSocial CommunicationSocial MediaFacebookComputer and Information SciencesNetwork AnalysisSocial NetworksSocial MediaFacebookSocial SciencesSociologySocial NetworksSocial MediaFacebookPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsEthnicitiesAsian PeopleVietnamese PeopleResearch and Analysis MethodsResearch DesignSurvey ResearchSurveysSocial SciencesSociologyCultureComputer and Information SciencesComputer NetworksInternetComputer and Information SciencesNetwork AnalysisSocial NetworksSocial SciencesSociologySocial NetworksBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyLanguageBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyLanguageSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyLanguageBiology and life sciencesOrganismsVirusesDNA virusesPapillomavirusesHuman PapillomavirusBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyMedical MicrobiologyMicrobial PathogensViral PathogensPapillomavirusesHuman PapillomavirusMedicine and Health SciencesPathology and Laboratory MedicinePathogensMicrobial PathogensViral PathogensPapillomavirusesHuman PapillomavirusBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsVirusesViral PathogensPapillomavirusesHuman PapillomavirusExperience and lessons learned from multi-modal internet-based recruitment of U.S. Vietnamese into research
Online recruitment of U.S. Vietnamese into researchhttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-0230-473XVuMilkieConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSoftwareSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing HuynhVictoria N.MethodologyProject administrationResourcesWriting – review & editing BednarczykRobert A.Data curationInvestigationWriting – review & editing EscofferyCamData curationInvestigationWriting – review & editing TaDannyInvestigationValidationWriting – review & editing NguyenTien T.Data curationInvestigationMethodologyValidationWriting – review & editing BergCarla J.Data curationMethodologyWriting – review & editing 
1
Department of Behavioral, Social, Health Education Sciences, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America

2
Emory College of Arts & Sciences, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America

3
Hubert Department of Global Health, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America

4
Winship Cancer Institute, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America

5
Nell Hodgson Woodruff School of Nursing, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America

6
Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts, United States of America

7
Department of Prevention and Community Health, Milken Institute of Public Health, George Washington University, Washington, District of Columbia, United States of America

8
George Washington Cancer Center, George Washington University, Washington, District of Columbia, United States of America
PikhartMarcelEditor ], with a population of more than 18 million as of 2019 (6% of the total population) [ ], which is projected to grow to 41 million (9% of the total population) by 2050 [ ]. Despite their growing numbers, Asian-Americans remain one of the most understudied racial/ethnic minority groups [ – ]. For example, studies including Asian-American participants totaled 0.01% of MEDLINE/PubMed articles published between 1966 and 2000 [ ] and 0.17% of the NIH-funded clinical research budget between 1992 and 2018 [ ]. Moreover, when Asian-American participants are included, research typically aggregates Asian subgroups into one single category [ – ] instead of providing data for separate subgroups. This trend masks important subgroup differences, as Asian-Americans are extraordinarily heterogeneous, comprising of people from over 30 countries and speaking over 100 languages/dialects, with diverse socioeconomic status, religious and cultural backgrounds, immigration histories, and patterns of health services utilization [ – ].
While in recent years, more large-scale or population-based datasets and registries (e.g., the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey or the National Health Interview Survey) have incorporated questions assessing separate Asian subgroups in their survey, due to small sample sizes, research using these datasets has rarely reported disaggregated subgroup outcomes [ , ]. Moreover and critically, with a few notable exceptions (e.g., the National Latino and Asian American Study, the California Health Interview Survey), large-scale or population-based surveys often are not available in Asian languages, thus excluding the participation of those with lower English proficiency [ , ]. According to the 2019 American Community Survey, 74% and 31% of the Asian population in the U.S. reported that they spoke a language other than English and that they spoke English less than "very well," respectively [ ]. The literature has demonstrated several differences between Asians with and without lower English proficiency. In particular, compared to Asians with higher English proficiency, Asians with lower English proficiency have higher psychological distress [ , ], higher unmet healthcare needs [ ], poorer quality of life and health [ , ], more limited access to care [ ] and are less likely to adhere to screening guidelines [ ] or receive and use health services [ , ].
To overcome these issues, many researchers interested in Asian-American health have relied on the use of community-engaged research [ , ]. Typically, researchers partner with community-based organizations (CBOs) serving Asian populations to collect data from clients using CBO services or attending community venues and events [ , – ]. This approach has allowed for the administration of surveys in diverse languages and the collection of adequate sample sizes from different Asian subgroups, thereby providing important representation and understanding of Asian-American health behaviors and outcomes.
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic in the U.S., however, represents a serious challenge to research employing in-person modes of data collection. A growing emphasis is being placed on transitioning to online data collection [ , ]. To successfully execute these methods in Asian communities, an understanding of the success and challenges of different recruitment strategies is critical. Yet, only a handful of published studies to date have described the process of online recruitment and data collection in Asian-Americans populations in detail [ – ].
Existing literature found that, in general, Asian participants recruited from Internet sources were more likely to be younger, U.S.-born, fluent in English, and more educated than Asian participants recruited from non-Internet sources [ , ]. Researchers also highlighted several issues in the online recruitment of Asian participants, notably difficulties in establishing trust and transparency between researchers and participants as well as participants’ concerns about the security of information transmitted through the Internet [ ]. In addition, challenges in creating rapport with "gatekeepers" (e.g., webmasters, Facebook group moderators, directors of Asian community groups) were also a barrier to recruitment [ , ]. On the other hand, having a culturally matched research team (e.g., same ethnicity or strong cultural ties) [ , ] and clear communication and outline of research procedures [ ] were facilitators to recruitment.
The primary goal of this paper is to contribute to the body of literature on strategies for online data collection efforts in Asian communities by presenting a case study of a research project with U.S. Vietnamese (i.e., those living in the U.S. and identifying as Vietnamese). U.S. Vietnamese represent the fourth largest Asian-American subgroup, with a population of more than 1.8 million as of 2019 [ ]. According to the 2019 American Community Survey, U.S. Vietnamese have lower English proficiency, median household income, and education and are more likely to live in poverty compared to other Asians [ ]. These disadvantages reflect potential barriers to health services utilization and health research participation, thus highlighting the need to focus on this specific subgroup (rather than Asians as an aggregate).
Indeed, a body of literature has documented lower utilization of various health services among U.S. Vietnamese when compared to other major Asian subgroups. For example, compared to Chinese and Korean populations in the U.S., fewer U.S. Vietnamese have a personal doctor as a main healthcare provider [ ], have ever been tested for Hepatitis B [ ], or have ever had colorectal screening [ ]. Moreover, a higher proportion of U.S. Vietnamese women have never had a Pap smear compared to Chinese and Cambodian women [ ]. Additionally, fewer U.S. Vietnamese women on average have ever sought mental health services compared to Chinese women or Filipino women in the U.S [ ].
The data presented in this paper are from a study investigating multilevel factors influencing U.S. Vietnamese parents’ HPV vaccine initiation for their adolescent children. U.S. Vietnamese have higher cervical cancer incidence rates than other racial/ethnic groups [ – ]. A solution to reduce cervical cancer burden in this population is HPV vaccination. Unfortunately, our understanding of HPV vaccination among U.S. Vietnamese is limited, partly because large national probability surveys on HPV vaccine uptake in the U.S. typically do not supply separate statistics for U.S. Vietnamese. For example, the National Immunization Survey–Teen and the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System, both of which provide estimates on HPV vaccine uptake, aggregate "Vietnamese" under the category of "Asians" and do not provide disaggregated Asian subgroup data in public-use datasets [ – ]. The Health Information National Trends Survey (HINTS), which examines knowledge of the HPV vaccine, reports separate data for Vietnamese in some cycles but not all; the sample sizes for Vietnamese in the public-use datasets are also relatively small (~1%) which can hinder meaningful statistical modeling [ ]. Importantly, none of these surveys includes Vietnamese language versions of their questionnaires, which can be a major obstacle to research participation for U.S. Vietnamese with low English proficiency. In the context of research with HPV vaccination, this issue is particularly problematic, given that U.S. Vietnamese women with lower English proficiency also had lower HPV vaccine uptake [ ]. Consequently, excluding those with low English proficiency could bias estimates of HPV vaccine uptake and lead to an incomplete understanding of barriers underlying HPV vaccination in this population.
In this study, we describe multiple strategies for online recruitment of U.S. Vietnamese parents and compare response rates among strategies. We also compare several characteristics (e.g., sociodemographic, acculturation, and mobile health usage) of participants drawn from different strategies. Moreover, we discuss lessons learned from our experiences conducting online recruitment, including handling fraudulent responses and how perceived benefits and trust can encourage participation.

## Materials and methods

## Eligibility criteria and research procedure
Eligibility criteria included: 1) self-identified as Vietnamese; 2) having lived in the U.S. for at least 12 months; 3) able to read either Vietnamese or English; and 4) having at least one child aged 9 to 18 and living in the same household with the child. Only one parent per household was allowed to participate. Participants first completed an online eligibility screener (administered via SurveyGizmo). Those eligible were directed to a webpage with a study description and a consent form. Consenting individuals indicated consent via a link and were directed to the online survey (via SurveyGizmo). The survey took approximately 60 minutes to complete. We limited duplicate responses by permitting only one response per IP address. Survey participants were compensated with a $30 Amazon gift card. We also selected a subset of 32 participants from those who completed the survey to participate in semi-structured interviews to further explore findings from the survey. We obtained electronic/online consent prior to the interview for each participant. Interviewed participants were compensated with a $60 Amazon gift card. Participants could choose to do the survey and interview in either Vietnamese or English. The Institutional Review Board at Emory University approved of this study.

## Recruitment procedures: Survey
Survey recruitment took place virtually from April to December 2020. We utilized several venues for survey recruitment: community-based organizations, Facebook groups, listservs, the personal network of the first author, and snowball sampling [ ]. Convenience sampling was used for all recruitment methods.

## Community-based organizations
We contacted CBOs serving Asians and/or Vietnamese populations in the U.S., introduced the research study and eligibility criteria, and asked the CBOs to send information about our research to their members. Additionally, we contacted Vietnamese Students Associations (VSA) at colleges and universities and requested VSA students to have their parents contact us if their parents met the eligibility criteria and were interested.
 details the recruitment process with CBOs.
 In total, we contacted 115 Vietnamese-serving CBOs, 91 Asian-serving CBOs, and 114 VSAs. Among those, 40 Vietnamese-serving CBOs, 20 Asian-serving CBOs, and 13 VSAs agreed to disseminate information about the study to their members. Six Vietnamese-serving CBOs and one Asian-serving CBO declined to participate in the project; reasons for nonparticipation included lack of members in the targeted demographics (n = 2), no email addresses of members on file (n = 1), insufficient staff capacity due to COVID-19 (n = 2), and insufficient technological knowledge among members to navigate online surveys (n = 2). In total, 51 participants from 19 Vietnamese-serving CBOs, nine participants from four Asian-serving CBOs, and eight participants from five VSAs completed the surveys.

## Facebook groups
Through a search on Facebook with terms such as "Vietnamese in the U.S.", we identified Facebook groups that operated in Vietnamese and focused on topics that might be of interests to U.S. Vietnamese parents of adolescents (e.g., general discussion of life in the U.S., parenting advice for those with children in the U.S., immigration and visa applications, etc.). We posted information about the research study and eligibility criteria in 12 Facebook groups, which ranged in membership from 50 to approximately 58,000. Ninety-seven participants from these 12 Facebook groups completed the surveys.

## Listservs
We posted information about the research study and eligibility criteria to two listservs, one focusing on Vietnamese Studies and the other on Vietnamese-related events in California. Four participants (two from each listserv) contacted the study team and completed the surveys.

## Personal network
The first author is a U.S. Vietnamese, fully fluent in Vietnamese and English, and has several years of experience partnering with Vietnamese and Asian-serving CBOs in different U.S. regions and conducting research on Vietnamese health. She disseminated information about the research study and eligibility criteria to her personal network via social media and emails. She requested those who were eligible and interested to contact the study team. She also asked others in her personal network to refer eligible and interested acquaintances to the study team. With this method, 42 participants completed the surveys.

## Snowball sampling
Using snowball sampling, we asked participants who completed the surveys to refer their eligible and interested acquaintances to the study team. A total of 197 participants completed the surveys through snowball sampling recruitment, in which two were referred from previous participants recruited through Vietnamese-serving CBOs, two referred from previous participants recruited through VSAs, 77 referred from those recruited through Facebook groups, and 116 referred from those recruited through the first author’s personal network.

## Survey measurements
The survey was available in Vietnamese and English. For the surveys, we used the Brislin’s back-translation method [ ], an iterative translation process involving an independent translation of survey questions into Vietnamese and back-translation into English by two different translators, and then reviewed by the first author (who is fully fluent in both languages) and by approximately 10 Vietnamese native speakers to ensure comprehensibility.
For sociodemographic characteristics, we assessed a participant’s age, sex, highest education level, combined household income, and child’s country of birth.
For acculturation-related characteristics, we assessed a participant’s percentage of life in the U.S. and their ability to understand medical information in English. In addition, we asked about participants’ zip codes and used data from the 2019 American Community Survey [ ] to construct two variables capturing zip code-level percentage of Asians and percentage of Vietnamese.
We also used the Asian American Multidimensional Acculturation Scale (15 items for each culture) [ ] to separately assess cultural identity (6 items), cultural knowledge (3 items), language (4 items), and food consumption (2 items) for Vietnamese culture and American culture. Examples of questions included: "How much do you interact and associate with [Vietnamese people]/[typical American people]?"; "How much do you actually practice the traditions and keep the holidays of [Vietnamese culture]/[mainstream American culture]?"; "How well do you speak [Vietnamese]/[English]?"; and "How often do you actually eat [Vietnamese food]/[the food of mainstream American culture]?" Each item was scored on a 6-point Likert scale (0 –Not very much to 5 –Very much). A higher subscale score, derived as an average across subscale items, indicated higher cultural identity, cultural knowledge, language ability, or food consumption.
For mobile health usage, we used items from the Health Information National Trends Survey 5 Cycle 2 [ ] to assess participants’ daily use of a home computer or mobile device to access the Internet, past 12-month use of electronic devices to look for health-related information for themselves or their children, and past 12-month use of emails or the Internet to communicate with a doctor. Given the critical role of digital technologies in facilitating data collection during the COVID-19 pandemic, these data can indicate whether access to the Internet (and, consequently, ability to participate in online data collection) differs between participants from different recruitment methods and potentially explain differences in response rates. In addition, they can also provide information on the possible receptiveness of participants to research and interventions leveraging mobile health technologies.

## Recruitment procedure: Interviews
Between November 2020 and February 2021, we invited a subset of participants who had already completed the survey to participate in in-depth, semi-structured qualitative interviews. We purposively sampled participants and stratified the sample of interviewees by their adolescent child’s sex (female versus male) and HPV vaccination status. For selected potential interviewees, we sent each of them an email with information about the interviews and a consent form. Depending on participants’ preferences, interviews were conducted in either Vietnamese or English and via telephone or the Zoom platform. Of 38 invited participants, 32 agreed to participate in the interviews (84% response rate). Among the 32 interviewed participants, 7 (21.9%) were recruited through CBOs, 1 (3.1%) through listservs, 10 (31.3%) through Facebook groups, 1 (3.1%) through personal network, 8 (25.0%) referred from those recruited through Facebook groups, and 5 (15.6%) referred from those recruited through the first author’s personal network.

## Interview questions
Interview questions explored participants’ sources of information about the HPV vaccine. While these questions were not designed specifically to inquire participants’ thoughts about the research project, several participants brought up the research project as a resource that motivated them to learn more about the HPV vaccine.

## Data analysis
We used the American Association for Public Opinion Research’s (AAPOR) response rate calculator version 4.1 to determine response rates [ ]. Chi-square tests and one-way analyses of variance were used to compare differences in sociodemographic characteristics, acculturation-related characteristics, and mobile health usage among recruitment methods. To further understand significant differences between recruitment methods, the Tukey test was used for post-hoc analyses of differences in pairs of means, while a Tukey-type procedure was used for post-hoc analyses of differences in pairs of proportions [ ]. Analyses were conducted in SAS 9.4 and Stata 15.1 and alpha levels were set at 0.05. Qualitative interview transcripts were uploaded to MAXQDA 2020. We used a hybrid approach of qualitative thematic analysis, which incorporated both 1) a deductive a priori template of codes and themes included in the interview guide and relevant literature and 2) a data-driven inductive approach that identified new emergent themes [ ]. Two coders (MV and DT) coded all transcripts independently. Coding results were compared and any discrepancies were resolved through discussion.

## Results

## Response rates
 summarizes the number of completed surveys as well as response rates with different venue.
 The overall response rate was 71.8% (range: 51.5% for Vietnamese CBOs to 86.6% for Facebook groups). shows the recruitment flowchart for the entire sample.
 shows the percentages of participants in the survey sample from different recruitment methods.
 

## Sample characteristics

## Sociodemographic characteristics
We found differences in all sociodemographic characteristics among recruitment methods ( ).
 On average, participants recruited through CBOs were the oldest (45 years). Post-hoc analyses show that, compared to those recruited through CBOs, a significantly higher proportion of those recruited through Facebook groups reported that they had a Bachelor’s degree or higher (66.2% versus 87.6%) and that their child was born outside of the U.S. (22.1% versus 70.1%). The distribution of education appeared similar between those recruited through Facebook groups, snowball sampling via Facebook groups, and the first author’s personal network.

## Acculturation-related characteristics
Except for a Vietnamese acculturation subscale (food consumption), we found significant differences in all acculturation-related characteristics among recruitment methods ( ).
 On average, Facebook groups-recruited participants and those referred by them had lived in the U.S. for the shortest durations, had the highest scores on the Vietnamese cultural knowledge and Vietnamese language subscales, and had the lowest scores on the American cultural identity, American cultural knowledge, and English language subscales. On average, personal network-recruited participants and those referred by them had the highest scores on the English language subscale and lived in zip codes with the lowest percentages of Vietnamese. Post-hoc analyses show that, compared to all other groups, participants recruited through CBOs had lived in the U.S. for the longest percentage of their lifetime (55.94) and had the lowest scores on the Vietnamese language subscale (3.76). Compared to those recruited through CBOs, those recruited through Facebook groups lived in zip codes with significantly lower percentages of Vietnamese (7.37 versus 3.24) and Asians (19.92 versus 12.70).

## Mobile health usage
We did not find any differences among recruitment methods regarding mobile health usage ( ). Overall, 77% reported daily use of a home computer to access the Internet and 92% reported daily use of a mobile device to access the Internet. Additionally, 89% and 88% of participants reported past 12-month use of a computer, smartphone, or other electronic means to look for health information for themselves and their children, respectively. A majority (60%) also reported past 12-month use of email or the Internet to communicate with doctors.

## Lessons learned in conducting online recruitment

## Handling fraudulent responses in online recruitment
At the beginning of data collection, we created public, non-unique links to the screener that participants could fill out to determine their eligibility. Participants would be automatically redirected to the main survey if they met all the eligibility criteria. However, we encountered problematic responses after these links were publicly shared on Facebook. A closer examination of the initial responses and a review of the literature regarding fraudsters in online survey recruitment [ ] led us to conclude that a majority of the initial responses were fraudulent.
These potentially fraudulent responses often followed these patterns: The provided email address generally indicated that both the participant’s first and last name were not Vietnamese (e.g., Robert Anderson). Occasionally, the IP address was outside of the U.S. despite the survey response indicating that they lived in the U.S. Responses from the same participant about their sociodemographic characteristics (e.g., age, zip code) in the screener and in the main survey were considerably different. In addition, we detected illogical patterns of responses (e.g., providing a year of immigration to the U.S. that was earlier than the year participant was born or much earlier than the end of the Vietnam War; responding that they had lived in Vietnam for the majority of their lives but indicated little fluency in Vietnamese).
Prior to launching the study, based on research team members’ previous experiences conducting Internet-based surveys, we had configured the survey to only accept one response per IP address. All the potentially fraudulent responses had different, unique IP addresses. After detecting these responses, we then implemented the reCAPTCHA system embedded in SurveyGizmo/Alchemer and asked participants to check a box that said, "I am not a robot." We still, however, received problematic responses after implementing the reCAPTCHA system.
To ensure reliable data quality, we then decided to not continue with using public, non-unique links to the screener. Instead, we asked CBOs to disseminate information about our study and have eligible members contact us via emails. Similarly, with recruitment through Facebook groups, listservs, and snowball sampling, we asked participants to contact us directly. Study team members who were fluent in English and Vietnamese monitored the mailboxes. For participants who contacted us, we first verified where they learned of the study (e.g., certain CBOs, Facebook groups, or previous participants). We also reiterated the eligibility criteria. For those who confirmed where they learned of the study and that they met the criteria, we privately emailed them unique, one-time use links to the screeners.

## Perceived benefits and trust as facilitators of research participation
Several participants remarked that they found our research project very meaningful. Specifically, many participants had limited knowledge of the HPV vaccine before completing the survey and reported that the project made them more aware of the benefits of the vaccine. For example, one interviewee stated: "I got my son vaccinated because I participated in your project and looked into the vaccine. Your research was a valuable source for me. Before that, I’d heard my friends talking about getting this vaccine to prevent cervical cancer, but it was all vague for me… So, your project came just in time." Another echoed the same sentiment: "Before filling out your survey, I didn’t know that boys should get the HPV vaccine too." In addition, a participant said: "This project is useful for me as it has helped me pay more attention to cervical cancer. I have heard about cervical cancer, but I have not paid much attention to the vaccine".
Snowball sampling appears to be a successful recruitment method. Many participants who found the project meaningful were enthusiastic in referring their eligible acquaintances, and several of those who were referred mentioned that they felt motivated to participate because their acquaintances had completed the survey. The information about the project that was included in introductory emails and messages also helped generate trust. The first author had included her name, credentials, past experiences with research in Vietnamese health, study funders, IRB approval, and contact information, in addition to study information (e.g., purpose, eligibility criteria, procedure, and compensation). Some participants noted that having such comprehensive information helped them trust that the responses they were providing would be used for research and health programs for Vietnamese communities and not for other purposes (e.g., for-profit purposes).

## Discussion
In this paper, we described the results of different online recruitment strategies of U.S. Vietnamese for a health research project as well as lessons drawn from conducting this project. To our knowledge, this paper is the first to present a variety of online recruitment strategies for U.S. Vietnamese and compare characteristics of participants among methods. While the overall response rate was high (72%), response rates varied among different recruitment methods. In addition, we found significant between-group differences in all sociodemographic characteristics and almost all acculturation-related characteristics. Mobile health use, however, appeared similar among recruitment methods. A considerable challenge during the recruitment process was encountering fraudulent responses. Moreover, participants’ perceived benefits and trust encouraged their research participation.
In general, response rates from CBOs were the lowest (e.g., 52% for Vietnamese-serving CBOs). While we made efforts to contact 320 CBOs (including VSAs) for recruitment, we received completed responses from participants from only 28 of those (i.e. less than 10%). A previous study noted similar difficulties in online recruitment of Korean-Americans through communities and groups catering to this population [ ]. Of 422 Korean-American communities and groups contacted, only 72 agreed to announce the study through their websites and email lists, and only 13 participants were recruited into the study [ ]. Research using online recruitment of Asian populations, especially those planning for a moderate sample size, should contact a high number of CBOs given these low observed response rates. Establishing relationships with gatekeepers (e.g., webmasters of online groups, directors of CBOs) may also be essential to facilitating recruitment [ ]. Two studies conducted during the COVID-19 pandemic (one with residents in rural areas in Mozambique [ ] and one with mothers who had experienced domestic violence in Canada [ ]) have also found that engagement with CBOs and stakeholders continued to be crucial for participant recruitment, even when researchers moved to remote data collection. At the same time, the pandemic likely created great disruptions to the activities of CBOs and exacerbated healthcare and social needs from community members [ ], all of which would put a strain on the operations of CBOs. This situation may explain the low response rates from CBOs in our study and researchers should be mindful of the limited time and effort that CBOs may be able to offer for research recruitment during a time of crisis.
In contrast to recruitment with CBOs, we received completed responses from participants from all Facebook groups where we advertised the study, with a high overall response rate (87%). Moreover, response rates for snowball sampling recruitment from either Facebook or the first author’s personal network were also high (76% and 73%, respectively). These results suggest the high feasibility of recruitment through Facebook groups or snowball sampling for U.S. Vietnamese populations during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Participants recruited through CBOs had lived in the U.S. for the longest duration and had the lowest Vietnamese language ability. When reviewing websites of Vietnamese-serving CBOs during recruitment, we noted that many were established between 1976 and mid-1990s. This period followed the Vietnam War, when hundreds of thousands of Vietnamese refugees left for the U.S.; it was also prior to the bilateral normalization of U.S.–Vietnam relations [ , ]. Participants recruited through CBOs may reflect the demographic of the groups that emigrated out of Vietnam in the earlier waves. Compared to those recruited through Facebook groups, those recruited through CBOs also lived in areas with higher concentration of Vietnamese and Asians, which are likely also places where CBOs are based. Moreover, given that Facebook groups that we selected operated in Vietnamese and were geared towards advice for Vietnamese living in the U.S., it is understandable that participants recruited through Facebook groups had lived in the U.S. for shorter durations, had higher Vietnamese language ability and lower English language ability, and had lower scores on American acculturation subscales.
Researchers looking to replicate these recruitment methods for future research studies in Vietnamese populations should be mindful of subgroup variability in terms of sociodemographic characteristics and acculturation-related characteristics, even within a cultural population (e.g., U.S. Vietnamese). For health promotion efforts in particular, these differences point to the need to consider tailored approaches to cultural appropriateness [ ]. Knowing a person’s educational background, level of Vietnamese cultural identity, degree of Vietnamese cultural knowledge, and ability to speak Vietnamese or English will facilitate crafting effective and resonating health messages [ ]. For example, in our sample, the majority of Facebook groups-recruited participants and those referred by them likely would require messages and programs in Vietnamese that leverage Vietnamese cultural information. In contrast, a considerable number of those recruited through CBOs and the first author’s personal network may prefer information in Vietnamese that incorporates Vietnamese culture but may also be open to receiving information in English given their higher English proficiency. Moreover, findings from our study highlight the complexity of the relationships between participants’ Vietnamese and American acculturation degrees, and consequently, the importance of including multidimensional acculturation-related measurements [ , ]. For example, lower Vietnamese acculturation does not necessarily mean higher American acculturation (and vice-versa), as on average, those recruited through the first author’s personal network had the highest scores for both Vietnamese and American cultural identity subscales.
To our knowledge, no research has examined mobile health usage among U.S. Vietnamese. Our study found no differences in mobile health usage among recruitment methods. Overall, more participants reported daily use of a mobile device than daily use of a computer to access the Internet, which has implications for the delivery mediums of research and interventions. In addition, nearly 9 out of 10 of participants reported past 12-month use of a computer, smartphone, or electronic means to look for health information for themselves and their children. This finding points to the potential for implementing mobile-based interventions to address health issues in U.S. Vietnamese.
We encountered fraudulent responses in the beginning, which we resolved by switching to manually verifying participants via emails first and then sending them unique screener links. While we believe this process helped ensure reliable data quality, it was also time-consuming and may have discouraged some participants (e.g., due to the need to send emails before they could participate in the study). Previous research with non-Asian populations has raised issues with fraudulent responses in online recruitment [ – ]. A growing body of literature is focusing on strategies to implement quality checks and identify fraudulent or automated responses in online survey research [ , – ]. These threats may be mitigated through methods such as assessing response coherence and consistency, including open-ended questions, and adding attention and logic checks [ , – ]. Aside from questionnaire data, researchers could also examine other information provided (e.g., emails and phone numbers) and look for similar/duplicate items or validate participants via phone prior to accepting the data [ ]. Having cultural knowledge of the targeted population was useful for our fraud detection, as we noticed patterns of non-Vietnamese names in email addresses and illogical responses.
Previous studies with Asian communities in the U.S. (including both online and non-online recruitment) have highlighted the value of cultural concordance in facilitating recruitment. For example, Im and colleagues described how they were able to contact Chinese-American communities and groups only after working with a Chinese-American research assistant, but not research assistants of other Asian subgroups [ ]. Mukherjea and colleagues also noted that respondents in their study had preferences for interviewers from the same South Asian regions, and that effective "cultural research brokers" are those that not only visibly and linguistically represented the community but also possessed credentials (e.g., advanced degrees) held in high regard by community members [ ]. Other studies have also reported a preference for culturally matched research personnel in Hawaiian and Filipino populations [ , ]. In our study, aside from being U.S. Vietnamese and fluent in the language, the first author had shared her credentials and past experiences with research in Vietnamese health with participants, which increased some participants’ trust in the project. In addition, a few also perceived gaining more knowledge about the HPV vaccine as an indirect benefit from study participation, which made them enthusiastic about referring others to the study. Recent systematic reviews have also documented knowledge gain and wanting to help others as facilitators of participation in research [ , ].
While, overall, our project had relative success in recruiting participants remotely during the COVID-19 pandemic, we note that remote data collection that relies on digital technologies is not always appropriate in every context and situation [ – ]. Researchers should consider how the pandemic may have affected the participants’ well-being and their ability to participate in research [ ]. In addition, while our participants did not voice concerns about technological barriers, multiple studies have demonstrated inequities in access to and ability to use mobile devices (e.g., smartphones, tablets, or laptops) for research participation along with challenges related to poor connectivity. Specifically, such issues have been documented in studies conducted during the COVID-19 pandemic with older adults in the U.S. and Italy [ , ], youth volunteers in Sudan [ ], and adults in Malawi and the United Kingdom [ , ].

## Limitations
Our results should be interpreted in light of a few limitations. We did not collect data on sociodemographic characteristics, acculturation, or mobile health usage of those who refused participation; therefore, we could not detect whether there were significant differences between those who chose to participate and those who did not. Additionally, we did not collect data on reasons why individuals refused participation.
While recruiting participants from existing social networks of research personnel has been used in several past studies with minority populations [ , , ], including Vietnamese [ ], given the prevalence of homophily [ ] in social networks (e.g., “tendency for friendships to form between those who are alike in some designated respect”) [ ], it is possible that personal network-recruited participants would share several similarities to the first author. For example, homophily may explain why personal network-recruited participants reported on average the highest level of English language proficiency. Future studies using similar methods should take into account the characteristics of the recruiters when determining the generalizability of research findings. Likewise, snowball sampling can lead to an overrepresentation of participants who share similarities or have larger social networks, consequently creating a sample that is unbalanced in several characteristics [ , , ]. Future research can consider employing respondent-driven sampling, which uses the chain-referral sample to make estimates about the social networks, and then uses the information about the social networks to derive population proportions [ , ]. Moreover, due to limited resources, for recruitment using Facebook, we posted about the study in relevant Facebook groups instead of using targeted Facebook advertising. While our approach had the advantage of bearing no direct costs, only members of the chosen Facebook groups had access to information about the study. The use of targeted Facebook advertising could have increased our reach to users who were not members of these groups.
Finally, the lack of sampling frames or population estimates for U.S. Vietnamese parents of adolescents prevents us from comparing estimates of our sample and those from the population. Our sample of parents of adolescents, on average, has higher socioeconomic status (e.g., income and education) compared to the 2019 American Community Survey data for all Vietnamese in the U.S. [ ].

## Conclusions
This paper presents a case study of multi-modal internet-based recruitment of U.S. Vietnamese into research. We found differences in sociodemographic and acculturation-related characteristics of participants drawn through different sources. Participants reported high mobile health usage among recruitment methods. Recruitment through Facebook groups and snowball sampling yielded high response rates, suggesting that these are feasible strategies to recruit U.S. Vietnamese. Perceived benefits and trust appear to be facilitators to study recruitment. Special attention should be paid to recruitment with CBOs and handling fraudulent responses. Our findings can inform future multi-modal data collection efforts for research with U.S. Vietnamese, Asian communities in the U.S., and other understudied populations in an international context.

 10.1371/journal.pone.0256074.r001Decision Letter 0
PikhartMarcelAcademic Editor© 2021 Marcel Pikhart2021Marcel Pikharthttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
14 Jun 2021

PONE-D-21-14089
Experience and lessons learned from multi-modal internet-based recruitment of U.S. Vietnamese into research
PLOS ONE
Dear Authors,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by 10 July 2021. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:

A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Marcel Pikhart
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. We note that the grant information you provided in the ‘Funding Information’ and ‘Financial Disclosure’ sections do not match.
When you resubmit, please ensure that you provide the correct grant numbers for the awards you received for your study in the ‘Funding Information’ section.
3.  We note that you have indicated that data from this study are available upon request. PLOS only allows data to be available upon request if there are legal or ethical restrictions on sharing data publicly. For more information on unacceptable data access restrictions, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions.
In your revised cover letter, please address the following prompts:
a) If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially sensitive information, data are owned by a third-party organization, etc.) and who has imposed them (e.g., an ethics committee). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent.
b) If there are no restrictions, please upload the minimal anonymized data set necessary to replicate your study findings as either Supporting Information files or to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. For a list of acceptable repositories, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-recommended-repositories.
We will update your Data Availability statement on your behalf to reflect the information you provide.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: No
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Thank you for giving me this opportunity to review the paper. I completely agree with the authors that studying the Asian American population is critical and underdeveloped in current research. This paper could potentially be valuable in achieving this goal, but I do think it needs clarification on the following points.
1. The paper’s focus switches between the Asian population and the Vietnamese-Asian population. My largest question is which of these findings on recruitment are specific to studying the Vietnamese-Asian population, which of these are specific to studying the Asian population, and which of the findings are applicable to studying all people? For example, the paper mentions this paragraph on the lessons regarding snowball sampling: “Snowball sampling appears to be a successful recruitment method. Many participants who found the project meaningful were enthusiastic in referring their eligible acquaintances, and several of those who were referred mentioned that they felt motivated to participate because their acquaintances had completed the survey” (p. 21). Is this lesson specific to Asian recruitment? Or is it applicable to non-Asian Americans as well? Put differently, if we used snowball sampling to recruit Latino/a people, would we also expect participants to find the project meaningful and share their enthusiasm? I think the paper would be stronger if the authors cut the parts that are not particularly relevant for the recruitment of the Asian population. After all, the study of Asian Americans is the biggest value of this paper.
2. I’m not sure about why mobile health was included as one of the research dimensions, as the other aspects (i.e., demographics and acculturation) are more relevant to this paper’s focus on ethnicity. Are there special things that researchers should be aware of when concerning Asian people’s mobile health? If so, what are they and how are these issues related to recruitment? I think the reader would appreciate some more clarifications.
3. My third question is the validity of the findings regarding the “personal networks” recruitment method, which is substantial in the paper. Specifically, I’m wondering whether the findings are because of the characteristics of the recruiter. Recruitment through personal networks depends highly on who is the recruiter. The people recruited would likely share similarities with the recruiter (in other words, “homophily” in the network literature). In this case, the recruiters are highly educated researchers, and thus one would expect a network of highly educated people. It is thus no surprise that this subsample had the highest scores on the English language subscale (p. 19). However, is this finding generalizable to other researchers who use the method? The other findings are similarly suspect. For instance, if a researcher asked a community organization with low education members to recruit participants, would one expect the same results (either regarding English, zip codes, or other patterns)?
If the authors can successfully clean up some of the confusions, the paper would make a contribution to the literature on studying the Asian American population.
Reviewer #2: Abstract
The ABSTRACT is well written, addressing the investigated problems intelligently.
Introduction
The INTRODUCTION is also well-structured, highlighting the problems of drawing samples from online data collection approach eloquently. Besides, the existing literature is well-documented to justify the research questions raised by the authors.
Materials and methods
The reviewer really appreciates the METHODOLOGY, as the authors have already addressed the limitations of doing this research. However, the authors are requested to delete “: Survey” from the Recruitment procedures as the study is based on survey only. Furthermore, the authors are requested to specify the sampling procedure for ‘community-based organizations,’ ‘Facebook groups’ and so on, except for ‘snowball sampling’ group. The authors are advised to use a sub-heading ‘Measurement’ under which they are requested to place ‘Sociodemographic characteristics,’ ‘Acculturation-related characteristics’ and ‘Mobile health usage,’ instead of repeating Measurement for each sub-heading.
It is not clear how did the authors select the participants for interviews, how and what tools they used to interview for participants for qualitative interviews.
The authors are requested to specify the procedures of interviewing the participants for qualitative interview – whether it was face-to-face, or telephonic or other procedure of data collection maintain social distancing.
Results
The results are well presented and pointed out some critical issues regarding the short-falls and advantages of using internet-based recruitment of participants during the COVID-19.
Discussion
The reviewer also appreciates the DISCUSSION penned by the authors. Yet, the DISCUSSION lacks recent empirical evidence regarding the problems that are critical to understand the ongoing situation of recruiting participants during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Conclusion
Th author are requested to point out whether this study is generalizable to other countries or not, and how other nations could cope with the emerging problems of the online recruitment during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Others
The authors are requested to follow the PLoS ONE reference style properly. Many citations did not comply with the reference style suggested by PLoS ONE.
Reviewer #3: The goal of this paper is to assess different forms of recruiting Vietnamese participants online. The paper does a good job in describing the many different types of recruiting the researchers did. However, I see two main ways that the paper can be improved: (1) The authors could do more to analyze the strengths and drawbacks of each method in relation to one another. For example, they have a section that says that snowball sampling is a good method to use, however, there is no discussion of the drawbacks of this method. Importantly, there is no discussion in the paper of what particular sub-sample of the Vietnamese population the authors are able to recruit, and the drawbacks of not being able to know how representative any of these subsamples are of the overall Vietnamese population. If the authors believe that getting representative samples is simply too difficult, it would be useful to understand more about why – is it because the population is very small, is it because this is a group that is just very hard to reach, etc. Or, perhaps these findings shed light on how representative samples of Vietnamese groups in the US can be reached. (2) The paper seems to be about health and health information, but there is very little description or tie-in to health. There are some brief mentions of the HPV study, however, the paper would be strengthened by a richer literature review of how better health information or services could benefit this population, and what is learned in particular about these various types of recruiting for challenges in health among Vietnamese populations.
A few more specific comments are below:
1. Intro:
a. The authors specify that “Asian-Americans” refers to Vietnamese, Korean, Chinese individuals – it is not clear if that is in the context of this paper alone, or across studies. This term is often used for other groups also. The statistics in the first paragraph do not make clear which subgroups are included and which are not. Perhaps change to “(e.g. Vietnamese, Korean, Chinese, etc.).
b. The motivation for using community surveys to reach Asian language speaking individuals is noted, but what fraction of Asians is this?
c. The motivation that it is difficult to reach this group, that online data collection is going to be hard because community events are not a possibility anymore due to COVID – this is all important. It would be helpful to have some background on studies that show information on how this group of non-English speaking Asians is different – like health utilization? Discrimination? Income? Social service usage? Just saying that Asians are the fastest growing population is a bit odd if then the focus is on this non-English speaking group.
d. And then the focus become Vietnamese. This makes sense given that they have lower English proficiency, lower income and education, etc. But the authors link this to barriers to health service utilization. The connection to health services is not made clear. That should be fleshed out much more, that the primary concern here is health service utilization.
e. Very little time in the intro is spent describing the HPV vaccine study. It would be good to flesh this out more too, to talk about how not having information from non-English speaking individuals could lead to incorrect results in a study like this.
2. Methods:
a. If only one parent per household was allowed to participate, would they have had the more English fluent person participate? Does this skew results?
3. Results:
a. It would be helpful to know how those who refused looked in terms of SES and other characteristics. Why did they refuse?
b. The authors describe the differences in SES and in acculturation-related characteristics, but do not explore what this might mean to the results. A fuller analysis would strengthen the paper.
c. In Table 3 - There is no description of the scale used for the acculturation measure, thus it is unclear what a score of 3.95 or 4.65 mean in relation to one another.
d. In Table 3 - Again here it would be helpful to know exactly how “Asian” is defined
e. In Table 3 and in text – consider separating out “mobile health usage” and “mobile phone usage”
f. It is not clear where the results of the chi-square tests/tukey tests are reported in looking at differences across sociodemographic and other characteristics, or differences in pairs of means.
g. Also, it would be great to have more details from the qualitative study. I believe there is only a single quote in the paper, but more details from the qualitative work could make the paper
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes: Md. Tanvir Hossain
Reviewer #3: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Reviewers comments.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0256074.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
17 Jul 2021

1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

AUTHORS: We have revised accordingly to ensure that the manuscript meets the style requirements. 
2. We note that the grant information you provided in the ‘Funding Information’ and ‘Financial Disclosure’ sections do not match.
When you resubmit, please ensure that you provide the correct grant numbers for the awards you received for your study in the ‘Funding Information’ section.
AUTHORS: We have revised accordingly to make sure the correct grant numbers are reflected. 
3. We note that you have indicated that data from this study are available upon request. PLOS only allows data to be available upon request if there are legal or ethical restrictions on sharing data publicly. For more information on unacceptable data access restrictions, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions.
In your revised cover letter, please address the following prompts:
a) If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially sensitive information, data are owned by a third-party organization, etc.) and who has imposed them (e.g., an ethics committee). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent.
b) If there are no restrictions, please upload the minimal anonymized data set necessary to replicate your study findings as either Supporting Information files or to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. For a list of acceptable repositories, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-recommended-repositories. We will update your Data Availability statement on your behalf to reflect the information you provide.
AUTHORS: We have clarified: "The data that support the findings of this study are available upon reasonable request and with the approval of Emory University Institutional Review Board (IRB 00111688). The data are not publicly available as it contains information that could compromise the privacy of research participants. In particular, given that participants are Vietnamese parents of adolescents (a small, specific population), and that the dataset contains their zip code, making the data available can risk the possibility of participants being identified. Please see more information here: http://www.irb.emory.edu/documents/phi_identifiers.pdf
Please contact the lead author, MV, as well as the Institutional Review Board at Emory University, with any request for data access (milkie.vu@emory.edu and IRB@emory.edu)." 
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
________________________________________
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: No
________________________________________
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
________________________________________
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
________________________________________
5. Review Comments to the Author
Reviewer #1: Thank you for giving me this opportunity to review the paper. I completely agree with the authors that studying the Asian American population is critical and underdeveloped in current research. This paper could potentially be valuable in achieving this goal, but I do think it needs clarification on the following points.
1. The paper’s focus switches between the Asian population and the Vietnamese-Asian population. My largest question is which of these findings on recruitment are specific to studying the Vietnamese-Asian population, which of these are specific to studying the Asian population, and which of the findings are applicable to studying all people? For example, the paper mentions this paragraph on the lessons regarding snowball sampling: “Snowball sampling appears to be a successful recruitment method. Many participants who found the project meaningful were enthusiastic in referring their eligible acquaintances, and several of those who were referred mentioned that they felt motivated to participate because their acquaintances had completed the survey” (p. 21). Is this lesson specific to Asian recruitment? Or is it applicable to non-Asian Americans as well? Put differently, if we used snowball sampling to recruit Latino/a people, would we also expect participants to find the project meaningful and share their enthusiasm? I think the paper would be stronger if the authors cut the parts that are not particularly relevant for the recruitment of the Asian population. After all, the study of Asian Americans is the biggest value of this paper.
AUTHORS: Thank you very much for these comments. To address this point, we have removed two paragraphs from the Introduction and Discussion that are broad and not specific to our populations. At the same time, we want to emphasize that there is very little research that describes online recruitment strategies specifically for U.S. Vietnamese. Consequently, we needed to draw on the body of research with other Asian subgroups and consult other literature on online recruitment with general populations. Our manuscript, as you suggested, provides information on findings applicable to the recruitment of U.S. Vietnamese and attempts to contextualize these findings in a broader literature on the recruitment of Asian-Americans into research studies.
Several findings, such as the sociodemographic and acculturation-related differences between those recruited via community-based organizations and those recruited via Facebook groups, are more specific to the history of migration and social patterns of U.S. Vietnamese. Findings related to low response rates from community-based organizations and the role of cultural concordance in facilitating recruitment have been noted in other studies with Asian-Americans. Issues with encountering fraudulent responses are a growing challenge with online recruitment and have been reported in research with different populations. As you suggested, research with other populations has also documented the effectiveness of snowball sampling. 
We believe that in this manuscript, it is important to report on findings specific to the recruitment of U.S. Vietnamese as well as several findings that may be generalized to the recruitment of Asians and even other populations. For example, it is critical for researchers embarking on future studies of U.S. Vietnamese or Asian-Americans to know about possible fraudulent responses in online research so they can take appropriate measures to counter this threat. In the manuscript, we reported on the relatively higher response rates from snowball sampling recruitment compared to recruitment from community organizations and commented on the utility of snowball sampling. Again, this information will be useful for others who are conducting future research with U.S. Vietnamese or Asian-Americans. 
2. I’m not sure about why mobile health was included as one of the research dimensions, as the other aspects (i.e., demographics and acculturation) are more relevant to this paper’s focus on ethnicity. Are there special things that researchers should be aware of when concerning Asian people’s mobile health? If so, what are they and how are these issues related to recruitment? I think the reader would appreciate some more clarifications.
AUTHORS: Thank you for these questions. We have added more information about why we collected data on mobile health usage: "Given the critical role of digital technologies in facilitating data collection during the COVID-19 pandemic, these data can indicate whether access to the Internet (and, consequently, ability to participate in online data collection) differs across participants from different recruitment methods and potentially explain differences in response rates. In addition, they can also provide information on the possible receptiveness of participants to research and interventions leveraging mobile health technologies." 
3. My third question is the validity of the findings regarding the “personal networks” recruitment method, which is substantial in the paper. Specifically, I’m wondering whether the findings are because of the characteristics of the recruiter. Recruitment through personal networks depends highly on who is the recruiter. The people recruited would likely share similarities with the recruiter (in other words, “homophily” in the network literature). In this case, the recruiters are highly educated researchers, and thus one would expect a network of highly educated people. It is thus no surprise that this subsample had the highest scores on the English language subscale (p. 19). However, is this finding generalizable to other researchers who use the method? The other findings are similarly suspect. For instance, if a researcher asked a community organization with low education members to recruit participants, would one expect the same results (either regarding English, zip codes, or other patterns)?
AUTHORS: Thank you for these suggestions. Out of our sample of 408 participants, around 10% (n=42) were recruited from the first author's personal network. We agree with your point about homophily in social network research and have added to the Limitation section: "While recruiting participants from existing social networks of research personnel has been used in several past studies with minority populations (1–3), including Vietnamese (4), given the prevalence of homophily (5) in social networks (e.g., “tendency for friendships to form between those who are alike in some designated respect”) (6), it is possible that personal network-recruited participants would share several similarities to the first author. For example, homophily may explain why personal network-recruited participants reported on average the highest level of English language proficiency. Future studies using similar methods should take into account the characteristics of the recruiters when determining the generalizability of research findings." 
In our original submission, we also noted several characteristics of the first author that may have positively influenced the recruitment process, such as her experience in research with U.S. Vietnamese and her culturally matched background with the research population. 
Regarding your point about recruiting through community organizations, this was one of the approaches we had used. To achieve a diversity of participants, we had attempted to contact an extensive number of organizations (115 Vietnamese-serving CBOs, 91 Asian-serving CBOs, and 114 VSAs). These organizations then helped connect us to eligible and interested study participants. We expect that if another researcher replicates such methodology for a study with U.S. Vietnamese, they would find similar results regarding the sociodemographic and acculturation of CBO-recruited participants. 
If the authors can successfully clean up some of the confusions, the paper would make a contribution to the literature on studying the Asian American population.
Reviewer #2: 
Abstract
The ABSTRACT is well written, addressing the investigated problems intelligently.
Introduction
The INTRODUCTION is also well-structured, highlighting the problems of drawing samples from online data collection approach eloquently. Besides, the existing literature is well-documented to justify the research questions raised by the authors.
Materials and methods
The reviewer really appreciates the METHODOLOGY, as the authors have already addressed the limitations of doing this research. However, the authors are requested to delete “: Survey” from the Recruitment procedures as the study is based on survey only. Furthermore, the authors are requested to specify the sampling procedure for ‘community-based organizations,’ ‘Facebook groups’ and so on, except for ‘snowball sampling’ group. The authors are advised to use a sub-heading ‘Measurement’ under which they are requested to place ‘Sociodemographic characteristics,’ ‘Acculturation-related characteristics’ and ‘Mobile health usage,’ instead of repeating Measurement for each sub-heading.
AUTHORS: Thank you for these suggestions. We have added: "Convenience sampling was used for all recruitment methods." 
We specified two subheadings "Recruitment procedures: Survey" and "Recruitment procedures: Interviews" to distinguish between recruitment for the survey and recruitment of a subset of survey respondents for the interviews. Per your comment about the subheadings for "Measurements," we have revised accordingly and also attended to PlosOne's manuscript convention in which there are only three levels of subheadings.
It is not clear how did the authors select the participants for interviews, how and what tools they used to interview for participants for qualitative interviews. The authors are requested to specify the procedures of interviewing the participants for qualitative interview – whether it was face-to-face, or telephonic or other procedure of data collection maintain social distancing.
AUTHORS: We have added: "Between November 2020 and February 2021, we invited a subset of participants who had already completed the survey to participate in in-depth, semi-structured qualitative interviews. We purposively sampled participants and stratified the sample of interviewees by their adolescent child's sex (female versus male) and HPV vaccination status. For selected potential interviewees, we send each of them an email with information about the interviews and a consent form. Depending on participants' preferences, interviews were conducted in either Vietnamese or English and via telephone or the Zoom platform."
Results
The results are well presented and pointed out some critical issues regarding the short-falls and advantages of using internet-based recruitment of participants during the COVID-19.
Discussion
The reviewer also appreciates the DISCUSSION penned by the authors. Yet, the DISCUSSION lacks recent empirical evidence regarding the problems that are critical to understand the ongoing situation of recruiting participants during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Conclusion
The author are requested to point out whether this study is generalizable to other countries or not, and how other nations could cope with the emerging problems of the online recruitment during the COVID-19 pandemic.
AUTHORS: To address these comments, we have added two paragraphs to the Discussion: "Two studies conducted during the COVID-19 pandemic (one with residents in rural areas in Mozambique (7) and one with mothers who had experienced domestic violence in Canada (8)) have also found that engagement with CBOs and stakeholders continued to be crucial for participant recruitment, even when researchers moved to remote data collection. At the same time, the pandemic likely created great disruptions to the activities of CBOs and exacerbated healthcare and social needs from community members (9), all of which would put a strain on the operations of CBOs. This situation may explain the low response rates from CBOs in our study. Future research should be mindful of the limited time and efforts that CBOs may be able to offer for research recruitment during a time of crisis."
"While, overall, our project had relative success in recruiting participants remotely during the COVID-19 pandemic, we note that remote data collection that relies on digital technologies is not always appropriate in every context and situation (10–12). Researchers should consider how the pandemic may have affected the participants' well-being and their ability to participate in research (12). In addition, while our participants did not voice concerns about technological barriers, multiple studies had demonstrated inequities in access to and ability to use mobile devices (e.g., smartphones, tablets, or laptops) for research participation along with challenges related to poor connectivity. Specifically, such issues have been documented in studies conducted during the COVID-19 pandemic with older adults in the U.S. and Italy (13,14), youth volunteers in Sudan (15), and adults in Malawi and the United Kingdom (12,15)."
 We have also added to the Conclusion: "Our findings can inform future multi-modal data collection efforts for research with U.S. Vietnamese, Asian communities in the U.S., and other understudied populations in an international context."
Others
The authors are requested to follow the PLoS ONE reference style properly. Many citations did not comply with the reference style suggested by PLoS ONE.
AUTHORS: We used a reference software (Mendeley) to manage our references. We have reviewed and made sure the paper adheres to the PLoSOne reference style. 
Reviewer #3: The goal of this paper is to assess different forms of recruiting Vietnamese participants online. The paper does a good job in describing the many different types of recruiting the researchers did. However, I see two main ways that the paper can be improved: 
(1) The authors could do more to analyze the strengths and drawbacks of each method in relation to one another. For example, they have a section that says that snowball sampling is a good method to use, however, there is no discussion of the drawbacks of this method. 
AUTHORS: Thank you for these remarks. We have added: "While recruiting participants from existing social networks of research personnel has been used in several past studies with minority populations (1–3), including Vietnamese (4), given the prevalence of homophily (5) in social networks (e.g., “tendency for friendships to form between those who are alike in some designated respect”) (6), it is possible that personal network-recruited participants would share several similarities to the first author. For example, homophily may explain why personal network-recruited participants reported on average the highest level of English language proficiency. Future studies using similar methods should take into account the characteristics of the recruiters when determining the generalizability of research findings. Likewise, snowball sampling can lead to an overrepresentation of participants who share similarities or have larger social networks, consequently creating a sample that is unbalanced in several characteristics (3,16,17). Future research can consider employing respondent-driven sampling, which uses the chain-referral sample to make estimates about the social networks, and then uses the information about the social networks to derive population proportions (17,18). Moreover, due to limited resources, for recruitment using Facebook, we posted about the study in relevant Facebook groups instead of using targeted Facebook advertising. While our approach had the advantage of bearing no direct costs, only members of the chosen Facebook groups had access to information about the study. The use of targeted Facebook advertising could have increased our reach to users who were not members of these groups."
 In the original submission, we had also discussed some of the advantages and drawbacks of recruiting from the first author's personal network and from community-based organizations. 
Importantly, there is no discussion in the paper of what particular sub-sample of the Vietnamese population the authors are able to recruit, and the drawbacks of not being able to know how representative any of these subsamples are of the overall Vietnamese population. If the authors believe that getting representative samples is simply too difficult, it would be useful to understand more about why – is it because the population is very small, is it because this is a group that is just very hard to reach, etc. Or, perhaps these findings shed light on how representative samples of Vietnamese groups in the US can be reached. 
AUTHORS: Thank you for these questions. We are addressing them in our reply to your point in 1.e. (please see below). In addition, we have also added: "The lack of sampling frames or population estimates for U.S. Vietnamese parents of adolescents prevents us from comparing estimates of our sample and those from the population. Our sample of parents of adolescents, on average, has higher socioeconomic status (e.g., income and education) compared to the 2019 American Community Survey data for all Vietnamese in the U.S. (19)"
(2) The paper seems to be about health and health information, but there is very little description or tie-in to health. There are some brief mentions of the HPV study, however, the paper would be strengthened by a richer literature review of how better health information or services could benefit this population, and what is learned in particular about these various types of recruiting for challenges in health among Vietnamese populations.
AUTHORS: Thank you for these questions. We are addressing them in our reply to your point in 1.e. (please see below). 
A few more specific comments are below:
1. Intro:
a. The authors specify that “Asian-Americans” refers to Vietnamese, Korean, Chinese individuals – it is not clear if that is in the context of this paper alone, or across studies. This term is often used for other groups also. The statistics in the first paragraph do not make clear which subgroups are included and which are not. Perhaps change to “(e.g. Vietnamese, Korean, Chinese, etc.)
AUTHORS: Thank you for this comment. To avoid misunderstanding, we have changed this sentence to: "Moreover, when Asian-American participants are included, research typically aggregates Asian subgroups into one single category (20–22) instead of providing data for separate subgroups."
b. The motivation for using community surveys to reach Asian language speaking individuals is noted, but what fraction of Asians is this?
AUTHORS: We have added: "According to the 2019 American Community Survey, 74% and 31% of the Asian population in the U.S. reported that they spoke a language other than English and that they spoke English less than "very well," respectively (23)."
c. The motivation that it is difficult to reach this group, that online data collection is going to be hard because community events are not a possibility anymore due to COVID – this is all important. It would be helpful to have some background on studies that show information on how this group of non-English speaking Asians is different – like health utilization? Discrimination? Income? Social service usage? Just saying that Asians are the fastest growing population is a bit odd if then the focus is on this non-English speaking group.
AUTHORS: Thank you for this suggestion. We have added: "The literature has demonstrated several differences between Asians with and without lower English proficiency. In particular, compared to Asians with higher English proficiency, Asians with lower English proficiency have higher psychological distress (24,25), higher unmet healthcare needs (26), poorer quality of life and health (27,28), more limited access to care (26) and are less likely to adhere to screening guidelines (29) or receive and use health services (25,30)."
d. And then the focus become Vietnamese. This makes sense given that they have lower English proficiency, lower income and education, etc. But the authors link this to barriers to health service utilization. The connection to health services is not made clear. That should be fleshed out much more, that the primary concern here is health service utilization.
AUTHORS: We have added: " Indeed, a body of literature has documented lower utilization of various health services among U.S. Vietnamese when compared to other major Asian subgroups. For example, compared to Chinese and Korean populations in the U.S., fewer U.S. Vietnamese have a personal doctor as a main healthcare provider (31), have ever been tested for Hepatitis B (32), or have ever had colorectal screening (33). Moreover, a higher proportion of U.S. Vietnamese women have never had a Pap smear compared to Chinese and Cambodian women (34). Additionally, fewer U.S. Vietnamese women on average have ever sought mental health services compared to Chinese women or Filipino women in the U.S (35)."
e. Very little time in the intro is spent describing the HPV vaccine study. It would be good to flesh this out more too, to talk about how not having information from non-English speaking individuals could lead to incorrect results in a study like this.
AUTHORS: Thank you for this suggestion as well as the above request to bring in more information about the challenges in obtaining representative samples of U.S. Vietnamese. We have added: "U.S. Vietnamese have higher cervical cancer incidence rates than other racial/ethnic groups (36–39). A solution to reduce cervical cancer burden in this population is HPV vaccination. Unfortunately, our understanding of HPV vaccination among U.S. Vietnamese is limited, partly because large national probability surveys on HPV vaccine uptake in the U.S. typically do not supply separate statistics for U.S. Vietnamese. For example, the National Immunization Survey – Teen and the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System, both of which provide estimates on HPV vaccine uptake, aggregate "Vietnamese" under the category of "Asians" and do not provide disaggregated Asian subgroup data in public-use datasets (40–42). The Health Information National Trends Survey (HINTS), which examines knowledge of the HPV vaccine, reports separate data for Vietnamese in some cycles but not all; the sample sizes for Vietnamese in the public-use datasets are also relatively small (~1%) which can hinder meaningful statistical modeling (43). Importantly, none of these surveys includes Vietnamese language versions of their questionnaires, which can be a major obstacle to research participation for U.S. Vietnamese with low English proficiency. In the context of research with HPV vaccination, this issue is particularly problematic, given that U.S. Vietnamese women with lower English proficiency also had lower HPV vaccine uptake (44). Consequently, excluding those with low English proficiency could bias estimates of HPV vaccine uptake and lead to an incomplete understanding of barriers underlying HPV vaccination in this population." 
2. Methods:
a. If only one parent per household was allowed to participate, would they have had the more English fluent person participate? Does this skew results?
AUTHORS: Thank you for this question. The survey was available in both English and Vietnamese. We have added more information about the translation process: "We used the Brislin’s back-translation method (45), an iterative translation process involving an independent translation of survey questions into Vietnamese and back-translation into English by two different translators, and then reviewed by the first author (who is fully fluent in both languages) and by approximately 10 Vietnamese native speakers to ensure comprehensibility."
3. Results:
a. It would be helpful to know how those who refused looked in terms of SES and other characteristics. Why did they refuse?
AUTHORS: Unfortunately, since SES and other characteristics were self-reported in the survey, we did not have these data from those who refused participation and therefore could not characterize this group. We also did not collect data on why eligible individuals may have refused to participate. We have added to the Limitations section: "We did not collect data on sociodemographic characteristics, acculturation, or mobile health usage of those who refused participation; therefore, we could not detect whether there were significant differences between those who chose to participate and those who did not. Additionally, we did not collect data on reasons why individuals refused participation."
b. The authors describe the differences in SES and in acculturation-related characteristics, but do not explore what this might mean to the results. A fuller analysis would strengthen the paper.
AUTHORS: We have added: "Researchers looking to replicate these recruitment methods for future research studies in Vietnamese populations should be mindful of subgroup variability in terms of sociodemographic characteristics and acculturation-related characteristics, even within a cultural population (e.g., U.S. Vietnamese). For health promotion efforts in particular, these differences point to the need to consider tailored approaches to cultural appropriateness (46). Knowing a person's educational background, level of Vietnamese cultural identity, degree of Vietnamese cultural knowledge, and ability to speak Vietnamese or English will facilitate crafting effective and resonating health messages (46). For example, in our sample, the majority of Facebook groups-recruited participants and those referred by them likely would require messages and programs in Vietnamese that leverage Vietnamese cultural information. In contrast, a considerable number of those recruited through CBOs and the first author's personal network may prefer information in Vietnamese that incorporates Vietnamese culture but may also be open to receiving information in English given their higher English proficiency. Moreover, findings from our study highlight the complexity of the relationships between participants' Vietnamese and American acculturation degrees, and consequently, the importance of including multidimensional acculturation-related measurements (47,48). For example, lower Vietnamese acculturation does not necessarily mean higher American acculturation (and vice-versa), as on average, those recruited through the first author's personal network had the highest scores for both Vietnamese and American cultural identity subscales."
c. In Table 3 - There is no description of the scale used for the acculturation measure, thus it is unclear what a score of 3.95 or 4.65 mean in relation to one another.
AUTHORS: We have added: "We also used the Asian American Multidimensional Acculturation Scale (15 items for each culture) (49) to separately assess cultural identity (6 items), cultural knowledge (3 items), language (4 items), and food consumption (2 items) for Vietnamese culture and American culture. Examples of questions included: "How much do you interact and associate with [Vietnamese people]/[typical American people]?"; "How much do you actually practice the traditions and keep the holidays of [Vietnamese culture]/[mainstream American culture]?"; "How well do you speak [Vietnamese]/[English]?"; and "How often do you actually eat [Vietnamese food]/[the food of mainstream American culture]?" Each item was scored on a 6-point Likert scale (0 – Not very much to 5 – Very much). A higher subscale score, derived as an average across subscale items, indicated higher cultural identity, cultural knowledge, language ability, or food consumption."
d. In Table 3 - Again here it would be helpful to know exactly how “Asian” is defined.
AUTHORS: We mentioned in the Methods section of the original submission: "We asked about participants' zip code and used data from the 2019 American Community Survey (19) to construct two variables capturing zip code-level percentage of Asians and percentage of Vietnamese." The zip code-level percentage of Asians is a variable listed in Table 3 and constructed from the 2019 American Community Survey data. 
e. In Table 3 and in text – consider separating out “mobile health usage” and “mobile phone usage.”
AUTHORS: We have separated this section per your suggestion into "daily use of mobile devices to access the Internet" and "past 12-month use of mobile health."
f. It is not clear where the results of the chi-square tests/tukey tests are reported in looking at differences across sociodemographic and other characteristics, or differences in pairs of means.
AUTHORS: Thank you for this question. As we described in the original submission, we used the chi-square tests and one-way analyses of variance to examine significant differences across sociodemographic characteristics, acculturation-related characteristics, and mobile health usage among recruitment methods. For any variables significant at the 0.05 level (described in the text of the Results section and shown in the p value columns of Table 2 and 3), we then conducted post-hoc analyses (the Tukey test for differences in pairs of means and a Tukey-type procedure for differences in pairs of proportions). Key findings from the post-hoc analyses are discussed in the text of the Results section, beginning with "Post-hoc analyses show that..."
g. Also, it would be great to have more details from the qualitative study. I believe there is only a single quote in the paper, but more details from the qualitative work could make the paper
AUTHORS: Thank you for this suggestion. We have added: "Another echoed the same sentiment: "Before filling out your survey, I didn’t know that boys should get the HPV vaccine too." In addition, a participant said: "This project is useful for me as it has helped me pay more attention to cervical cancer. I have heard about cervical cancer, but I have not paid much attention to the vaccine."
REFERENCES
1. Redmond N, Harker L, Bamps Y, Flemming SSC, Perryman JP, Thompson NJ, et al. Implementation of a Web-Based Organ Donation Educational Intervention: Development and Use of a Refined Process Evaluation Model. J Med Internet Res [Internet]. 2017 Nov 30;19(11):e396. Available from: http://www.jmir.org/2017/11/e396/
2. Rodriguez MD, Rodriguez J, Davis M. Recruitment of First-Generation Latinos in a Rural Community: The Essential Nature of Personal Contact. Fam Process [Internet]. 2006 Mar;45(1):87–100. Available from: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/j.1545-5300.2006.00082.x
3. Browne K. Snowball sampling: using social networks to research non‐heterosexual women. Int J Soc Res Methodol [Internet]. 2005 Feb;8(1):47–60. Available from: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/1364557032000081663
4. Tung W-C, Nguyen DHT, Tran DN. Applying the transtheoretical model to cervical cancer screening in Vietnamese-American women. Int Nurs Rev [Internet]. 2008 Mar;55(1):73–80. Available from: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/j.1466-7657.2007.00602.x
5. Block P, Grund T. Multidimensional homophily in friendship networks. Netw Sci [Internet]. 2014 Aug 3;2(2):189–212. Available from: https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/identifier/S2050124214000174/type/journal_article
6. Lazarsfeld P, Merton RK. Friendship as a Social Process: A Substantive and Methodological Analysis. In: Berger M., Abel T., Charles H, editors. Freedom and Control in Modern Society. New York: Van Nostrand; 1954. p. 18–66. 
7. Magaço A, Munguambe K, Nhacolo A, Ambrósio C, Nhacolo F, Cossa S, et al. Challenges and needs for social behavioural research and community engagement activities during the COVID-19 pandemic in rural Mozambique. Glob Public Health [Internet]. 2021 Jan 2;16(1):153–7. Available from: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/17441692.2020.1839933
8. Archer-Kuhn B, Beltrano NR, Hughes J, Saini M, Tam D. Recruitment in response to a pandemic: pivoting a community-based recruitment strategy to facebook for hard-to-reach populations during COVID-19. Int J Soc Res Methodol [Internet]. 2021 Jun 16;1–12. Available from: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/13645579.2021.1941647
9. Health Management Associates. Community Based Organizations and COVID-19 [Internet]. [cited 2021 Jun 30]. Available from: https://www.healthmanagement.com/services/covid-19-resources-support/community-based-organization-needs/
10. Grantz KH, Meredith HR, Cummings DAT, Metcalf CJE, Grenfell BT, Giles JR, et al. The use of mobile phone data to inform analysis of COVID-19 pandemic epidemiology. Nat Commun [Internet]. 2020 Dec 30;11(1):4961. Available from: http://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-020-18190-5
11. Douedari Y, Alhaffar M, Duclos D, Al-Twaish M, Jabbour S, Howard N. ‘We need someone to deliver our voices’: reflections from conducting remote qualitative research in Syria. Confl Health [Internet]. 2021 Dec 17;15(1):28. Available from: https://conflictandhealth.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13031-021-00361-w
12. Rahman SA, Tuckerman L, Vorley T, Gherhes C. Resilient Research in the Field: Insights and Lessons From Adapting Qualitative Research Projects During the COVID-19 Pandemic. Int J Qual Methods [Internet]. 2021 Jan 1;20:160940692110161. Available from: http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/16094069211016106
13. Brody AA, Convery KA, Kline DM, Fink RM, Fischer SM. Transitioning to Remote Recruitment and Intervention: A Tale of Two Palliative Care Research Studies Enrolling Underserved Populations during COVID-19. J Pain Symptom Manage [Internet]. 2021 Jun; Available from: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0885392421004000
14. Melis G, Sala E, Zaccaria D. Remote recruiting and video-interviewing older people: a research note on a qualitative case study carried out in the first Covid-19 Red Zone in Europe. Int J Soc Res Methodol [Internet]. 2021 Apr 15;1–7. Available from: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/13645579.2021.1913921
15. Hensen B, Mackworth-Young CRS, Simwinga M, Abdelmagid N, Banda J, Mavodza C, et al. Remote data collection for public health research in a COVID-19 era: ethical implications, challenges and opportunities. Health Policy Plan [Internet]. 2021 Apr 21;36(3):360–8. Available from: https://academic.oup.com/heapol/article/36/3/360/6130108
16. Sadler GR, Lee H-C, Lim RS-H, Fullerton J. Research Article: Recruitment of hard-to-reach population subgroups via adaptations of the snowball sampling strategy. Nurs Health Sci [Internet]. 2010 Sep;12(3):369–74. Available from: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/j.1442-2018.2010.00541.x
17. Salganik MJ, Heckathorn DD. 5. Sampling and Estimation in Hidden Populations Using Respondent-Driven Sampling. Sociol Methodol [Internet]. 2004 Dec 24;34(1):193–240. Available from: http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1111/j.0081-1750.2004.00152.x
18. Heckathorn DD. Comment: Snowball versus Respondent-Driven Sampling. Sociol Methodol [Internet]. 2011 Aug 19;41(1):355–66. Available from: http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9531.2011.01244.x
19. United States Census Bureau. 2019 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates Data Profiles [Internet]. 2020. Available from: http://data.census.gov
20. Holland AT, Palaniappan LP. Problems With the Collection and Interpretation of Asian-American Health Data: Omission, Aggregation, and Extrapolation. Ann Epidemiol. 2012 Jun;22(6):397–405. 
21. Srinivasan S, Guillermo T. Toward improved health: disaggregating Asian American and Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander data. Am J Public Health [Internet]. 2000 Nov;90(11):1731–4. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11076241
22. Islam NS, Khan S, Kwon S, Jang D, Ro M, Trinh-Shevrin C. Methodological Issues in the Collection, Analysis, and Reporting of Granular Data in Asian American Populations: Historical Challenges and Potential Solutions. J Health Care Poor Underserved. 2010;21(4):1354–81. 
23. United States Census Bureau. 2019 American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates Total Population [Internet]. 2019 [cited 2020 Sep 27]. Available from: http://data.census.gov
24. Zhang W, Hong S, Takeuchi DT, Mossakowski KN. Limited English proficiency and psychological distress among Latinos and Asian Americans. Soc Sci Med [Internet]. 2012 Sep;75(6):1006–14. Available from: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S027795361200425X
25. Kim G, Worley CB, Allen RS, Vinson L, Crowther MR, Parmelee P, et al. Vulnerability of Older Latino and Asian Immigrants with Limited English Proficiency. J Am Geriatr Soc [Internet]. 2011 Jul;59(7):1246–52. Available from: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/j.1532-5415.2011.03483.x
26. Jang Y, Kim MT. Limited English Proficiency and Health Service Use in Asian Americans. J Immigr Minor Heal [Internet]. 2019 Apr 24;21(2):264–70. Available from: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s10903-018-0763-0
27. Jang Y, Yoon H, Park NS, Chiriboga DA. Health Vulnerability of Immigrants with Limited English Proficiency: A Study of Older Korean Americans. J Am Geriatr Soc [Internet]. 2016 Jul;64(7):1498–502. Available from: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/jgs.14199
28. Gee GC, Ponce N. Associations Between Racial Discrimination, Limited English Proficiency, and Health-Related Quality of Life Among 6 Asian Ethnic Groups in California. Am J Public Health [Internet]. 2010 May;100(5):888–95. Available from: http://ajph.aphapublications.org/doi/10.2105/AJPH.2009.178012
29. Sentell T, Braun KL, Davis J, Davis T. Colorectal Cancer Screening: Low Health Literacy and Limited English Proficiency Among Asians and Whites in California. J Health Commun [Internet]. 2013 Dec 4;18(sup1):242–55. Available from: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/10810730.2013.825669
30. Sentell T, Shumway M, Snowden L. Access to Mental Health Treatment by English Language Proficiency and Race/Ethnicity. J Gen Intern Med [Internet]. 2007 Nov 24;22(S2):289–93. Available from: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s11606-007-0345-7
31. Tran H, Do V, Baccaglini L. Health Care Access, Utilization, and Management in Adult Chinese, Koreans, and Vietnamese with Cardiovascular Disease and Hypertension. J Racial Ethn Heal Disparities [Internet]. 2016 Jun 28;3(2):340–8. Available from: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s40615-015-0155-2
32. Ma GX, Tan Y, Wang MQ, Yuan Y, Chae WG. Hepatitis B Screening Compliance and Non-compliance among Chinese, Koreans, Vietnamese and Cambodians. Clin Med Gastroenterol [Internet]. 2010 Jan 5;3:CGast.S3732. Available from: http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.4137/CGast.S3732
33. Ma GX, Wang MQ, Toubbeh J, Tan Y, Shive S, Wu D. Factors Associated with Colorectal Cancer Screening Among Cambodians, Vietnamese, Koreans and Chinese Living in the United States. N Am J Med Sci (Boston) [Internet]. 2012 Jan;5(1):1–8. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23243486
34. Ma GX, Toubbeh JI, Wang MQ, Shive SE, Cooper L, Pham A. Factors Associated With Cervical Cancer Screening Compliance and Noncompliance among Chinese, Korean, Vietnamese, and Cambodian Women. J Natl Med Assoc [Internet]. 2009 Jun;101(6):541–51. Available from: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0027968415309391
35. Appel HB, Huang B, Ai AL, Lin CJ. Physical, Behavioral, and Mental Health Issues in Asian American Women: Results from the National Latino Asian American Study. J Women’s Heal [Internet]. 2011 Nov;20(11):1703–11. Available from: http://www.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/jwh.2010.2726
36. Parker SL, Davis KJ, Wingo PA, Ries LA, Heath CW. Cancer statistics by race and ethnicity. CA Cancer J Clin [Internet]. 1998 Jan 1;48(1):31–48. Available from: http://doi.wiley.com/10.3322/canjclin.48.1.31
37. Miller BA, Kolonel LN, Bernstein L, Young JL, Swanson GM, West D, et al. Racial/Ethnic Patterns of Cancer in the United States 1988-1992. NIH Pub. N. Miller BA, editor. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute; 1996. 
38. Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results Program. Cancer Stat Facts: Cervical Cancer [Internet]. Available from: https://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/cervix.html
39. Jin H, Pinheiro PS, Xu J, Amei A. Cancer incidence among Asian American populations in the United States, 2009-2011. Int J Cancer [Internet]. 2016 May 1;138(9):2136–45. Available from: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/ijc.29958
40. NORC at the University of Chicago. National Immunization Survey - Teen. A Codebook for the 2019 Public-Use Data File [Internet]. 2020. Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/imz-managers/nis/downloads/NIS-TEEN-PUF19-CODEBOOK.pdf
41. Elam-Evans LD, Yankey D, Singleton JA, Sterrett N, Markowitz LE, Williams CL, et al. National, Regional, State, and Selected Local Area Vaccination Coverage Among Adolescents Aged 13–17 Years — United States, 2019. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep [Internet]. 2020 Aug 21;69(33):1109–16. Available from: http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/wr/mm6933a1.htm?s_cid=mm6933a1_w
42. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. LLCP 2019 Codebook Report. Overall version data weighted with _LLCPWT. Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System. July 31, 2020 [Internet]. 2020 [cited 2021 Jul 6]. Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/brfss/annual_data/2019/pdf/codebook19_llcp-v2-508.HTML
43. National Cancer Institute. Public Use Dataset (Health Information National Trends Survey) [Internet]. [cited 2021 Jul 6]. Available from: https://hints.cancer.gov/data/download-data.aspx
44. Yi JK, Anderson KO, Le YC, Escobar-Chaves SL, Reyes-Gibby CC. English proficiency, knowledge, and receipt of HPV vaccine in Vietnamese-American Women. J Community Health. 2013;38(5):805–11. 
45. Brislin RW. Back-Translation for Cross-Cultural Research. J Cross Cult Psychol. 1970 Sep 1;1(3):185–216. 
46. Kreuter MW, Lukwago SN, Bucholtz DC, Clark EM, Sanders-Thompson V. Achieving Cultural Appropriateness in Health Promotion Programs: Targeted and Tailored Approaches. Heal Educ Behav [Internet]. 2003 Apr 1;30(2):133–46. Available from: http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/1090198102251021
47. Berry JW. Theories and Models of Acculturation [Internet]. Schwartz SJ, Unger J, editors. Vol. 1. Oxford University Press; 2017. Available from: http://oxfordhandbooks.com/view/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780190215217.001.0001/oxfordhb-9780190215217-e-2
48. Sam DL, Berry JW. Acculturation: When Individuals and Groups of Different Cultural Backgrounds Meet. Perspect Psychol Sci [Internet]. 2010;5(4):472–81. Available from: http://www.jstor.org/stable/41613454
49. Gim Chung RH, Kim BSK, Abreu JM. Asian American Multidimensional Acculturation Scale: Development, Factor Analysis, Reliability, and Validity. Cult Divers Ethn Minor Psychol [Internet]. 2004;10(1):66–80. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14992631
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Reviewers Comments.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0256074.r003Decision Letter 1
PikhartMarcelAcademic Editor© 2021 Marcel Pikhart2021Marcel Pikharthttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
2 Aug 2021

Experience and lessons learned from multi-modal internet-based recruitment of U.S. Vietnamese into research
PONE-D-21-14089R1
Dear Author,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Marcel Pikhart
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0256074.r004Acceptance letter
PikhartMarcelAcademic Editor© 2021 Marcel Pikhart2021Marcel Pikharthttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
6 Aug 2021

PONE-D-21-14089R1 
Experience and lessons learned from multi-modal internet-based recruitment of U.S. Vietnamese into research 
Dear Dr. Vu:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Marcel Pikhart 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE