PLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLoS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC8051789PMC8051789.1805178980517893386178410.1371/journal.pone.0250024PONE-D-20-247291Research ArticleMedicine and health sciencesPublic and occupational healthPreventive medicineHIV preventionBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyMedical MicrobiologyMicrobial PathogensViral PathogensImmunodeficiency VirusesHIVMedicine and Health SciencesPathology and Laboratory MedicinePathogensMicrobial PathogensViral PathogensImmunodeficiency VirusesHIVBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsVirusesViral PathogensImmunodeficiency VirusesHIVBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsVirusesImmunodeficiency VirusesHIVBiology and life sciencesOrganismsVirusesRNA virusesRetrovirusesLentivirusHIVBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyMedical MicrobiologyMicrobial PathogensViral PathogensRetrovirusesLentivirusHIVMedicine and Health SciencesPathology and Laboratory MedicinePathogensMicrobial PathogensViral PathogensRetrovirusesLentivirusHIVBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsVirusesViral PathogensRetrovirusesLentivirusHIVMedicine and Health SciencesDiagnostic MedicineVirus TestingPeople and PlacesGeographical LocationsEuropeUkraineMedicine and health sciencesEpidemiologyHIV epidemiologyMedicine and health sciencesDiagnostic medicineHIV diagnosis and managementSocial SciencesSociologySexual and Gender IssuesSex WorkMedicine and Health SciencesEpidemiologyMedical Risk FactorsTraumatic Injury Risk FactorsViolent CrimeIntimate Partner ViolenceMedicine and Health SciencesPublic and Occupational HealthTraumatic Injury Risk FactorsViolent CrimeIntimate Partner ViolenceSocial SciencesSociologyCriminologyCrimeViolent CrimeIntimate Partner ViolenceAccess to HIV-prevention in female sex workers in Ukraine between 2009 and 2017: Coverage, barriers and facilitators
Access to HIV prevention in FSW in Ukraine between 2009 and 2017https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0137-6336BlumerNatashaConceptualizationFormal analysisMethodologyVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5038-8072PfadenhauerLisa M.ConceptualizationMethodologySupervisionWriting – review & editing BurnsJacobConceptualizationFormal analysisMethodologySupervisionWriting – review & editing 1
Institute for Medical Information Processing, Biometry and Epidemiology – IBE, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany2
Pettenkofer School of Public Health Munich, Munich, GermanyWangZixinEditor ]. As in most countries, the HIV epidemic in Ukraine is concentrated amongst populations that are at heightened risk of contraction, designated ‘key populations’. These include people who inject drugs, men who have sex with men, transgender people, incarcerated persons and sex workers (SWs) [ – ].
Globally, female sex workers (FSWs) bear a disproportionately high burden of the HIV pandemic, with a global prevalence of over 10% [ ]. FSWs are 13.5 times more likely to contract HIV than of women of the same reproductive age [ ]. In Ukraine, the annual incidence rate lies at 0.56 per 1000 uninfected SWs and the prevalence at 5.2% within an estimated population of 80.000 SWs [ ]. An array of determinants increase the vulnerability of a FSW to HIV, including gender-based violence (GBV) [ , ], poverty [ , ], multiple sexual partners [ ], criminalisation [ – ], stigma [ , ] and substance abuse [ ]. Recent literature has posited that determinants of HIV operate on different structural levels, ranging from the macrostructural to the individual level [ , ].
Although a multitude of prevention interventions have been designed to reduce the impact of HIV amongst key populations, it has been established that no single prevention intervention is sufficient to contain the spread of the disease and that a multi-pronged, multi-level approach is necessary [ – ]. In 2014, the World Health Organisation (WHO) published guidelines consolidating all existing recommendations relevant to the prevention of HIV amongst key populations, including SWs. These guidelines outline the components of a comprehensive, evidence-based package of interventions, which has been found to be acceptable and effective for the global SW community. The package has two parts: essential health care sector interventions and essential strategies for an enabling environment. Health care interventions include components such as comprehensive condom and lubricant provision and behavioural interventions (e.g. consultation with social workers), whilst strategies addressing community empowerment and addressing violence fall beneath the enabling environment section [ ]. As one of the five prevention pillars, the United Nations General Assembly prevention targets emphasised the importance of this comprehensive prevention package (PP), by urging countries to ensure that 90% of people at risk of HIV infection have access to the PP by 2020 [ ]. The Alliance of Public Health (Alliance) has been distributing HIV prevention amongst key populations in Ukraine since 2003, which was first coined the PP in 2007, and has since been scaled up countrywide [ ].
Despite these efforts, only 46% and 48% of Ukrainian SWs accessed the PP in 2015 and 2017 respectively [ , ]. Recent literature has identified that FSWs encounter barriers on multiple structural levels, which impede their access to HIV prevention services [ , ]. In order to improve the intervention and its implementation in Ukraine, further investigation is necessary to determine the factors that hinder FSWs from accessing the PP.
The aim of this study was to therefore explore which factors influenced the access that Ukrainian FSWs had to the PP between 2009 and 2017. More specifically, our four research objectives were 1) to develop a conceptual framework illustrating the factors that influence FSWs access to prevention and the structural levels they operate on 2) to identify which components were included in the Ukrainian PP for SWs, 3) to measure the coverage of the PP in Ukraine amongst the FSW population and finally, 4) to describe and explore the factors associated with the access of Ukrainian FSW to the PP over this nine-year period.

## Method
We undertook multiple steps to address our four research objectives, as outlined in . We began by developing a conceptual framework, informed by a literature review (objective 1). We then conducted a document analysis, which served to describe the Ukrainian PP and its components (objective 2). The questionnaires from five Ukrainian Integrated Bio Behavioural Surveillance Surveys (IBBS) were then reviewed to identify items that corresponded to both the factors identified in the conceptual framework and the components identified in the document analysis. These then served as our independent variables and outcome variables, respectively and were used to conduct exploratory analyses. This included calculating descriptive statistics to measure the coverage of the PP amongst the Ukrainian FSW population (objective 3) and a descriptive longitudinal comparison between FSWs that did and did not access prevention, to explore which factors influenced access to PP between 2009 and 2017 (objective 4). As no information about the gender of Ukrainian SWs is available in the IBBS data prior to 2015 and that in 2017, 97.72% of Ukrainian SWs were female (2.14% male and 0.14% transgender), we have referred to SWs as FSWs when referring to IBBS data, unless stated otherwise.
 

## Conceptual framework
In an iterative process, NB thematically grouped specific factors associated with access to HIV prevention, which were identified in a literature review. The literature review method, corresponding protocol, and results are available in the . Uncertainties about attributing factors to a certain thematic cluster were discussed with JB and LMP on an ongoing basis. To structure these thematic clusters, we adopted the framework structure developed by Shannon and colleagues, which visualises the determinants of HIV for the global population of FSWs. This framework identifies six structural levels that HIV determinants operate on, including the macrostructural, sex worker community organisation, work environment, sexual networks and patterning, sex worker and client individual level [ , ]. As our literature review identified that factors associated with the access to HIV prevention also operate on different structural levels, we considered the structure of this framework appropriate and populated it with our thematic clusters accordingly ( ).

## Document analysis and description of the Ukrainian PP
Our second research objective aimed to identify components offered as part of the Ukrainian PP between 2008 and 2017. To do so, we conducted a document analysis of all annual general reports published by Alliance over this time period [ , , – ]. With substantial financial support by of the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria (TGF), Alliance has been responsible for the distribution of HIV prevention amongst SWs in Ukraine since 2003, and each report provides a detailed list of components included in the PP [ ]. These components were extracted from the English version of each annual report. After extraction, we grouped the components of similar nature into categories to gain a clearer picture of the composition of the PP over the years. For a detailed list of the categories and associated components, see .

## Review of IBBS questionnaires and variable selection
We reviewed the questionnaires of five Integrated Bio Behavioural Surveillance Surveys (IBBS) to identify items that corresponded to both our outcome and independent variables, which were drawn from the results of the conceptual framework and document review, respectively. The IBBS are cross-sectional studies that were administered amongst Ukrainian SWs in 15 cities in 2009, 25 cities in 2011, 27 cities in 2013 and 2015 and 32 cities in 2017. The IBBS were developed, piloted and administrated by Alliance under the financial support of the TGF in 2009, 2011 and 2013 and then from the The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in 2015 and 2017. The Public Health Centre (PHC) of the Ukrainian Ministry of Health are now the holders of the data. Ethical approval was granted by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at the Ukrainian Institute on Public Health Policy (Kiev, Ukraine) and CDC. The surveys were administered as face-to-face interviews lasting approximately thirty minutes. The interview was followed by a voluntary rapid HIV tests, details of rapid tests can be found in the Alliance analytic reports [ , , , , ]. Participants were considered eligible if they were fourteen or older, had received money, goods or services in exchange for sex within the last six months and consented to participate in the study. Three sampling strategies were employed for recruiting participants: respondent-driven-sampling (RDS), time-location-sampling (TLS) and key-informant sampling was employed in 2013, no follow up was conducted. Recruitment continued until sample size was reached. Sample size was calculated for each study site using the specific HIV prevalence rate as determined by the previous IBBS result. Further details about the study design of each year can be found in the analytic reports of Alliance [ , , , , ]. All five IBBS surveys were translated from Ukrainian into English by an associate professor of Slavic languages at the Donetsk National Technical University.

## Independent variables
To identify our independent variables, namely, factors associated with access to HIV prevention, we drew upon our conceptual framework (objective 1) and then screened each IBBS questionnaire for a corresponding item. The single most fitting item was selected for each independent variable.
We support the emphasis that Shannon and colleagues place upon factors that operate at the macrostructural level when designing prevention policies and schemas. As all IBBS questionnaires measure individual behaviour, we were unable to extract items operating on the macrostructural level, and hence, resorted to designating the most fitting item at the individual level to these macrostructural factors. The exact item used for each independent variable can be found in .

## Outcome variable
Receipt of the Ukrainian PP was our outcome of interest; hence we drew upon the findings of our document analysis. As there is no universally accepted way to measure PP receipt, we created two definitions, including “basic PP receipt” and “extended PP receipt”. We initially used Alliance’s definition for basic PP receipt which consists of “the receipt of at least one consultation from a social worker and the receipt of at least one male condom over a six month period” [ ]. However, due to limitations in the IBBS data, we altered this to “the receipt of at least one male condom and any form of HIV testing over a 12-month period”.
For extended PP receipt, we adopted the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS’ (UNAIDS) [ ] definition. According to UNAIDS, PP receipt is defined as, “access to at least two HIV prevention interventions within the last three months”. As the time frame referenced in many IBBS question was twelve months, we adapted this definition by increasing the three-month period to twelve months. Thus, we defined extended PP receipt as, “access to at least two HIV prevention interventions within the last twelve months”. The number and specific type of prevention services included in each year’s extended PP, alongside the corresponding IBBS item, can be found in .

## Exploratory analyses: PP coverage and descriptive longitudinal group comparison
We conducted descriptive statistics to measure the coverage of the basic and extended PP receipt between 2009 and 2017 (objective 3). We did so by calculating the proportion of FSWs that received the PP per year according to the definition for basic PP receipt and extended PP receipt. These results enabled us to undertake a descriptive longitudinal group comparison to compare the FSWs who did and did not receive the PP, with regard to the various independent variables (objective 4). Specifically, we calculated proportions for binary variables and means for continuous variables, stratified by those who received the basic PP and the extended PP and those who did not ( ). All variables were screened for missing data before undergoing descriptive analyses. For all but one variable assessed, the proportion of missing data was low, ranging from 0% to 6.7%. For the item regarding HIV status, a large proportion of the data, 54.3% was missing. We excluded missing data from the analysis. All analyses were conducted using the statistical software R (3.6.0) [ ].
 

## Results

## Conceptual framework (objective 1)
Many factors associated with access to HIV prevention were presented in multiple studies, identified in our literature review. As these factors were largely aligned, we clustered factors with similar themes to better structure our conceptual framework. For example, three specific factors found to influence access to HIV prevention–knowledge of where to access prevention [ ], knowledge of HIV transmission routes [ – ] and the self-perception of being at high risk of HIV infection [ ]–were grouped into one broader thematic cluster, knowledge of HIV. After discussing the conceptual framework with staff members from the PHC, one thematic cluster, sex worker- family was excluded from the conceptual framework, as the specific factors were applicable to a generalised epidemic (HIV prevalence of ≥1% amongst the general population) and were not applicable in the Ukrainian context, where the epidemic is classified as a concentrated or mixed epidemic [ ]. Our conceptual framework illustrates that most thematic clusters which influence access to HIV prevention operate at the macrostructural level, as seen in .
 

## Document analysis and description of the Ukrainian PP (objective 2)
A total of 32 categories describing prevention components emerged from the document analysis of the Alliance annual general reports from 2008 to 2017 (see ). Many components included in the PPs could be grouped into broader categories. For example, testing for chlamydia, assisted testing for syphilis and examination for sexually transmitted diseases (STI) were coded as the overarching category, ‘any form of STI testing’. A list of specific components within each overarching prevention category can be found in .
 The number of components included in the Ukrainian PP increased from 2008 until 2013, when the highest number of components (n = 24) was included in both 2012 and 2013. A steep drop was observed in 2014, with only seven components included. Between 2015 and 2017, eleven components were included in the PP.
The four prevention components ‘any form of social worker counselling’, ‘male condoms’, ‘awareness raising materials’ and ‘HIV testing and counselling’ were the most commonly delivered components in the Ukrainian PP across all years. Lubricants, ‘any form of STI testing’ and ‘referrals to relevant specialists’ were also consistently included in the prevention package in all years, except for 2014. ‘Overdose prevention’ was only included once in 2012, while ‘online counselling’, ‘training about safe behaviour’, ‘case management’, ‘humanitarian aid’ and ‘tea and meals’ were only included twice. The level of coverage of each component may vary based on region.

## Results of exploratory analysis of IBBS
26.79% of FSWs included in the overall study sample were recruited in the West of Ukraine, 20.06% in the South, 22.74% in the East and 30.41% in Central Ukraine. The average age was 28.52 years, 27.58% of the sample was living with a partner and 23.63% had obtained tertiary education ( ). In 2015, 99.12% of participants were female and 0.88% were male. In 2017, 97.72% of participants were female, 2.14% male and 0.13% transgender. No data about gender was available for 2009,2011 and 2013.
 

## Prevention package coverage analysis (objective 3)
 represents the coverage of both the basic and extended definitions of the PP amongst Ukrainian FSW from 2009 to 2017. For both definitions of access to prevention, coverage increased from 2009, peaked in 2013 and then decreased in 2015 and 2017. The highest proportion of FSWs who had access to the PP was in 2013, where 51.46% and 67.42% accessed the basic and extended PP, respectively, whereas the lowest level of coverage was seen in 2017 with only 26.71% received the basic and 32.10% the extended PP, respectively. Between 48.4% and 54.09% of Ukrainian FSW received HIV testing between 2009 and 2015, however, this drastically decreased in 2017 with only 27.92% coverage. Condom coverage presented a similar trend, as between 52.85% and 65.36% of FSW received condoms from 2009 to 2015, yet only 46.72% in 2017.
 

## Descriptive longitudinal group comparison (objective 4)
When stratified by receipt and non-receipt of the basic and extended PP, our descriptive longitudinal group comparison found only marginal differences and therefore, only results for the basic PP are shown and discussed. Results for the extended PP are available in . Additionally, due to the volume of data, only results from the descriptive longitudinal group comparison that (i) showed a clear difference between those that did access the basic PP compared to those that did not or (ii) were frequently discussed in the literature as being critical, are explicitly described in our results. For some thematic clusters, no suitable variables were found in the IBBS datasets; for these clusters, we could not conduct further analysis.
In relation to the factors that operate on a macrostructural level, our descriptive comparison produced mixed results. Amongst the individual-level proxies that we used for representing macrostructural relationships, the belief that HIV testing was not personally available, was less common amongst PP recipients compared to PP non-recipients in all years. In all years except 2009, of the FSWs who believed that HIV testing was not personally available, fear of HIV status being exposed and no desire to know HIV test results, two individual-level proxies addressing the level of HIV stigma amongst the population, were less common amongst the PP recipients. In all years except 2011, belief that HIV prevention is too expensive, the individual-level proxy referring to the national financial scheme for HIV prevention, was less common amongst the PP recipients compared to the PP non-recipients. In 2009 and 2011, dissatisfaction with HCF staff attitude and the opening hours of HCFs, two individual-level proxies addressing health-related policy, were more common amongst PP recipients. In all years, sex work as the sole form of income, the individual-level proxy used to address support schemas for women (re)-entering the workforce, was consistently more common amongst PP recipients than PP non-recipients.
Factors that operate on both the community organisational level and the work environment level identified consistent differences across all years between PP recipients and PP non-recipients. The proportion of FSWs, who were clients of an NGO was much larger in PP recipients (83–97%) than in PP non-recipients (15–25%). Across all years, soliciting on the street and on highways was more common amongst PP recipients, whereas soliciting in affluent settings was less common. Of those who experienced GBV, PP recipients were consistently more affected. Of these FSWs, GBV from clients or police officers was more common amongst the PP recipients than the PP non-recipients.
Regarding factors that operate on the interpersonal dynamic level, having sex without a condom was less common, while having a partner that knew of their FSW status was more common amongst PP recipients compared to PP non-recipients in all years.
Analyses of the factors that operate on a sex worker individual level showed that sharing needles was more common amongst PP recipients, except in 2011. PP recipients were in 2009, 2011 and 2013 on average one year–and in 2015 and 2017, two years older than their counterparts. Both groups increased in age over time, from 28 to 32 and 27 to 29 years amongst PP recipients and PP non-recipients, respectively. Knowledge of HIV transmission routes and knowledge of where to access prevention was consistently higher amongst PP recipients compared to non-recipients.

## Discussion
In this study, we identified factors that acted as potential barriers and facilitators to the access of HIV prevention amongst the Ukrainian FSW population between 2009 and 2017. Our literature-informed conceptual framework identified various risk factor clusters, which operate on six structural levels. Our exploratory analyses identified that these factors may have partially been responsible for the changes in PP coverage, which peaked in 2013 and then dropped in both 2015 and 2017. Our results suggest that sex work as the only form of income, being a client of an NGO, street and highway solicitation, partner’s knowledge of occupation, knowledge of where to access prevention and knowledge of HIV transmission routes may act as important facilitators to HIV prevention. Potential barriers to accessing the PP were soliciting in affluent settings and unsafe sex.
The initial conceptual framework reflected the findings from empirical studies, which were conducted in the Americas, the African, East Mediterranean, European, South-East Asia and West Pacific regions between 2005 and 2018. To tailor this global conceptual framework to a Ukrainian setting, we discussed our findings with staff members in the PHC of the Ministry of Health of Ukraine and subsequently removed one determinant–sex worker family–from the framework, as it was not applicable to the Ukrainian context. The resulting conceptual framework, thus, reflects both current, global literature as well as local insights into barriers and facilitators to accessing PP in Ukraine. This conceptual framework can be utilised to inform future research on barriers and facilitators of accessing HIV prevention for FSWs and contribute to advancing theories underlying this field of research.
Findings from our document analysis identified that the Ukrainian PP has changed over the past nine years, which may be attributed to the fluctuation in international funding and the armed conflict in the east of Ukraine. Between 2008 and 2013, Alliance’s international funding grew from US$28.4 to US$37.7 million, which coincided with an expansion in the PP from 10 to 24 components in 2008 and 2013, respectively [ , ]. Only seven components were offered in 2014, the year in which Ukraine experienced a severe restructuring of the political landscape [ ], recession of the economy [ ] and the onset of the continuing armed-conflict in the east [ ]. As one of the only NGOs permitted to work in the conflict zones of the east, Alliance diverted a large proportion of international funding to the emergency procurement of HIV and tuberculosis (TB) medicine in these eastern regions [ , ]. This diversion of funds may be one factor to explain the sharp decrease in PP components in regions of Ukraine from 2014 onwards, particularly, specialist medical or legal counselling. Despite this cutback, the components that were included from 2015 to 2017 did largely meet the WHO recommendations, which included condoms, HIV testing and counselling, consultations with social workers as well as screening and prevention of co-infections such as TB and Hepatitis B [ ].
The coverage of both the basic and the extended PP also changed over this nine-year period. Between 2009 and 2013, progress toward the “five pillars for achieving less than 500,000 new infections by 2020”, a sub-target of the 90-90-90 goals seemed promising as the level of extended PP coverage amongst Ukrainian FSWs increased from 60% to 67%. However, although Kyiv and other cities signed the Paris Declaration on Fast-Track Cities in 2014, a pact that committed cities to focusing on vulnerable and marginalized people, including key populations, [ ] extended PP coverage dropped to 32% in 2017. Coincidentally, Alliance introduced a new policy in 2017 that deemed FSWs who knew of their HIV positive status ineligible for testing [ ]. This may explain the steep decline in both HIV testing coverage and subsequently, the sharp drop in PP coverage in 2017. Nonetheless, our analyses also identified a 18.05% decrease in condom coverage in 2017, hence, future research is required to further investigate this trend. Alliance defines receipt of basic PP as ‘the receipt of at least one male condom and at least one consultation with a social worker’, however, due to limitations in the IBBS questionnaires, our definition included, ‘receipt of male condoms and receipt of HIV testing and counselling’. This could explain the discrepancy between the coverage we observed, and that reported by Alliance. Alliance report that the basic PP coverage remained relatively stable over time (46.7% in 2013 and 48% in 2017), whereas we identified a clear decrease in basic PP coverage over this time period (51.46% and 26.71% in 2013 and 2017, respectively). Furthermore, Alliance utilises an internal database, Syrex for reporting [ ] as opposed to the IBBS, which may also explain this difference in coverage.
The fall in coverage between 2013 and 2017 may further be explained by the reduction in international financial support and the redistribution of resources associated with emergency programmes in the conflict zone, both of which operate on a macrostructural level.
Changes in the PP coverage may also be explained by specific factors associated with access to prevention. Our findings from the macrostructural level suggest that relying upon sex work as one’s sole source of income consistently acted as a facilitator to the basic PP. We identified that the proportion of FSWs relying upon sex work as their only form of income increased in both groups between 2015 and 2017, which coincides with and could potentially have arisen because of the outbreak of the armed conflict in the East of Ukraine. This spike in reliance upon sex work aligns with previous studies that outline the catalytic effect that armed conflict can have upon internal displacement and economic insecurity, which in turn, often results in conditions that facilitate engagement in sex work as a source of income, particularly amongst woman [ – ].
We observed a high level of stigma (54%) amongst PP recipients who feared their HIV status being exposed in 2009, however we did not observe meaningful between-group differences. Previous studies have deemed stigma to be one of the most salient barriers to HIV prevention [ , , ], fuelled by other factors on different structural levels such as criminalisation [ , – ] on the macrostructural level and a lack of community empowerment on the community organisational level [ , , ].
Our results identified an encouraging trend underscoring the importance of facilitators that operate on a community organisation level. In congruence with previous literature [ , – ], our findings strongly imply that collective agency of the Ukrainian FSW community via NGO membership largely facilitated access to the basic PP, as most PP recipients were clients of an NGO. Knowledge of HIV transmission routes was higher amongst PP recipients across all years, which may be attributable to consultations with social workers and the distribution of HIV awareness-raising materials, two components that were consistently included in the PP. Authors have also identified that social and community participation can foster transparency and trust between FSWs and non-FSWs, which can increase their access to prevention [ , ]. Our results support this in all years, as disclosing one’s FSW status to a partner was more common amongst PP recipients, suggesting that this may have acted as a facilitator.
Our results from the interpersonal dynamic and the work environment level not only elucidate potential barriers and facilitators to PP in the Ukrainian context but highlight the interplay of factors that operate on different structural levels. We found condom use to be consistently more common amongst PP recipients than PP non-recipients, this may suggest that sex without a condom could act as a barrier to the PP. An array of studies have identified that unsafe sex is associated with GBV, a factor operating on both the work environment and the interpersonal dynamic level. Authors have described that FSWs who have experienced GBV in the work environment are less likely to instigate condom negotiation in fear of client aggression [ – ] and therefore, may be less inclined to seek condoms, an important component of the Ukrainian PP. We identified an alarmingly high prevalence of GBV amongst both groups at the work environment, however, contrary to the literature, GBV at the work environment level was more common amongst PP recipients than PP non-recipients. Results measuring GBV at the interpersonal level were not meaningful. It is possible that the criminalisation of sex work, a barrier that operates on the macrostructural level, may have led to an increase in GBV [ , , ] in the workplace, and in turn, an increase in unsafe sex [ ]. Although recent literature supports this hypothesis [ , , ], future research is required to further explore this within the Ukrainian context. Further research is particularly warranted to investigate the higher prevalence of GBV amongst PP recipients and this association with condom use.
Two additional factors on the work environment level, street- and highway-based soliciting appeared to act as facilitators to the basic PP in all years. This contrasted with previous literature, which has highlighted that street-based FSWs are less likely to access HIV prevention due to an array of barriers, such as higher mobility, higher risk-taking behaviour and higher exposure to GBV [ , , , ]. The facilitating effect that street- and highway soliciting had upon access to the PP in the Ukrainian context may be attributed to the successful employment of mobile clinics, an intervention conducted by Alliance to ease access to HIV prevention services, specifically targeting these vulnerable subgroups [ ]. Affluent-based FSWs may be less likely to disclose their HIV status due to fear of being associated with HIV and being banned from a venue, resulting in loss of income [ , , , ]. Furthermore, affluent-based FSWs may be less interested in accessing the basic PP, as they are able to afford these services. This warrants future qualitative research to investigate the prevention needs of Ukrainian FSWs, relative to their soliciting setting.
Our findings from the sex worker individual level corroborate previous studies, which have demonstrated that knowledge of where to access prevention acts as a key facilitator [ , , , , , ]. However, contrary to our expectations, we found that more than 82% of Ukrainian FSWs who did not access the basic PP knew where to access prevention. This may suggest the need to further address macrostructural barriers in efforts to ameliorate access to HIV prevention.
Although our study provides valuable insights into the factors associated with access HIV prevention, future research is needed to deepen this knowledge. Our analyses were limited by the quality of the data and further quantitative analyses, both in Ukrainian but also in other specific and broader contexts, should focus on collecting high-quality and valid data to address both specific associations, as well as more complex, multi-component associations. Qualitative research could provide evidence on opinions, perceptions and motivations of FSWs, which may help to gain a deeper insight into the source of barriers such as stigma, GBV and the influence of the armed conflict upon access to HIV in a Ukrainian context. Future qualitative studies exploring the specific needs of FSWs, namely, which PP components are most necessary, may also elucidate important findings for future prevention programmes.

## Strengths and limitations
The strength of this work lies in its theoretical foundation in current empirical literature and the use of a conceptual framework to inform the analyses. Using a conceptual framework is not only considered a means of conceptualizing and structuring research, it also contributes to theory building around the topic of interest. Our conceptual framework informed the selection of variables in the survey, hence contributing to the structure of the exploratory analyses. Additionally, the use of multiple, large datasets from FSWs in almost all regions of Ukraine allowed us to explore changes over time, another major strength of this study.
Several limitations need to be taken into account when interpreting these results. Firstly, we limited our literature searches to one database, PubMed. Our search strategy did not focus on identifying conceptual papers that presented and discussed theories, models or frameworks of barriers and facilitators but empirical papers assessing barriers and facilitators in real-world settings. There were also limitations with regard to the assessed IBBS surveys. Changes in the design of surveys made it difficult to compare particular factors across time, particularly questions measuring barriers on the macrostructural level. Additionally, missing data prevented us from measuring informative outcomes, such as the coverage of the basic PP, as defined by Alliance. The nature of the questions themselves may have also influenced results; both FSW and HIV are two highly sensitive issues and therefore, recall and social desirability bias may have impacted the responses in the survey, particularly since the survey were administered face-to-face. There were also limitations in our analyses. In measuring PP coverage, changes in the specific components of the PP over time resulted in our indicator for extended PP coverage being more volatile and less informative than the basic PP. However, a similar trend was seen in both basic and extended PP coverage, hence this did not substantially impact the measurement of coverage. Nonetheless, the level of coverage of each PP component may vary based on region and therefore have had some influence upon our results. Geographical sampling of cities included in the IBBS may have also influenced the level of coverage. As in other studies that utilised IBBS data [ , – ], we did not weight for sampling and therefore, our results are to be interpreted with this in account. Only in 2017 and 2015 was a question on gender included in the IBBS and although only a small proportion of SWs were male or transgender, limitations caused by the misclassification need to be considered.
We conducted and reported descriptive statistical analyses, however, due to limitations in the data, such as inconsistent response scales and a lack of internal consistency throughout all five datasets alongside structural changes between 2013 and 2015. Hence, the analyses should be considered exploratory rather than confirmatory and should be interpreted cautiously. As the IBBS measured individual behaviours, we were limited to assigning individual-level proxies analyse factors that influence access to the Ukrainian PP on the macrostructural level. RDS and TLS have found to be effective sampling methods for reaching marginalised populations. In accordance with others working with the IBBS data [ , ], we did not consider survey weights when calculating descriptive statistics, which may have led to an over-representation of certain subpopulations.

## Conclusion
To our knowledge, this is the first study to explore the factors associated with the access of Ukrainian FSW to HIV prevention on a national scale across a time span of nine years. Our study strengthens current knowledge that access to prevention is complex with many factors found on multiple levels and that access to prevention has decreased since 2014. We also identified several factors such as relying solely upon sex work for income, being a client of an NGO, knowledge of HIV, partner’s knowledge of occupation, soliciting setting and condom use that may be associated with access to HIV prevention within the Ukrainian context. Future interventions targeting these factors may increase the coverage of HIV prevention and thus, contribute to reducing the HIV burden within the FSW population.

## Supporting information
S1 Appendix

## Literature review method, protocol and results.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Table

## Formation of thematic clusters used to populate the conceptual framework.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Table

## Categories and specific PP components as extracted from the Alliance general reports from 2008 to 2017.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Table

## PP component and corresponding IBBS item for 2009, 2011, 2013, 2015 and 2017.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Table

## Independent variables from IBBS and corresponding thematic clusters for 2009, 2011, 2013, 2015 and 2017.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S5 Table

## Barriers and facilitators to accessing HIV prevention stratified by receipt or non-receipt of extended PP between 2009 and 2017.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.

The paper summarizes and analyses the data from studies funded by of the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria (TGF) and implemented in Ukraine by the International Charitable Foundation “Alliance for Public Health” (Alliance). The data for analysis were provided to the authors by the data holder the Public Health Centre (PHC) of the Ukrainian Ministry of Health. All opinions presented in this manuscript belong to the authors alone and not represent position of the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, Alliance for Public Health or the Public Health Centre (PHC) of the Ukrainian Ministry of Health. We would like to thank Ihor Kuzin (PHC), Yana Sazonova (Alliance), Roksolana Kulchynska (CDC) and Tetyana Salyuk (Alliance) for their comments on the manuscript, Oleksandr Korotych (PHC) and Oksana Kovtun (Alliance) for providing us with the IBBS datasets and, Nadiya Yanhol (Alliance) for her insight into the PP. Lastly and most importantly, thank you to the SWs that partook in the IBBS studies.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0250024.r001Decision Letter 0
WangZixinAcademic Editor© 2021 Zixin Wang2021Zixin Wanghttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
3 Nov 2020

PONE-D-20-24729
Access to HIV-prevention in female sex workers in Ukraine between 2009 and 2017: coverage, barriers and facilitators
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Blumer,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Dec 18 2020 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Zixin Wang, PhD.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2.  We note that you have indicated that data from this study are available upon request. PLOS only allows data to be available upon request if there are legal or ethical restrictions on sharing data publicly. For information on unacceptable data access restrictions, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions.
In your revised cover letter, please address the following prompts:
a) If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially identifying or sensitive patient information) and who has imposed them (e.g., an ethics committee). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent.
b) If there are no restrictions, please upload the minimal anonymized data set necessary to replicate your study findings as either Supporting Information files or to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. Please see http://www.bmj.com/content/340/bmj.c181.long for guidelines on how to de-identify and prepare clinical data for publication. For a list of acceptable repositories, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-recommended-repositories.
We will update your Data Availability statement on your behalf to reflect the information you provide.
3. Thank you for stating the following in the Competing Interests section: 
"Data collection for this study was undertaken while NB was affiliated to PHC. I have read the journal's policy and the authors of this manuscript have the following competing interests: Data collection for this study was undertaken while NB was affiliated to PHC. All opinions presented in this manuscript belong to the author alone, and not any institution to which they are or were affiliated. The authors declare that they have no competing interests."
i) Please confirm that this does not alter your adherence to all PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials, by including the following statement: "This does not alter our adherence to  PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.” (as detailed online in our guide for authors http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/competing-interests).  If there are restrictions on sharing of data and/or materials, please state these. Please note that we cannot proceed with consideration of your article until this information has been declared.
ii) Please include your updated Competing Interests statement in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
Please know it is PLOS ONE policy for corresponding authors to declare, on behalf of all authors, all potential competing interests for the purposes of transparency. PLOS defines a competing interest as anything that interferes with, or could reasonably be perceived as interfering with, the full and objective presentation, peer review, editorial decision-making, or publication of research or non-research articles submitted to one of the journals. Competing interests can be financial or non-financial, professional, or personal. Competing interests can arise in relationship to an organization or another person. Please follow this link to our website for more details on competing interests: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/competing-interests
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: No
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: No
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: In this study, the authors carried out a comprehensive literature search, a document analysis, and a quantitative analysis of survey data collected between 2009 and 2017 to identify factors associated with the access of HIV prevention in Ukraine sex workers. The topic is significant, and the description of methodological details are sufficient. However, I find that the current form of the manuscript is rather lengthy. Specifically, it is difficult to understand how the document search of the Ukrainian prevention package relates to the other objectives. Only very basic bivariate-level descriptive analysis was used to analyze the survey data. Please see below for my specific comments.
Major comments:
1. Four objectives were stated in this study, which can be distracting. I find the essential question of this study is to assess the coverage of PP in Ukraine over time and understand factors associated with the access. The development of a conceptual framework, rather than presenting it as a separate objective, can be considered as the necessary step of literature review for identifying putative factors of interest.
2. How is the document search relates to the analysis of the questionnaire data? I think it can be more clearly explained.
3. The authors repeatedly used “factors that influence” access to PP throughout the manuscript. However, limited by the current cross-sectional design and bivariate analysis, I think such wording infers a causal relationship and should be revised to “factors associated”.
4. About the sampling design, it seems that the surveys are conducted independently of each other. Is it possible that one respondent was selected multiple times? Any identifier that can explore this issue?
5. Regarding the survey question design, to what extent are the questions comparable? If the questions are designed in similar ways and there are ways to uniquely identify the participants, one way to improve the analysis is to pool the data together, and include calendar year as an independent variable to test the effect of calendar year. If one individual is sampled multiple times, multilevel analysis can be considered by treating the individual as a level two variable. The study in its current form is a rather scattered analysis of survey data conducted in different years. Given that these surveys essentially adopted a non-probability sampling approach, any conclusions regarding trends or trajectory are weak.
6. In the variable selection section, only the outcome variables were described. Independent variables should also be systematically presented in the Method section.
7. To understand factors associated with access, rather than presenting a big table of descriptive analysis by group, the authors may consider using multiple logistic regressions. The outcome variable should be whether access to PP, while the independent variables should be a selection of variables investigated in Table 3.
8. If I understand correctly, measures of the macrostructural factors are all obtained from individual-level response. They are not upper-level objective measures and are subject to measurement bias. In general, these independent variables need to be much more carefully presented and discussed.
9. Did the authors obtain ethical approvals as human subjects were involved?
Minor comments:
1. Objectives do not need to be presented as a separate section.
2. In the Introduction, the WHO guideline was published in 2014. The authors then stated that in 2006, the Alliance launched a PP in Ukraine adhering to WHO guidelines. The timeline is a bit confusing. Better to clarify.
3. What does it mean by “no missing data were excluded”. Are there missing values?
Reviewer #2: The authors of this manuscript managed to present the overall picture of access to HIV-prevention among female sex workers in Ukraine over nearly a decade. After reading the manuscript, it is obvious that the authors have done extensive work and put in many efforts to explore the barriers and facilitators of access to prevention service in key populations. The manuscript is clearly structured and well-written, supported by literature, data and other materials indicating how the author performed the literature review and exploratory analysis. There are only several questions I would like the author to give a more detailed explanation.
1. In method, the author mentioned that the definition of extended PP receipt was adapted by increasing the timeframe. Is the any modification in the number of service received given the timeframe was longer in the new definition? The definition of extended PP receipt was not clearly stated either in the main document or in the supporting material. As far as I am concerned, even the package was different year from year, the number of service received should stay consistent, just like the UNAIDS definition (i.e. two service received in three months)
2. In method, the author suggested no missing data were excluded. Judging from the data, numbers of missing values were not indicated in the table. It would be great if the author could give further explanation about how the missing data were processed.
3. In results, the author compared characteristics between recipients and non-recipients, but there was no statistical testing. If possible, it could be great if the author could provide more statistical support for between group comparison.
4. In discussion, the authors mentioned the armed conflicts in the eastern Ukraine might affect the service coverage. It would be great if the author could brief us about the location of sampling cities in method so that the audience could have a clearer understanding about the extent of the impact the conflicts had on the service coverage.
5. In discussion, the authors suggested GBV was more common in PP recipients than non-recipients. Yet, in the table, only data of the year 2013 and 2015 support this claim. It would be better if the author could provide data to better explain this statement.
6. Besides, the authors showed that consistent condom use and GBV were both more prevalent among PP recipients, meanwhile suggested FSW experienced GBV may be less inclined to seek condoms. These two facts contradicted with each other. It could be great if the author could settle this contradiction that why PP recipient which experienced more GBV than non-recipients displayed more consistent condom use behavior.
7. Given the fact that the current design and analysis were inadequate for a causal reference, the statement in discussion: “sex without a condom may impede access to the PP” sounds a little inappropriate.
8. Overall, this manuscript utilized longitudinal data from a series of national survey with about 5 waves. However, the “trend” of service coverage in this paper was not supported by testing for trends. It would be great if the author could provide more statistical evidence to support the description of coverage changes over the years.
Reviewer #3: Comments:
This paper has comprehensively described the access to HIV-prevention in female sex workers in Ukraine between 2009 and 2017: coverage, barriers and facilitators. While this article has provided numerous information including literature review, document analysis, exploratory analysis. The rich information is not easy to follow to generate a whole story to a specific research question. It has four objectives, which in my opinion is way too long for an article. The contents look more like a project report instead of one original research. I would suggest the authors to shorten the article and specify research questions instead of lump everything together and resubmit again.
Line 82, the reference is not right.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0250024.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
8 Feb 2021

COMMENT REVIEWER 1
1. In this study, the authors carried out a comprehensive literature search, a document analysis, and a quantitative analysis of survey data collected between 2009 and 2017 to identify factors associated with the access of HIV prevention in Ukraine sex workers. The topic is significant, and the description of methodological details are sufficient. 
2. However, I find that the current form of the manuscript is rather lengthy. Specifically, it is difficult to understand how the document search of the Ukrainian prevention package relates to the other objectives. Only very basic bivariate-level descriptive analysis was used to analyze the survey data. Please see below for my specific comments.
CHANGE MADE
No changes made.
JUSTIFICATION
1. We thank the reviewer for their positive feedback.
2. Please, see the corresponding answer to each comment below. 
MAJOR COMMENT REVIEWER 1
Four objectives were stated in this study, which can be distracting. I find the essential question of this study is to assess the coverage of PP in Ukraine over time and understand factors associated with the access. The development of a conceptual framework, rather than presenting it as a separate objective, can be considered as the necessary step of literature review for identifying putative factors of interest.
CHANGE MADE
Please, see revisions in the Conceptual Framework section of the Method, the Conceptual Framework (objective 1) section of the Results, and the Supporting Information Captions. We also created a new supporting information document, S1 Appendix. Literature review method, protocol and results.
JUSTIFICATION
We thank the reviewer for their comments. We have removed the narrative details about the literature review to both reduce the length of the manuscript and focus upon the importance of the conceptual framework in the Method. All information is available in the Supporting Information, should the reader wish to scrutinise details about the literature review, see S1 Appendix. Literature review method, protocol and results.
We do, however, believe that a conceptual framework should be presented as a separate objective in the Methods. To our knowledge, there is no existing framework that presents the current evidence-based factors associated with access to HIV prevention amongst female sex workers (FSW) and highlights which structural level these factors operate on. Only two studies have similar aims; however, we believe our framework is somewhat more comprehensive and thus worthy of a designated section. The systematic review conducted by Nnko and colleagues only targets FSWs in sub-Saharan Africa and only included HIV testing and counselling. Whilst the framework Shannon et al (2015) largely informed our research and provided the basic structure of our framework, our framework presents the specific factors associated with access to HIV prevention. 
MAJOR COMMENT REVIEWER 1
How is the document search relates to the analysis of the questionnaire data? I think it can be more clearly explained.
CHANGE MADE
Please, see changes in the first paragraph, the first sentence of the Review of IBBS questionnaires and variable selection and the first sentence of the Outcome Variable section in the Method.
JUSTIFICATION
We have rephrased the text to clarify how the document analysis relates to the questionnaire data in the Method.
MAJOR COMMENT REVIEWER 1
The authors repeatedly used “factors that influence” access to PP throughout the manuscript. However, limited by the current cross-sectional design and bivariate analysis, I think such wording infers a causal relationship and should be revised to “factors associated”.
CHANGE MADE
Please, see changes in the Introduction, Discussion and Conclusions.
JUSTIFICATION
We have made the suggested revisions. 
MAJOR COMMENT REVIEWER 1
About the sampling design, it seems that the surveys are conducted independently of each other. Is it possible that one respondent was selected multiple times? Any identifier that can explore this issue?
CHANGES MADE
No changes made.
JUSTIFICATION
This is indeed an interesting point; there is no unique participant identifier across surveys that would allow this to be tracked.
MAJOR COMMENT REVIEWER 1
Regarding the survey question design, to what extent are the questions comparable? If the questions are designed in similar ways and there are ways to uniquely identify the participants, one way to improve the analysis is to pool the data together, and include calendar year as an independent variable to test the effect of calendar year. If one individual is sampled multiple times, multilevel analysis can be considered by treating the individual as a level two variable. The study in its current form is a rather scattered analysis of survey data conducted in different years. Given that these surveys essentially adopted a non-probability sampling approach, any conclusions regarding trends or trajectory are weak.
CHANGES MADE
No changes made. 
JUSTIFICATION
We appreciate the reviewer's suggestions here on how to improve the analysis.
In principle, we are open to conducting further statistical analyses, however our preference would be to not do so for two reasons: 1) the aim of the study was exploratory in nature, with the potential to suggest aspects for further study (with the appropriate methodology and statistical power) rather than to provide inferential estimates of relationships. Thus, we feel that the descriptive nature of the analyses allows for this exploration, without relying on inferential statistics to determine what is significant and what is not; 2) as described in the Discussion there were some concerns with the underlying data - we feel that the problems with the data do not preclude a rather descriptive and exploratory analysis, however conducting inferential statistics may suggest more confidence than we have in the assessed relationships.
MAJOR COMMENT REVIEWER 1
In the variable selection section, only the outcome variables were described. Independent variables should also be systematically presented in the Method section.
CHANGES MADE
Please see changes in the Independent Variables in the Method section. 
JUSTIFICATION 
We have added a section titled, Independent Variable in the Method section. 
MAJOR COMMENT REVIEWER 1
To understand factors associated with access, rather than presenting a big table of descriptive analysis by group, the authors may consider using multiple logistic regressions. The outcome variable should be whether access to PP, while the independent variables should be a selection of variables investigated in Table 3.
CHANGES MADE
Please see changes made in the Strengths and Limitations section.
JUSTIFICATION
As described above, the aim of the study was exploratory in nature. Given this, we do not feel that further statistical analyses would make the results clearer or more robust. To further emphasise the need for future studies with more robust testing, we have added another sentence into the Strengths and Limitations section. 
MAJOR COMMENT REVIEWER 1
If I understand correctly, measures of the macrostructural factors are all obtained from individual-level response. They are not upper-level objective measures and are subject to measurement bias. In general, these independent variables need to be much more carefully presented and discussed.
CHANGES MADE
Please see changes made in the second paragraph of the Independent Variables in the Method section, the second paragraph of the Descriptive Longitudinal Group Comparison section in the Results, and the last paragraph of the Strengths and Limitations.
JUSTIFICATION
We thank the Reviewer for their comments and have amended the text to emphasise that these variables are individual-level proxies, as no macrostructural level data could be extracted from the IBBS, due to the individual nature of the questionnaire. 
MAJOR COMMENT REVIEWER 1
Did the authors obtain ethical approvals as human subjects were involved?
CHANGES MADE
See changes made in the Review of IBBS questionnaires and variable selection in the Methods section.
JUSTIFICATION
We have inserted a sentence outlining where Alliance received ethical approval, when conducting IBBS. As we conducted a secondary analysis of data, in which ethical approval was already granted, we do not believe it necessary to include that we did not receive ethical approval for this study. 
MINOR COMMENT REVIEWER 1
Objectives do not need to be presented as a separate section.
CHANGE MADE
Please, see the revised Introduction.
JUSTIFICATION
We have made the suggested revisions.
MINOR COMMENT REVIEWER 1
In the Introduction, the WHO guideline was published in 2014. The authors then stated that in 2006, the Alliance launched a PP in Ukraine adhering to WHO guidelines. The timeline is a bit confusing. Better to clarify.
CHANGES MADE
Please see changes made in the second last paragraph of the Introduction.
JUSTIFICATION
We have edited the text to make this sentence clearer. 
MINOR COMMENT REVIEWER 1
What does it mean by “no missing data were excluded”. Are there missing values?
CHANGES MADE
Please, see lines 199-201 of the Method.
JUSTIFICATION
We have amended this sentence and thank the reviewer for bringing it to our attention. 
******
COMMENT REVIEWER 2
The authors of this manuscript managed to present the overall picture of access to HIV-prevention among female sex workers in Ukraine over nearly a decade. After reading the manuscript, it is obvious that the authors have done extensive work and put in many efforts to explore the barriers and facilitators of access to prevention service in key populations. The manuscript is clearly structured and well-written, supported by literature, data and other materials indicating how the author performed the literature review and exploratory analysis. There are only several questions I would like the author to give a more detailed explanation.
CHANGES MADE
No changes made.
JUSTIFICATION
We thank the reviewer for their positive feedback. 
COMMENT REVIEWER 2
In method, the author mentioned that the definition of extended PP receipt was adapted by increasing the timeframe. Is the any modification in the number of service received given the timeframe was longer in the new definition? The definition of extended PP receipt was not clearly stated either in the main document or in the supporting material. As far as I am concerned, even the package was different year from year, the number of service received should stay consistent, just like the UNAIDS definition (i.e. two service received in three months)
CHANGES MADE
Please, see the second paragraph in the Outcome Variable section in the Methods.
JUSTIFICATION
Based on the reviewer's comments we believe that our description of the outcome definition may have been unclear. The only part of the UNAIDS definition that was adapted was the timeframe. This adaptation was solely because most IBBS questions asked about the previous 12 months, rather than the 3 months referenced in the UNAIDS definition. We have added an explicit description of the outcome definition we applied.
COMMENT REVIEWER 2
In method, the author suggested no missing data were excluded. Judging from the data, numbers of missing values were not indicated in the table. It would be great if the author could give further explanation about how the missing data were processed.
CHANGES MADE
Please, see lines 199-201 of the Method.
JUSTIFICATION
We have amended this sentence and thank the reviewer for bringing it to our attention.
COMMENT REVIEWER 2
In results, the author compared characteristics between recipients and non-recipients, but there was no statistical testing. If possible, it could be great if the author could provide more statistical support for between group comparison.
CHANGES MADE
No changes made.
JUSTIFICATION
We appreciate the reviewer's suggestions here on how to improve the analysis.
In principle, we are open to conducting further statistical analyses, however our preference would be to not do so for two reasons: 1) the aim of the study was exploratory in nature, with the potential to suggest aspects for further study (with the appropriate methodology and statistical power) rather than to provide inferential estimates of relationships. Thus, we feel that the descriptive nature of the analyses allows for this exploration, without relying on inferential statistics to determine what is significant and what is not; 2) as described in the Discussion there were some concerns with the underlying data - we feel that the problems with the data do not preclude a rather descriptive and exploratory analysis, however conducting inferential statistics may suggest more confidence than we have in the assessed relationships.
COMMENT REVIEWER 2
In discussion, the authors mentioned the armed conflicts in the eastern Ukraine might affect the service coverage. It would be great if the author could brief us about the location of sampling cities in method so that the audience could have a clearer understanding about the extent of the impact the conflicts had on the service coverage.
CHANGES MADE
Please, see changes made to lines 348-351 in the Discussion.
JUSTIFICATION
We thank the reviewer for their comment and have amended this sentence accordingly. 
COMMENT REVIEWER 2
In discussion, the authors suggested GBV was more common in PP recipients than non-recipients. Yet, in the table, only data of the year 2013 and 2015 support this claim. It would be better if the author could provide data to better explain this statement.
CHANGES MADE
Please, see changes made to the Discussion.
JUSTIFICATION
We thank the reviewer for bringing this to our attention. We measured GBV at both the work – and the interpersonal level and believe the reviewer may be referring to results from the interpersonal level, where indeed, GBV was more prevalent amongst PP recipients in 2013 and 2015. However, in the discussion, we refer to the prevalence of GBV at the work environment level, which was consistently higher amongst PP recipients amongst all years, hence, we do not deem it necessary to provide further evidence. Nonetheless, we have altered this paragraph to make it clearer that we are referring to GBV at the work level, rather than the interpersonal level. 
COMMENT REVIEWER 2
Besides, the authors showed that consistent condom use and GBV were both more prevalent among PP recipients, meanwhile suggested FSW experienced GBV may be less inclined to seek condoms. These two facts contradicted with each other. It could be great if the author could settle this contradiction that why PP recipient which experienced more GBV than non-recipients displayed more consistent condom use behavior.
CHANGES MADE
Please, see changes made to the Discussion.
JUSTIFICATION
We agree that our findings regarding the higher prevalence of GBV yet higher use of condoms amongst PP recipients is perplexing. We have added subsequent sentence, highlighting the need for future research to investigate this further, however, do not believe additional analysis falls within the scope of this research. 
COMMENT REVIEWER 2
Given the fact that the current design and analysis were inadequate for a causal reference, the statement in discussion: “sex without a condom may impede access to the PP” sounds a little inappropriate.
CHANGES MADE
Please, see changes made to the Discussion.
JUSTIFICATION
We thank the reviewer for their comment and have rephrased this sentence accordingly. 
COMMENT REVIEWER 2
Overall, this manuscript utilized longitudinal data from a series of national survey with about 5 waves. However, the “trend” of service coverage in this paper was not supported by testing for trends. It would be great if the author could provide more statistical evidence to support the description of coverage changes over the years.
CHANGES MADE
No changes made.
JUSTIFICATION
We appreciate the reviewer's suggestions here on how to improve the analysis.
In principle, we are open to conducting further statistical analyses, however our preference would be to not do so for two reasons: 1) the aim of the study was exploratory in nature, with the potential to suggest aspects for further study (with the appropriate methodology and statistical power) rather than to provide inferential estimates of relationships. Thus, we feel that the descriptive nature of the analyses allows for this exploration, without relying on inferential statistics to determine what is significant and what is not; 2) as described in the Discussion there were some concerns with the underlying data - we feel that the problems with the data do not preclude a rather descriptive and exploratory analysis, however conducting inferential statistics may suggest more confidence than we have in the assessed relationships.
*******
COMMENT REVIEWER 3
This paper has comprehensively described the access to HIV-prevention in female sex workers in Ukraine between 2009 and 2017: coverage, barriers and facilitators. 
CHANGES MADE
No changes made.
JUSTIFICATION
We thank the reviewer for their positive feedback.
COMMENT REVIEWER 3
While this article has provided numerous information including literature review, document analysis, exploratory analysis. The rich information is not easy to follow to generate a whole story to a specific research question. It has four objectives, which in my opinion is way too long for an article. The contents look more like a project report instead of one original research. I would suggest the authors to shorten the article and specify research questions instead of lump everything together and resubmit again.
CHANGES MADE
Please, see changes made in the Method section and the Supporting Information.
JUSTIFICATION
We agree with the reviewer that the manuscript is quite lengthy. However, we do deem each objective to be integral in painting and overall, clear picture of the current HIV PP coverage amongst Ukrainian FSWs between 2009 and 2017. As no there is no research with such breadth investigating this study aim, we believe our research to provide a valuable launching pad for future research. WE outline in the discussion that further research is needed, with more robust statistical testing to investigate select variables and our findings. Nonetheless, to reduce the Method section, we have removed the paragraph elaborating on the literature review details to the Supporting Information S1.
COMMENT REVIEWER 3
Line 82, the reference is not right.
CHANGES MADE
No changes made.
JUSTIFICATION
Perhaps because of a discrepancy in the line numbering, we were unable to locate an incorrect reference in line 82 (indeed there was no reference in line 82); however, we have now double checked that all references are correct
10.1371/journal.pone.0250024.r003Decision Letter 1
WangZixinAcademic Editor© 2021 Zixin Wang2021Zixin Wanghttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
30 Mar 2021

Access to HIV-prevention in female sex workers in Ukraine between 2009 and 2017: coverage, barriers and facilitators
PONE-D-20-24729R1
Dear Dr. Blumer,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Zixin Wang, PhD.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: My comments have been adressed very well by the authors and the manuscript has improved a lot. I have no further comments.
Reviewer #2: The authors addressed all my comments. Though it remained confusing that PP-recipients experienced higher gender-based violence as well as showed higher condom use behavior, the authors stated clearly that further study is warranted particularly for this phenomenon. Hopefully further research will be conducted to address this problem.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
10.1371/journal.pone.0250024.r004Acceptance letter
WangZixinAcademic Editor© 2021 Zixin Wang2021Zixin Wanghttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
6 Apr 2021

PONE-D-20-24729R1 
Access to HIV-prevention in female sex workers in Ukraine between 2009 and 2017: coverage, barriers and facilitators 
Dear Dr. Blumer:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Professor Zixin Wang 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE