pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLoS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC8916624PMC8916624.1891662489166243527590810.1371/journal.pone.0262834PONE-D-21-270971Research ArticlePeople and placesGeographical locationsEuropeEuropean UnionMaltaPeople and placesGeographical locationsEuropeEuropean UnionIrelandSocial SciencesSociologyEducationEducational AttainmentPeople and PlacesGeographical LocationsEuropeComputer and Information SciencesComputer NetworksInternetEarth SciencesGeographyHuman GeographyUrban GeographyCitiesSocial SciencesHuman GeographyUrban GeographyCitiesMedicine and Health SciencesEpidemiologyPandemicsMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesViral DiseasesCovid 19How does moving public engagement with research online change audience diversity? Comparing inclusion indicators for 2019 & 2020 European Researchers’ night events
Moving public engagement onlinehttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-0714-6251JensenAaron M.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologySoftwareWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing JensenEric A.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologySupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing DucaEdwardFunding acquisitionProject administrationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing DalyJenniferFunding acquisitionProject administrationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing MundowNiamhFunding acquisitionProject administrationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9981-1502RocheJosephFunding acquisitionProject administrationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Institute for Methods Innovation, Dublin, Ireland2
University of Malta, Msida, Malta3
Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland4
University College Cork, Cork, IrelandMordauntDylan A.Editor – ].
While comprising unique activities in every country, ERN broadly resembles science festivals, albeit focusing on a more expansive range of research disciplines. While science festivals have existed in some form since at least 1831 [ ], they have dramatically increased in number and size in recent decades [ ]. Such festivals are seen as celebrating scientific content and ideas to engage public audiences [ ]. Studies that have explored why people attend science festivals have found visitors value direct interactions with researchers [ ]. Similarly, ERN aims to ensure that European research is visible and participative in how research addresses pressing concerns that face European society.
This paper focuses on who engages with and benefits from research and innovation by exploring key indicators of social inclusion: educational attainment and self- reported, or subjective, household economic well-being status. Although a range of socioeconomic dimensions are not regularly measured among science festival audiences, studies have shown that visitors tend to be already comfortable in such environments due to being privileged in their educational attainment and socioeconomic status [ ]. Likewise, studies of ERN have found high educational qualification levels among audiences [ , ]. Additionally, the digital divide discourse has consistently shown contributions, such as education and income, to inequalities in who accesses and benefits from the digital landscape [ – ].
Combined with a unique context created by the COVID-19 pandemic, this study compares differences in audience profiles for 2019 (offline) and 2020 (online) iterations of ERN events. Given the literature on the digital divide, we hypothesized that the 2020 online ERN events would attract an audience skewed towards higher levels of educational attainment and those with greater levels of subjective economic well-being.

## European researchers’ night: Background and changing context
European Researchers’ Night is a flagship initiative of the European Union tasked with widening access and engagement with European research and innovation. The European Commission provides guidance that ERNs should bring researchers closer to the general public and suggests that a combination of education and entertainment will be most effective to engage with people regardless of the level of their scientific backgrounds [ , ]. With an emphasis on younger audiences, the European Commission suggests a range of activities including hands-on experiments, science shows, simulations, debates, games, competitions, and quizzes. Many event organizers include arts-themed activities such as performances, theatre, stand-up comedy, short stories, and art installations [ , , ]. These events were free of charge to all attendees in both 2019 and 2020.
The COVID-19 pandemic created a ‘natural experiment’ scenario, allowing cross- year comparison between public engagement events that were predominantly face-to-face in 2019 and then shifted online in 2020 [ ]. In 2019, ERN events were organized over two days at the end of September and ran face-to-face events in over 400 cities across Europe, with over 1.6 million attendees reported [ ]. In 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, ERNs were moved to the end of November. Event coordinators were allowed to spread their activities over a longer period and encouraged to shift events online, with over 2.3 million attendees reported [ ]. The overall approach to digital marketing adopted by the three events evaluated here was broadly similar in 2019 and 2020. This empirical study explores shifts in audiences’ profiles from well-established ERN events in two national contexts in 2019 and 2020. Malta and Ireland were selected as the focus for this study because coordinators of these ERN events agreed to collaborate on this research.
First, we briefly introduce the events studied below:

## European researchers’ night in Malta (2019 & 2020)
In Malta in 2019, European Researchers’ Night was reported as the largest national science and arts festival, attracting around 30,000 people. The 2019 iteration of the festival had an emphasis on face-to-face activities. It took over a substantial area of the historic capital of Valletta by running interactive performances, art installations and hands-on activities in its streets and buildings. In the 2020 iteration, the festival went online for the first time by running several digital pre-festival events over a whole month of November and then culminated in a ‘marathon live streaming video’ displayed on a range of digital platforms, including Zoom and Facebook Live. The 2020 iteration was estimated to engage more than 20,000 people in total with online activities that included a STEM escape room, performances, science shows, puppet theatre, pre-recorded theatre and video content, debates, quizzes, question and answer sessions and other formats. Both 2019 and 2020 iterations had marketing campaigns that reached an estimated 300,000 people.

## European researchers’ night in Ireland (2019 & 2020)
In Ireland, European Researchers’ Night includes Cork and Dublin, as different cities with data collected independently over multiple years. In 2019 iterations, ERN activities primarily took place on university campuses over the last weekend of September, including lecture theaters, labs and other campus spaces that are usually occupied by academic staff and students. Activities included walk-up events and allowed people to participate in tours, discussions, viewing posters and science-themed arts and demonstrations. In the 2020 iterations, all ERN activities were shifted online for the first time over the last weekend of November.
The Cork ERN events in 2019 primarily took place on the campus of University College Cork. Public audiences moved between exhibition and information stands to interact with researchers, watch demonstrations, and participate in experiments. In 2020, the event formats changed entirely from face-to-face to virtual. Extensive preparation was required in the lead up to the last weekend of November, with two live-streamed TV shows organized and led by workshops with researchers. These researchers trained in creating short, pre-recorded videos to give an overview of their research projects. These videos were edited and proofread, uploaded to the Cork ERN website, and a selection of researchers were chosen to appear in the live-streamed shows. The Friday night live show targeted adults, and the Saturday morning was dedicated to younger audiences. In addition to these live shows, scientific experiments that could be carried out at home, such as creating yogurt, were advertised to families. Researchers at Teagasc, an Irish research agency in the agri-food sector, organized an experiment box for interested schools in the same week of the live events and researchers carried out Zoom calls with primary schools.
The Dublin ERN events in 2019 were held on the university campus at Trinity College Dublin. The 2019 iteration took the form of a free, public pop-up festival to highlight the diverse range of academic research in Dublin. Held in Trinity’s historic Front Square in Dublin city center, attendees could participate in live experiments, exclusive performances, interactive workshops, stand-up comedy, and storytelling sessions. The organizer for the Dublin event changed between 2019 and 2020 iterations. While the events took place on the same university campus, adjustments were introduced in branding and advertising, including a change to the event’s name. Organizers of the 2020 iteration aimed to disperse events around the campus and Dublin city. However, the Irish government placed a strict lockdown in Dublin and organizers had to switch to an entirely virtual event because no in-person activities were permitted. The shift to online delivery required extensive preparation to revise the program in the weeks leading up to the last weekend of November. The revised program included 60 separate live virtual sessions for 27 different activities and a parallel program of “any time” activities for people of all ages. Additionally, organizers developed a program for primary school children consisting of live science workshops and history tours with researchers providing live interactive virtual sessions in classrooms around Ireland to approximately 1,500 schoolchildren.

## Moving public engagement with research online
In this study, each of the established ERN events changed their program of activities from face-to-face in 2019 to online, virtual events in 2020. This shift was driven by the COVID-19 pandemic, mandated restrictions and concerns for health and safety. Within this unique context, education and many basic services were shifted online. This shift has highlighted longstanding gaps in digital infrastructures, such as the availability and access to broadband internet, interdependencies on digital devices, digital literacy, and inequalities in who can access and benefit from the digital landscape [ – ]. Several studies indicate key socioeconomic factors, such as education and income, contribute to the digital divide via digital and material access [ , ]. In this manuscript, we build on relevant studies regarding the internet and its effects on social inclusion [ ], namely access and engagement with European research and innovation.The organizers of the 2020 iteration of ERN moved events primarily online for the first time, using a range of digital platforms to fulfil their mission to showcase research and widen access and engagement with European research and innovation. This shift of public engagement with research online can be seen as testing the ‘rosy scenario’, whereby the internet can “level the playing field and strengthen the voice of the voiceless” [ ]. However, disadvantaged groups within society may experience barriers following the shift towards greater reliance on digital and material access to online platforms [ ]. We focus on the contribution of education and socio-economic well-being as two factors repeatedly identified in the digital divide literature [ – ].

## Research hypotheses
By exploring indicators of social inclusion among those who engage with and benefit from research [ ], and given the high educational qualification levels among ERN audiences [ , , , ], coupled with the digital inequities [ – ] caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the following hypotheses were formulated:
Hypothesis 1 (H1): Online ERN events in 2020 will attract an audience with higher educational attainment compared to face-to-face events in 2019.
Hypothesis 2 (H2): Online ERN events in 2020 will attract an audience with greater levels of subjective economic well-being compared to face-to-face events in 2019.

## Methods
This research received ethical approval from an ethics committee at Trinity College Dublin. The ensuing sections describe the methods and procedures used to gather audience survey responses and the subsequent analysis. This study utilized secondary data—survey respondents provided electronic, written consent at the events for their anonymized data to be used for research purposes in academic publications. The research approach balanced the practical compromises needed for real-world naturalistic exploratory research and sampling best practices, such as having equal probability of selection as well as random allocation to treatment and control groups. This is often difficult in audience research settings, where public audiences have free choice about where they spend their leisure time [ , ].

## Instrument
The survey instrument was administered in English in both 2019 and 2020 iterations of ERN events. The questionnaire used closed-ended multiple-choice questions (e.g. demographic data and Likert scales about attitudes towards research). The questions analyzed for this paper focus primarily on quantitative nominal and ordinal data (e.g. educational attainment and household income) to compare to broader population data across multiple countries. Educational attainment was measured at the individual level with the following question: “What is the highest level of education you have completed?”. Response options in the 2019 iteration included more categories for educational attainment below an undergraduate degree than 2020 and were combined post-hoc to align both years. Economic well-being [ ] was measured at the household level using a self-report scale, with the following question: “Please indicate what your household can usually afford”. Response options were focused on different abilities to meet basic needs.

## Procedure
Procedures for data collection in 2019 and 2020 event iterations had some similarities and differences. In 2019, all event sites used similar data collection protocols. For example, on the day of the event, adult attendees were approached by data collection volunteers and asked if they were willing to provide answers to a few questions on-site and then respond to a follow-up questionnaire sent by email after the event. The 2019 iteration used a systematic on-site ‘intercept’ sampling approach to mimic random selection to the extent feasible when the audience research setting is face-to-face events [ , ].
The most substantial differences in data collection procedure for the 2020 iterations were based on greater reliance for digital-only research methods and integrations between different digital technologies, including public-facing event websites, booking platforms (such as Eventbrite) and a digital research platform for GDPR-compliant data collection capabilities provided by Qualia Analytics (qualiaanalytics.org). Differences were observed in how each event interfaced with the research platform and invited participation. Still, all sites used a similar method after respondents were invited in pre-event and follow- up questionnaires. Events not using the booking platform used the digital research platform to streamline enrollment in the research.

## Data analysis
Unweighted data were used in the analysis. Some total percentages presented in the results add to less than 100 due to either rounding of decimals, exclusion of response categories or questions that have multiple response options. The analysis was completed using Qualia Analytics’ (qualiaanalytics.org) built-in dashboard, along with SPSS 27 and Microsoft Excel. The significance threshold for all tests was α = .05. National population statistics were utilized in this study as a basis for comparison to address the hypotheses [ – ].

## Sample
We analyzed audience profiles for those attending European Researchers’ Nights events held in 3 cities across Ireland and Malta in 2019 and 2020. This analysis produced descriptive statistics about the audience profiles across each country, year of attendance, and event cases. For all events, the total sample frame of invited respondents (N = 2478) was dispersed between Malta (65%, n = 1601) and Ireland (35%, n = 877). The specific levels of achieved sample size are indicated based on available data for Malta (57%, n = 667) and Ireland (43%, n = 495). The response rate comparison for attendees by country is presented in .
 The data collection was conducted across multiple years. The total sample frame of respondents was distributed between 2019 (29%, n = 722) and 2020 (71%, n = 1756). The specific levels of achieved sample size are indicated based on available response data for 2019 (57%, n = 656) and 2020 (43%, n = 506). The sample frame distribution by year of data collection is presented in .
 While a much larger sample frame is indicated in 2020, the survey was carried out differently in each year of data collection. In 2019, the survey was conducted on the day of each event through face-to-face intercept data collection at entrances to the events. For 2019 events, the total sample frame of invited respondents was determined by those willing to participate (78%, n = 566;) and those who declined to participate (12%, n = 156) at the point of intercept. Subsequently, all events in 2020 were moved online and the survey was carried out digitally with either self-enrollment available on event websites or automated enrollment and email invitations that were connected to booking systems and dependent on the technical capacity of each event organizer.
The data collection presents multiple event cases conducted across each year and location. In Ireland, Case 1 and Case 2 share the same institution and city, but the event organizers changed between 2019 and 2020, and so are presented as unique cases. Whereas, Case 3, also in Ireland, and Case 4, in Malta, share the same event organizers across both years. The comparison for data collection by country, year and event cases is presented in .
 

## Results
This study assessed audience profiles in terms of demographic diversity and representativeness of the wider public. Here, we begin with levels of educational qualification as a key indicator of social inclusion across 2019 and 2020.

## Hypothesis 1: Educational attainment
Considering the aggregate across all countries, cases and event locations, most respondents in 2019 indicated having at least some university-level education (65%, n = 404), with most holding degrees at undergraduate (32%, n = 196) or postgraduate (33%, n = 208) levels. Whereas a much lower portion of respondents indicated having below undergraduate (35%, n = 217) and no formal qualification (0%, n = 1). Similarly in 2020, most respondents indicated having at least some university-level education (73%, n = 404), with most holding degrees at undergraduate (29%, n = 141) or postgraduate (44%, n = 212) levels. Again, a lower portion of respondents indicated having below undergraduate (18%, n = 86) and no formal qualification (9%, n = 45). The comparison for educational attainment of respondents across all events in 2019 and 2020 is presented in .
 These results show observable changes from 2019 to 2020. For example, the two categories with an increase are ‘no formal qualification’ (+9%) and ‘postgraduate’ (+11%) levels, while the two categories with a decrease are ‘below undergraduate’ (-17%) and ‘undergraduate’ (-3%) levels. The observed ±8% shift between ‘below undergraduate’ (2019, 35% ⇒ 2020, 27%) and ‘above undergraduate’ (2019, 65% ⇒ 2020, 73%) categories show that ERN attendees are consistently highly educated [ ].
Furthermore, we found that a larger proportion of adult attendees to European Researchers’ Night events were more highly educated compared to the respective national populations (See ). Compared with national figures for each country, these figures have shown a consistent overrepresentation of university-educated attendees (or degree holders). Indeed, as a combined segment, degree holders attending ERN events in Malta and Ireland represented more than 50% above the respective national populations in both 2019 and 2020. However, across both countries a smaller portion of attendees in 2019 and 2020 held ‘undergraduate degrees’ (Malta: +26% ⇒ +20%; Ireland: +17% ⇒ +13%) while a larger portion held ‘postgraduate degrees’ (Malta: +24% ⇒ +32%; Ireland: +33% ⇒+41%) than the respective national populations. The comparison for the educational attainment of respondents across Malta and Ireland in 2019 and 2020 compared to national populations is presented in .
 Compared with national figures for each country, these figures have shown a consistent underrepresentation of below university-educated attendees (or non-degree holders). As a combined segment, non-degree holders attending ERN events in Ireland represented 29% below the respective national populations in 2019 and 34% below the respective national populations in 2020. Whereas non-degree holders attending ERN events in Malta represented 49% below the respective national populations in 2019 and 51% below the respective national populations in 2020. By comparison, the proportion of ERN attendees with qualifications ‘below undergraduate degree’ level decreased from 2019 to 2020 (Malta: -1%; ⇒ -19%; Ireland: -21% ⇒ -30%). However, the percentage of attendees with ‘no qualification’ went up (Malta: -48% ⇒ -32%; Ireland: -8% ⇒ -4%) in 2020.
ERN attendees in the sample across all years and countries have shown underrepresentation of those with ‘no qualification’ compared with national population statistics. However, Malta’s results are particularly striking for this category, with an increase (16%) in participation in this category from 2019 to 2020. Nevertheless, there is still a substantial underrepresentation of those with no qualifications in Malta, given that almost half (48%) of its population has no formal education qualification.
Considering the relationships in the sample for this study, we conducted a chi-square test of independence comparing the 2019 and 2020 Qualification Levels. A significant interaction was found with a large effect size (DF = 3, X2 = 91.951, p < .001, Cramér’s V = 0.288), indicating a strong relationship between Qualification and Year that predicts 8.29% of the variance.

## Hypothesis 2: Subjective economic well-being
We note that between 73–82% of ERN respondents in each country and year indicated an ability of their household to afford ‘All needs or more’ (Malta: 78.7% ⇒ 80.1%; Ireland: 73.7% ⇒ 81.4%). In contrast, a much lower portion of respondents indicated an ability of their household to afford ‘Some needs but not all’ (Malta: 21.3% ⇒ 19.9%; Ireland: 26.3% ⇒ 18.6%). Within these categories, we observed overall shifts of ±1.4% in Malta and ±7.7% in Ireland between years. The comparison for the subjective economic well-being of respondents across each country in 2019 and 2020 is presented in .
 We conducted a chi-square test of independence comparing years and subjective economic well-being in both countries. This test found no significant interaction between Economic Well-being and Year (DF = 1, X2 = 0.474, p = .491).

## Discussion
In this paper, the profiles of audiences engaging with online and offline public engagement with research events were compared, taking advantage of the natural experiment conditions created by the pandemic. This research combined evaluation evidence from two European countries and several cities in a cross-year comparison between face-to-face (2019) and online (2020) iterations of the same public engagement events. All these events were part of European Researchers’ Night (ERN), an initiative of the European Union (EU) aimed at widening access and engagement with research.
Shifts in demographic indicators of social inclusion were identified between the same set of 2019 (offline) and 2020 (online) events. Given the literature on the digital divide, it was hypothesized that the 2020 online engagement events would draw an audience skewed towards higher levels of educational attainment and those with greater levels of subjective economic well-being. The results do not support this hypothesis. Instead, it was found that audiences’ level of educational attainment was more polarized in the online context: There were increased prevalence at both the lowest and highest ends of the attainment spectrum. In other words, the online events enabled greater participation of both the highly educated and those with no educational qualifications. These findings suggest the possibility that moving public engagement with research online may have had a democratizing effect on participation.
Also based on the digital divide literature, it was hypothesized that the online events in 2020 would garner an audience with greater levels of subjective economic well- being compared to the face-to-face events in 2019. The results weakly supported the hypothesis, with already high levels of subjective economic well-being reported by audiences in the offline events repeated in the online events. The audiences in Ireland were somewhat more likely to be in the highest subjective economic well-being category in the online context, but the effect size was extremely small for this variable overall.
Ultimately, the results indicate that the effects of shifting public engagement events online are mixed when it comes to social inclusion. On one of the key dimensions tested, there was an increase in audience diversity (participants with no educational qualifications). While on most dimensions, the indicators were stable (remaining skewed towards high socio-economic status) or decreasing in social inclusion. Therefore, the findings demonstrate that it is possible to leverage the online engagement pathway to enhance social inclusion, despite the headwinds presented by the digital divide. Yet, there remains a steep hill to climb for public engagement with research to achieve more equitable audience participation.

 10.1371/journal.pone.0262834.r001Decision Letter 0
MordauntDylan AAcademic Editor© 2022 Dylan A Mordaunt2022Dylan A Mordaunthttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
27 Oct 2021

PONE-D-21-27097How Does Moving Public Engagement with Research Online Affect Audience Diversity? Comparing Inclusion Indicators for 2019 & 2020 European Researchers’ Night EventsPLOS ONE
A Dhuine Uasail Dr. Roche,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
 Please see the more detailed responses below. The responses were wide ranging and it's important to acknowledge the views of all the reviewers and respond to each, of which I look forward to receiving.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Dec 11 2021 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Le gach dea-ghu,
Dylan A Mordaunt, MB ChB, FRACP, FAIDH
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. Please amend your authorship list in your manuscript file to include author
3. We note that you have indicated that data from this study are available upon request. PLOS only allows data to be available upon request if there are legal or ethical restrictions on sharing data publicly. For more information on unacceptable data access restrictions, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions.  
In your revised cover letter, please address the following prompts:
   a) If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially sensitive information, data are owned by a third-party organization, etc.) and who has imposed them (e.g., an ethics committee). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent.
    b) If there are no restrictions, please upload the minimal anonymized data set necessary to replicate your study findings as either Supporting Information files or to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. For a list of acceptable repositories, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-recommended-repositories.
We will update your Data Availability statement on your behalf to reflect the information you provide.
4. Please include your full ethics statement in the ‘Methods’ section of your manuscript file. In your statement, please include the full name of the IRB or ethics committee who approved or waived your study, as well as whether or not you obtained informed written or verbal consent. If consent was waived for your study, please include this information in your statement as well.
5. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Additional Editor Comments (if provided):
Thank you for your submission. We had widely ranging feedback, all of which I've included below. The article presents what some might call a case study and one of the authors has referred to as a natural experiment, each of which are used in different social sciences contexts, which was part of the challenge in editing this paper. With specific reference to the publication criteria (https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/criteria-for-publication):
1. The study appears to present the results of original research.
2. Results do not appear to have been published elsewhere.
3. Experiments, statistics, and other analyses are require some elaboration and further detail, as outlined by the reviewers below.
4. Conclusions are presented in an appropriate fashion and are supported by the data.
5. The article is presented in an intelligible fashion and is written in standard English.
6. The research meets all applicable standards for the ethics of experimentation and research integrity.
7. The article adheres to appropriate reporting guidelines and community standards for data availability.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: I Don't Know
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: No
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Comment 1: This paper adopted a case, the 2019 & 2020 European Researchers’ Night Events, to investigate the digital divide of online and offline participants, however, relying on survey methods. The limitations are obvious, conclusion and implications can only be understood in a narrow context, such as the European Researchers’ Night Events. Hence, from my perspective, a qualitative method seems more appropriate for this type of research.
Comment 2: The research questions including two hypotheses: audience participation in online events seem to have higher educational attainment and subjective economic well-being when compared to those engaged in offline activities, seems can not provide this field with enough contribution and implications. It is more like a course paper than a journal paper, and I recommend you rethink the RQs and Hypos based on what theoretical and practical implications you can provide to this field.
Comment 3: The sample method for this second hand survey data, which seems to have adopted a convenience sampling method, can not guarantee representativeness, which in turn undermines the conclusion and generality of your study.
Comment 4: In the data analysis part, more advanced statistical methods could be applied, instead of too descriptive evidence, to show direct and robust evidence for the reader’s understanding.
Reviewer #2: Summary
A descriptive review of the change in audience attending the ERN, an annual European science festival, as it transforms from physical to digital delivery in a pre and post-COVID-19 climate. The study compares two social inclusion metrics within nations Malta and Ireland, namely levels of education attained and self-reported economic well-being. The manuscript clearly delineates between the evening expo events and how online content has compensated with mixed media interactions available in the digital space. The author articulates their hypotheses, methods, and results understandably.
Hypotheses of increased educational attainment levels and greater self-reported economic well-being were both upheld and not. In the context of diversity, questions arise whether COVID-19 potentiated skews in education and or economic well-being could be explored further. The manuscript could be strengthened with other measures of diversity and additional examination into reasons for hypotheses not being upheld; if the data is available to support more investigation. A title change to remove diversity without any revision of the data would be less misleading.
Title: Diversity
Diversity and inclusion metrics could be disaggregated for gender or age as a key measure of social inclusion. Ethnicity and linguistics may or may not be relevant or easy to compare given the two nations lack of direct comparison; however, the survey was entirely completed in English. Differences between events, and those speaking English as a first or second language at both events may reveal other influences on audience participation, socio-economic status and or other barriers to accessing the event eg. disability, isolation.
Title: Inclusion Indicators
Quantify the number of inclusion metrics as measures are not exhaustive. 2 inclusion indicators would frame the body of work better.
Abstract: Digital Divide
Income and education are often cited with age, linguistics, race and other factors in context of digital divide. Would help to acknowledge the communication infrastructure necessary to support digital delivery, comparison between the two locations Malta/Ireland and why other indicators have not been included in the statistical measure.
Introduction: Literature
Digital divide literature review methodology would be helpful to include.
ERN Night: Marketing campaigns
Aside from spend, were the demographic targeting settings for digital marketing the same for both? Could this have impacted the diversity of the audience / outcomes of the study?
Discussion: COVID-19
Given the pre and post-pandemic setting for the study, what relevance does it bring to bear on the digital divide and it’s impacts on diverse audiences’ engagement with science?
Reviewer #3: This study provides an interesting ‘natural experiment’ comparing in-person and online attendance at research engagement events pre- and mid-COVID pandemic (2019 vs 2020). This is a well-presented manuscript which will be of interest to many event organisers who continue to be impacted by COVID-19 in their ability to fully present in-person events and may have valid concerns about their ability to reach certain audiences online. The authors have done well to connect their results to the so-called ‘digital divide’, and with a few minor changes will be able to publish a study that has wide significance across numerous fields.
Minor comments:
The keywords provided are limited and repetitive: I recommend adding “science communication” or science/research engagement/outreach or “public engagement in science (or research)” or likewise to help researchers in those fields find this study when it is published.
Tables 1, 2 and 3 use the terms ‘enrolled’ and ‘achieved’ but these are not easy to understand out of context and do not appear well defined in text or in the table captions. Perhaps it would be cleared to use ‘recruited’ or ‘invited’ and ‘responded’, which would align more closely with the description in the methods.
From the in-text description it is clear which city ‘Case 1’ and ‘Case 2’ refers to, so I am unclear why they cannot simply be referred to by the city in the table, i.e. Dublin 1 and Dublin 2. It seems to introduce an unnecessary element of confusion to use different labels in the table when they are clearly identified elsewhere.
For the chi-square test of hypothesis 2, no significant effect has been detected and I think the current wording ‘an extremely weak statistical relationship’ is misleading. Please rephrase to make it clear no relationship was detected between economic wellbeing and year. However, you might consider running the test on Ireland alone to see if there is a difference when you separate country. Is there any economic difference between Ireland and Malta that would contribute to a different result?
In response to Q3 – have the authors made data full available: In the authors’ responses they have indicated data from the study will be available on request, whereas the PLOS Data Policy requires data to be fully available as part of the manuscript, supporting information or in a public repository. The authors should make their data available in such a manner, or explain why they are unable to meet the policy’s requirements.
Ethics statement – is there an approval number from the Trinity College ethics committee? This statement is quite vague: “an ethics committee” – is there more than one?
Major comments:
The introduction to the ERN events is generally very good and provides sufficient background to non-European readers. However, it might be useful to know if the European Commission has particular aspirations in terms of who is reached through these events, for instance those with less formal education or scientific qualifications. If such goals exist, it would be useful context in which to read this study’s findings and could be linked in the discussion in terms of whether a shift to online helped or hindered the reaching of these particular audiences.
It is not clear from the manuscript whether ERN events are free or ticketed. This is relevant information since moving events online would have a likely impact on cost (if there is any cost to attendees). Please amend the manuscript to make this distinction clear: if events are free, it can be mentioned early and dismissed as a potential factor influencing attendance. If there is a cost to attendees, then this should be considered as part of the implications of moving online and should be canvassed in the discussion.
The discussion section is limited and based mostly around the ‘digital divide’, however, there are several interesting avenues the authors could discuss their findings in light of. For instance, for the Ireland events in particular it appears there was a focus on in-person events held on university campuses: there is currently no discussion on whether the shift to online may have facilitated a greater breadth of attendees by democratising the venue and being more open to attendees with less formal education who otherwise might feel uncomfortable at a university-based event.
Currently missing from the discussion is any form of recommendation or reassurance for those running such outreach events. It would be useful to comment on such events in the context of these results, especially as some event organisers may choose to operate ‘dual mode’ or provide some online events to help attract a wider audience. It would also be interesting to discuss whether delivering events online was cost-effective to organisers and funders as a way of reaching a broader range of attendees perhaps in addition to in-person events.
Overall, I think the authors haven’t done their study justice in the discussion: their findings raise several interesting points about whether online delivery might attract a wider range of attendees to such events and better achieve goals to connect with audiences with less formal education. At least this should be discussed, potentially in the form of recommendations for event organisers or further research examining events that were forced online in 2020/21. This could also be better tied back to science/research outreach and the goal of connecting with a broader range of audiences.
Reviewer #4: The manuscript is technically sound, well-written, and all data discussed are clearly presented. The statistics need some further explanation to ensure that they have been rigorously tested. As an example, you refer to four 'cases' but it is not clear how these were tested statistically, and how classifying these into 4 cases is important. Overall, the paper demonstrates an important finding, that shifting public science events online can polarise the audience by strengthening attendance from higher educated groups whilst also attracting those with no formal qualification. I felt that the manuscript was rather too simplistic in this analysis however, as there was no discussion about other interesting demographics and how these may be affected by a move to an online delivery. It was also not explained why Malta and Ireland were chosen for this study, and no recommendations were given for improving online events to attract a wider demographic. I would be interested to see a revised version that presents evidence for future event organisers (and other science communication practitioners) to use to ensure greater representation of diverse society at these events.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes: Katy Thomas
Reviewer #3: No
Reviewer #4: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Reviewers comments.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0262834.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
29 Dec 2021

1. Thank you for including your ethics statement on the online submission form: "This research received ethical approval from an ethics committee at Trinity College Dublin.". To help ensure that the wording of your manuscript is suitable for publication, would you please also add this statement at the beginning of the Methods section of your manuscript file. 
[This line has now been added to the manuscript]
2. Please amend the title either on the online submission form or in your manuscript so that they are identical. 
[The online submission title has been changed to match the manuscript title]
3. Please include a copy of Table 4. 
[Table 4 is now included]
4. We note your current Data Availability statement: "The data underlying the results presented in the study are available from the authors on request." 
[The Data Availability statement has now been changed to say: "The anonymized dataset underlying the results presented in the study will be published on the open-access database Zenodo following acceptance and prior to publication, in line with PLOS ONE data accessibility policy."]
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0262834.r003Decision Letter 1
MordauntDylan AAcademic Editor© 2022 Dylan A Mordaunt2022Dylan A Mordaunthttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
6 Jan 2022

How does moving Public Engagement with Research Online Change Audience Diversity? Comparing Inclusion Indicators for 2019 & 2020 European Researchers’ Night events.
PONE-D-21-27097R1
Dear Dr. Roche,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Dylan A Mordaunt, MB ChB, MPH, MHLM, FRACP, FAIDH
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Thank you for your resubmission. I accept the responses and this now meets the criteria for publication.
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0262834.r004Acceptance letter
MordauntDylan AAcademic Editor© 2022 Dylan A Mordaunt2022Dylan A Mordaunthttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
4 Mar 2022

PONE-D-21-27097R1 
How does moving Public Engagement with Research Online Change Audience Diversity?Comparing Inclusion Indicators for 2019 & 2020 European Researchers’ Night events. 
Dear Dr. Roche:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Dylan A Mordaunt 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE