3386inquiryInquiry: A Journal of Medical Care Organization, Provision and FinancingInquirySAGE PublicationsPMC8977690897769089776903536356210.1177/00469580221086369Explaining the Determinants of Pediculosis Control and Prevention: A
Qualitative Study in Southern Iran
ToghroliRazie PhD HosseiniZahra PhD ZiapourArash PhD YariAsiyeh PhD RahimiSeyyede FatemePhD MehediNafiulBSS 1Social Determinants in Health
Promotion Research Center, Hormozgan Health Institute, Hormozgan University of Medical
Sciences, Bandar Abbas, Iran2Tobacco and Health Research Center, Hormozgan University of Medical
Sciences, Bandar Abbas, Iran. Corresponding Author First: Tobacco and
Health Research Center, Hormozgan University of Medical Sciences, Bandar Abbas,
Iran. 7851919814, Email: hosseinishirin@ymail.com
3Social Development & Health
Promotion Research Center, Health Institute, Kermanshah University of Medical
Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran. Corresponding Author Second: Social
Development & Health Promotion Research Center, Health Institute, Kermanshah
University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah 6715847141, Iran. Email:
arashziapoor@gmail.com4School of Health, Hormozgan University of Medical
Sciences, Bandar Abbas, Iran5School of Health, Bandar Abbas University of Medical
Sciences, Hormozgan, Iran6Department of Social Work, Shahjalal University of Science and
Technology, Sylhet, Bangladesh✉Arash Ziapour, Social Development &
Health Promotion Research Center, Health Institute, Kermanshah University of
Medical Sciences, Kermanshah 6715847141, Iran. Email:
arashziapoor@gmail.com
✉ZahraHosseini, Tobacco and Health Research
Center, Hormozgan University of Medical Sciences, Bandar Abbas, Iran.
7851919814, Email: hosseinishirin@ymail.com
142022590046958022108636900469580221086369542022© The Author(s) 2022This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which
permits non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work
without further permission provided the original work is attributed as
specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).

## Abstract
In many regions of the world, human head lice infestations caused by
Pediculus capitis are a major health concern among
school-aged children. This study was carried out to explain variables
influencing pediculosis prevention and control from the perspective of parents
and teachers of female elementary school pupils, as well as healthcare
practitioners in Bandar Abbas, Iran. Participants in this qualitative study
included 23 participants, including parents and teachers of primary school
girls, as well as healthcare practitioners. Purposive sampling was employed and
sustained until data saturation was reached. Data was acquired through in-depth
interviews and evaluated using content analysis in the form of constant
comparison. To assess the quality of the outcomes, Lincoln and Guba’s criteria
were used. The data were extracted into 2 primary categories, including
challenges and facilitators to controlling pediculosis, each with several
subcategories as follows: 1) economic-political aspects; 2) family factors; 3)
social-cultural elements; 4) personal and mental issues; 5) geographical
position of the investigated region; 6) school and education factors; and 7)
factors related to medications and therapy. There were 2 types of facilitators:
1) informative factors and 2) social-cultural variables. According to the
findings, pediculosis prevention, control, and treatment necessitate
multifaceted and multi-level intervention. Some solutions must be addressed at
the personal-psychological, familial, political-economic, geographical, and
informational levels, as well as school-related concerns, social stigma
elimination, and evaluation of cultural components of the issue at the social
level.
Keywords: pediculosis, lice, prevention, qualitative study, Iran

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Jan 9; Accepted 2022 Feb 22; Collection date 2022 Jan-Dec.

## What do we already know about this topic?
The variables that present challenges for frontline workers in dealing with
pediculosis include economic-political aspects; family factors;
social-cultural elements; personal and mental issues; the geographical
location of the investigated region; school and education factors;
medication and therapy factors; and 2 types of facilitators: informative
factors and social-cultural variables.

## How does your research contribute to the field?
According to the findings of this study, pediculosis prevention, control, and
treatment necessitate multidimensional and multilevel intervention. Some
remedies must be applied at the personal-psychological, familial,
political-economic, geographical, and informational levels, as well as
school, social stigma, and cultural aspects of the issue at the societal
level.

## What are your research’s implications towards theory, practice, or
policy?
This is a study that used a content analysis technique, and its goal is not
to extract a theory; rather, understanding the ideas recovered from the data
might help policymakers prioritize planning to solve this health problem.
Additionally, parents, school health educators, and other health providers
will take greater precautions to prevent and control pediculosis.

## Background
For more than 10 000 years, pediculosis has been a widespread global concern for
human communities as a factor affecting societal health caused by an external
parasite called lice.
 
 Pediculosis has remained a health concern despite advances in health and
medical science. , 
This sickness is caused by a 2–4 mm forced external blood-sucking parasite known as
lice. Lice are wingless arthropods that feed on human blood and infest hair and
skin. Nits are white, oval-shaped eggs that are about 4 mm in size, cling to the
hair shaft, and hatch in 8–10 days. They stick out about 1–1.5 mm above the hair shaft.
 

Lice infestation in the head is one of the most common parasitic disorders in people
of all ages, with a high prevalence in congested areas, especially in schools for
children aged 3 to 11. Girls are more likely than boys to become infested. The most
prevalent form of lice transmission is through personal contact. Contact with shared
products or the close proximity of personal objects such as towels, combs,
undergarments, caps, scarves, and mattresses can also result in indirect infestation.
 

According to the National Pediculosis Association of the United States, an epidemic
begins when the infestation rate of head lice surpasses 5%. , Several studies from various
places in Iran found head lice infestation rates ranging from .47% to 28.5%.
 
 In Iran, several studies on the epidemiology of head lice and its risk
factors have been conducted. In an investigation in Sirjan county, parents'
literacy, family size, school grade, and having a bathroom in the house were some of
the factors reported to have significant associations with the frequency of head
lice infestations
 
; sex, father’s occupation, mother’s education level, having a bathroom in the
house, previous history of the infestation, and nationality were explored in an
Aran-Bidgol county study
 
; geographical area (city or village), itching, student’s age, the prevalence
of the infestation in the family, and history of infestation were found in a Damghan
county study
 
; school grade, family size, and type of house were the factors in a Khajeh
city study
 
; the age of children, father’s occupation, father’s education, mother’s
education, using a common comb, and school grade were revealed in a Paveh city study
 
; and children’s age, use of hair oil, and the presence or absence of dandruff
were explored to have pivotal relations with head lice infestations in an Iranshahr
county study.
 

According to an Iranian meta-analysis, the prevalence of pediculosis among students
in 2015 was 7.4%, with 1.6% being boys and 5.8% being girls.
 
 However, the prevalence of head lice infestation varies by region due to the
effects of various variables such as age, gender, residence location, presence of
health instructors in schools, social status of parents, inappropriate socioeconomic
situation, population density in a family, and low standard of living and quality of
life. , According to,
 
 20.8% of youngsters in Bandar Abbas’s Chahestani area were afflicted with
head lice. There were 33.26% girls and 6% boys among them. Sanie Dehkordi et al
discovered head lice in 56.15% of primary school girls in Sirik County, Hormozgan
Province, Iran.
 

In addition to immediate symptoms (e.g., head itching, skin scrapes, and irritations
caused by lice saliva and feces beneath the skin), people infested with lice
parasites are prone to sleeplessness, psychological troubles, scholastic failure,
melancholy, and secondary diseases. Other problems associated with head lice
infestations include infestation and purulent discharge, scalp swelling and
separation, allergies, and loss of social status.
 
 In comparison to adults, elementary school students are the most vulnerable
to head lice infestations. Girls are more susceptible than boys,
 
 due to their higher hair volume. , Lice infestation in children
has an impact on their quality of life, education level, and the spread of
infestation. , , 
In general, lice infestations are more prevalent in low-income and congested
communities, though the prevalence is not limited to one socioeconomic
class. , Age, economic situation, sex, family size, environmental health
status, social class, and education level are all factors that influence the
occurrence of lice infestations. Despite the fact that improved health and hygiene
have a critical role in lowering pediculosis, this parasite infestation may be found
even in industrialized nations. , 
To improve health, the most effective strategy to combat the infestation is to use
shampoos containing insecticides such as lindane and permethrin on individuals with
the condition, as well as public education in affected communities. , In terms of
the relevance of schools as congested places where pediculosis may arise, they are
the best option for providing education and treating infestations.
 
 According to WHO reports, despite better health standards, medical science
advancements, efforts, and expenditures, lice infestation has not been reduced and
continues to be a public health issue.
 

As a result, the current study was conducted in order to determine the causes and
controlling factors of pediculosis as well as to identify affected people’s
knowledge, perspectives, experiences, feelings, and perceptions. Furthermore, the
majority of contemporary pediculosis research has used quantitative, epidemiologic,
clinical, and descriptive approaches, with few qualitative studies on the reasons
for pediculosis control. Therefore, the current study employed a qualitative
approach to identify variables influencing pediculosis management from the
perspectives of Iranian parents, teachers, and healthcare experts.

## Materials and Methods

## Study Area
We employed a qualitative technique as well as a traditional content analysis
method.

## Data Collection Tools and Methodologies
The current study was conducted in Bandar Abbas, Iran, and employed a qualitative
approach as well as the traditional qualitative content analysis method. In some
cases, the purposive technique was used to select participants, whereas in
others, the snowball-sampling method was used (8 subjects). The researcher
invited participants who were aware of the issue or who had pediculosis among
their primary school girls to introduce them to others who had similar
experiences. Prior experience dealing with people suffering from pediculosis, as
well as a desire to participate, were required for inclusion.
The semi-structured depth interviews with open responses were the primary data
collection approach in this study. Face-to-face interviews were conducted in
health houses and schools in person and over the phone from late February 2019
to early January 2020, inviting healthcare employees (e.g., employees working in
family health and environmental health, school health educators, psychologists,
and physicians working in this area) as well as parents and teachers (11
months). Each interview lasted between 15 and 46 minutes. The Hormozgan
University of Medical Sciences ethics committee assigned this study an ethical
code (IR.HUMS.REC.1398.435). Before the interview, the researchers designed the
questions in in-person and online sessions as well as provided question
guidelines. In addition, the researchers stated the study’s goal. The purpose
and interview approach were then explained to the participants, who then signed
the consent form and answered the questions. It is worth noting that each
participant’s questions were asked in a different order, and more exploratory
questions were provided based on their previous responses. Participants were
allowed to choose the time and venue of their interviews.
The majority of the interviews were performed and transcribed simultaneously
prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, with the remaining 5 interviews being completed
over the phone due to pandemic and quarantine restrictions. This technique was
used to gain access to a diverse range of people. In all interviews, the
interviewer introduced himself/herself, stated the objectives, and then handed
out a consent form for participants to fill out and sign. In cases of absence,
the consent letter was sent or texted to each participant, who then resent the
signed letter through WhatsApp or email. Following the transcription of
face-to-face interviews, the texts were given to participants for review and an
indication of approval. Following basic explanations and an appreciation for
participating, interviews began. The interviews were properly taped and
transcribed verbatim.
The questions were developed using the research background as well as the
opinions of consultants and faculty members. To divide the questions,
predesigned objective-based (expressing barriers and facilitators of pediculosis
control from the standpoint of participants) and exploratory items were
employed.

## Some Questions Were as Follows:

• What challenges do you have when it comes to controlling and
treating lice?
• What issues do you have with pediculosis in your family?
• Who, in the opinion of the participants, are the facilitators of
pediculosis control? What difficulties did you have when treating
your child’s pediculosis?
• What could make it easier for you to tackle the problems?
• What are your suggestions for resolving these issues?
• What can help you get through this scenario and overcome the issues
you have mentioned (social, economic, emotional, physical, and
mental)?
• How did the support of others assist you in dealing with this
situation?
• Was the resurrected assistance beneficial in dealing with the
problems created by this infestation?
• Is a lack of protective facilities a factor influencing pediculosis
encounters among children, family members, and school members, and
if so, how?
• What difficulties do you think are the root causes of pediculosis
in families?
• What challenges did you face while treating pediculosis in your
clients and their families?
• What could be more beneficial in resolving challenges that schools
and healthcare facilities encounter when treating pediculosis? What
solutions do you have to relevant problems?

Researchers in this study reached theoretical saturation after interview number
21. Two further interviews were conducted, and data collection ended after
interview number 23.

## Data Analysis
The data were analyzed using the MAXQDA-10 software in accordance with the 5
procedures proposed by Graneheim and Lundman.
 
 The information recorded on the audio recorder was transcribed word for
word immediately following the conclusion of the interviews. Before moving on to
the next interview, each one’s data were analyzed and coded. After each
interview was completed and its text entered into the program, the text of the
interview was reviewed line by line, and each portion of the participant’s
statement relevant to the study topic was coded. The codes were grouped
according to their similarities and differences. In contrast, the codes and
categories were compared across all interviews.
The first and third authors performed data analysis using the 5-steps of the
Graneheim and Lundman approach
 
 and MAXQDA-10 software. Immediately following the first interview, the
researcher and colleagues put the content of the interviews into the Word 2010
program. Researchers examine interview materials 4 times in the second phase to
comprehend the overall context of the text. In the third phase, interview
transcripts were read word for word, and considerable effort was spent grouping
codes with similar meanings into the same subcategory. Researchers also
discovered a connection between similar codes. In the fifth phase, codes and
classifications were organized into primary categories with a more complete
notion and a high level of abstraction. After that, classifications and
subcategories were retrieved. Based on their diverse ideas, all data analysis
procedures were exchanged at the authors' meeting.

## Rigor
To improve the quality of the results, Guba and Lincoln’s criteria were used.
 
 Researchers chose individuals with a wide range of demographic features
to increase the credibility of the study. To ensure dependability, findings were
distributed to participants in-person and by phone, allowing them to voice their
thoughts and endorse the results. Furthermore, the data analysis and conclusions
were shared with 4 top qualitative researchers, who approved the analytical
processes and findings. The first, fifth, and corresponding authors all
contributed to the analysis and coding process to improve confirmability by
attending meetings and exchanging ideas and criticisms. To enhance
transferability, a full explanation of the study as well as various direct
statements from participants were presented. Furthermore, the findings were
disseminated to 6 people who lived in this geographic region and had a
comparable socioeconomic position to the research participants but did not
engage in the study. And they verified that they had comparable experience to
the research subjects.

## Ethical Considerations
The Hormozgan Medical Science Ethical Committee examined and approved this study
(IR.HUMS.REC.1398.435). Furthermore, all participants signed the consent form
and were allowed to abandon the study procedure at any point in accordance with
ethical guidelines. Researchers informed participants about the interview
technique, the outcome, and their anonymity.

## Results
In total, 23 people took part in the study, and shows their demographic
information. Furthermore, data analysis yielded 58 codes, 9 subcategories, and 2
categories ( ),
which are mentioned below with quotes and explanations.
 The majority of participants (61%) were female, with the remaining (39%) being males
between the ages of 30 and 40. In addition to parents of elementary school students,
all participants with pediculosis were welcomed to take part in the study. Family
health professionals, school health experts, environmental health experts,
psychologists, family doctors, and teachers with a bachelor’s degree or higher were
among those who took part (6%). According to the data, there are 2 primary types of
pediculosis control obstacles and facilitators in Bandar Abbas. The categories
included a wide range of subcategories and conditions, resulting in 7 subcategories
of barriers experienced by people with pediculosis or similar situations. On the
other hand, subcategories pertinent to pediculosis treatment facilitators were
highlighted by participants.

## Obstacles
The current study revealed several obstructions to pediculosis medication in the
studied society, and all of these impediments served as impediments to preventing,
regulating, and treating this condition. This category had several subcategories,
including economic-political variables, family considerations, social-cultural
features, personal and mental concerns, the geographical location of the researched
region, school and education components, and medicine and treatment factors.

## Economic-Political Factors
Participants, in some cases, reported financial and social status as variables
impacting their difficulty in preventing and treating pediculosis. Furthermore,
as a result of recent restrictions imposed on the Iranian people, numerous
participants mentioned sanctions as a barrier to unfettered access to effective
and diverse treatments for this ailment. Others perceive sanctions as putting
economic pressure on people’s lives and jobs, pushing them to overlook sanitary
issues. Furthermore, because many people are in dire financial straits, they are
unaware of a condition known as pediculosis. Some families, however, come from
higher socioeconomic backgrounds and can afford to purchase better and more
expensive medications from abroad to treat this infestation, whilst other
low-income families cannot. This area includes sections on poverty, low family
income, sanctions, and financial difficulties.
Participant 6: “What can I say to someone who goes through the garbage
looking for food and other items? It makes no difference to such a poor
individual. ”
Participant 3: “Economic issues such as the family’s income level are
quite important. Families with a lot of money, for example, may afford to
buy pricey, high-quality shampoos that are more effective. Sanctions, on the
other hand, have hampered the entry of flawless foreign pharmaceuticals,
resulting in increased prices for high-quality shampoos. ”
Participant 3: “Households with a greater socioeconomic level have fewer
children and can pay more attention to their children and their cleanliness,
whereas overpopulated families may overlook the hygiene of all of their
children.”
Participant 8: “Most impoverished families must receive donations to
notify them of hygiene difficulties because many shampoos are quite
expensive.”

## Family Factors
Participants identified financial reasons as the most important subcategory,
which included a wide range of options. Many participants, for example,
expressed worries about family factors such as pediculosis indifference or
inattention to this issue for family members. Some participants also claimed
that they were aware of the need to treat all family members at the same time,
while others emphasized adherence to comprehensive therapy, meticulously
following instructions, and family engagement with healthcare facilities and
schools. The following alternatives were classified as belonging to this
subcategory:
Indifference of families, inattention, ignorance, lack of awareness, negligence,
failure to understand the problem, lack of awareness about a health issue, low
importance of the issue for families, individual treatment, lack of adherence to
treatment, family problems, lack of father’s collaboration, number of children,
failure to comply with instructions, no tendency to speak about the case, no
priority of the problem for parents, necessary continual cooperation of
families, required self-care of parents, and parents' addiction.
Participant 6: “Pediculosis is more common in households where the mother
does not receive emotional support from her husband, where there is domestic
abuse, and where there is despair, so lice cannot be a problem in such
situations. Furthermore, this issue is more prevalent in addiction-affected
households. In certain circumstances, addicted parents have a high
socioeconomic level and are well educated.”
Participant 7: “Some families do not understand that pediculosis is a
hygiene concern, while others who are aware of the situation are unaware
that the problem must be addressed in health care facilities. Such families
believe that pediculosis is a family problem.”
Participant 4: “Some people, for example, are unaware that anti-lice
shampoo is only used on dry hair, or they are unaware of the optimal time
and technique for combing, or they are bored of constantly using a comb.
Such folks do not utilize the needed goods on a regular basis, but just on
the first or second day. My baby had lice, and I had no idea how to use
anti-lice shampoo. I had no idea that it had to be used differently, with a
different volume of usage and a different time interval between
uses.”
Participant 3: “Many families are unaware that the treatment cycle must
be followed. Some families, for example, do not adhere to the two-week time
period between lotion reuses. Lice are a major worry, and all family
members, not just students, must be treated.”
Participant 7: “Despite the fact that combing is a vital activity, some
families do not take it seriously. Many families do not have the time or
know how to comb their hair, and some do not do it on a regular basis or
with the proper comb.”
Participant 4: “Families do not discuss this issue because they are
embarrassed, while it does not matter to certain families and is not
regarded as a major issue. When some families visit our facility, we
question them about lice difficulties, and they suddenly realize that they
had this problem but forgot about it.”
Participant 3: “Some parents refuse to trim their children’s hair if they
have a head lice infestation. They believe it’s humiliating if other people
find out why we cut our child’s hair. They are primarily concerned about how
others see them.”
Participant 2: “We hold lice training courses, as well as diagnosis and
control measures, but they claim it is not a significant case, so tell us
about your diet and income. Parents, on the other hand, refuse to
acknowledge that their children have hygiene problems and refuse to work
with them to address them.”

## Social-Cultural Factors
The most prevalent forms of barriers to prevention and control were classified
using the subcategory of social-cultural factors. Among the socio-cultural
aspects were societal stigma, traditional treatments, wearing a veil or scarf,
girls' long hair, and participation from all walks of life. It is not accepted
in the culture of the people who reside in Bandar Abbas to trim girls' hair.
These people, on the other hand, began self-medication as a result of
traditional remedies taught by earlier generations, as well as stress generated
by the stigma associated with families suffering from pediculosis. Another cause
is the dress of Iranian girls and women, who are required to wear a hijab and,
consequently, are more susceptible to lice than boys and men.
Participant 6: “Girls in Bandar Abbas are expected to have long hair, and
you will seldom encounter a female with short hair unless she is a local
girl. Even if their children have pediculosis, some parents refuse to trim
their children’s hair. They claim it’s a shame and that everyone will find
out that our kid has lice on her head.”
Participant 6: “Some parents prefer not to discuss the situation, so they
go to the drugstore and ask the vendor their inquiries because the merchant
does not know them. We must be aware of this issue rather than ignore it,
because no one likes to talk about it, and many conceal it because they do
not want to be accused of inattention and neglect. Most parents are
terrified of being criticized, and mothers express their desire not to be
labeled as irresponsible mothers!”
Participant 13: “Some parents are embarrassed or ashamed of their
situation. It is typical practice among individuals to avoid discussing lice
infestations and to keep this problem hidden because of their
reputation.”
Participant 8: “The case may involve many households with varying social
or economic backgrounds. We have some consumers who arrive in new
automobiles to inquire about this ailment. It does not, in my opinion, rely
on a person’s financial level or social position.”
Participant 10: “Infant boys and girls, as well as pre-school children,
may be infested. However, because of their long hair and veils, school-aged
girls are more prone to pediculosis. A few females in Bandar Abbas have
short hair; all girls, including babies, have long hair, and their parents
do not cut it. Girls' long hair has long been a cultural norm in our city,
and no one loves short hair.”

## Personal and Mental Factors
Participants also noted a variety of physical and mental issues, ranging from
inadequate personal hygiene to mental and psychological disorders. This
subcategory includes the following codes: ignoring personal hygiene, melancholy,
parents' poor physical and mental health, sex disparities, ignoring personal
care, and parental addiction.
Participant 1: “In my opinion, sex is not an important factor; if one is
infested, the others will be infested,” says Participant 1. Girls, on the
other hand, are treated more harshly than boys.”
Participant 19: “Several years ago, we had a student who liked to wear
headbands even on hot days. When a health instructor wanted to evaluate
students one day, the girl abruptly fled the class to avoid the inspection.
We inquired about the reason, and her teacher stated that the child had lost
her mother in an accident in front of the school and witnessed the accident
and death of her mother, resulting in significant trauma; in the meantime,
she had numerous family difficulties and lived with her stepmother. Because
of her family’s inattention, the pupil was despondent and suffering from a
terrible live infestation. Hence, they shaved her hair, and she wore
headbands since she didn’t want her classmates to see her bare
head.”
Participant 23: “Some parents are so rigid that their children are afraid
to inform them about their issues. Furthermore, pediculosis is more common
in confrontational households where individuals are preoccupied with their
problems, as well as in families dealing with addiction disorders or living
in a low-income position and collecting rubbish. Furthermore, this condition
is more widespread in children from households where the parents have poor
self-esteem, are negligent and reckless, or refuse to face the difficulties,
as well as in susceptible families with multiple concerns such as addiction
and criminality.”

## Geographical Position of the Studied Area
According to some participants, the climate in the area influences the spread of
pediculosis. These features included high humidity levels and the research
region’s surroundings.
Participant 5: “Iranians used to wear more clothes during the winter,
which resulted in a higher incidence of problems in the area in question,
although this does not occur in Bandar Abbas, where there is no winter and
only two or three months of the year are hot. In reality, the environment is
constantly conducive to lice growth and spread. I believe the frequency of
this condition is lower in the winter, while the rest of the year in this
city is hot and humid.”
Participant 10: “Children in Bandar Abbas have wavy hair owing to
genetics and humidity, making it difficult to comb. Because lice may thrive
at any time of year, the geographical location and climate of Bandar Abbas
make it difficult to treat pediculosis.”

## Factors Pertinent to School and Education
Other current concerns identified by participants were a lack of screening
resources, a lack of a holistic approach, school inattention, an erroneous
screening procedure, a lack of school resources, and population density in
schools.
Participant 3: “Children are more likely to become infested as a result
of population density and overcrowding in schools. Children from diverse
walks of life attend schools, yet there is a scarcity of throwaway personal
goods to check on all students.”
Participant 14: “Some schools pay far less attention to this issue, and
health instructors do not correctly screen pupils. They do this assignment
at random, and only one student is checked at a time. In actuality, schools
do not use a comprehensive approach to treatment.”

## Factors Associated With Medicines and Treatment
Some participants expressed concerns about the medications and treatments
utilized to treat the illnesses under investigation. Medical quality, the high
expense of effective treatments, drug resistance, the need for innovative
medications, the scarcity of local medicine, and group therapy were among the
problems addressed.
Participant 8: “Every child in a school, class, or household must be
treated at the same time. The quality of drugs is no longer comparable to
the past, and, of course, the kind of therapy and prescription shampoo are
critical.”
Participant 5: “Dimethicone Lotion used to be of higher quality, but it
now has no impact on lice; moreover, shampoo components are useful elements.
Permethrin combined with dimethicone spray, in my opinion, is superior to
permethrin alone. To obtain a positive outcome, medications must be
combined.’’
Participant 2: “Some drugs are more effective than others. I looked
around for a suitable therapy for my daughter and discovered shampoo in a
drugstore in another city. My kid is doing much better now. Not all shampoos
are suitable’’
Participant 22: “I believe it is preferable to develop a native
medication specifically for the hair of individuals living in this city.
Drug resistance, in my opinion, has occurred since we can no longer use most
shampoos because they have no effect’’
Participant 11: “We don’t always know which shampoo to pick and buy; we
have to test a variety of shampoos. The shampoo provided by the health
center is ineffective since it functions like a regular shampoo. We require
more potent medication’’
Participant 2: “Many families utilize traditional therapies and believe
in old practices such as applying henna, olive oil, white vinegar, or other
herbs on children’s heads and covering them with plastic for one or
two days. They believe that these methods aid in the removal of
lice.’’
Participant 15: “The problem is that the remedies are inadequate.
Occasionally, the treatment procedure is not thoroughly described, or the
therapy is not completed or is left incompletely.’’

## Facilitators
The facilitators of improvement and control of pediculosis were divided into 2
subcategories: social-cultural factors and informative factors.

## Social-Cultural Factors
Participants highlighted the importance of social-cultural issues by expressing
specific examples, such as the need for culturalization and the removal of
social stigma associated with pediculosis, receiving support from various
organizations, and collaboration on the collective treatment of infested people
in society, not just for a person with a specific diagnosis. The acquired codes
for this subcategory are multi-sectoral approach, culturalization,
collaboration, and collective treatment.
Participant 5: “This culture must be formed among individuals to inform
us if they have lice; they must understand that the entire family should be
treated and that individual treatment is not appropriate.”
Participant 10: “Parents need permanent teaching; they should receive
comprehensive and continuous teaching with trustees working in the
neighborhood, such as clergymen in mosques, health educators, and employees
working in health centers, who should cooperate to solve the issue because
this is not the task of a single organization.”
Participant 21: “The necessary information must be made available to the
public; a provincial channel, such as Hormozgan’s provincial broadcasting
channel, should disseminate information and raise awareness about the
importance of this problem. There should be billboards in the city promoting
home screening approaches to familiarize parents with the signs of
pediculosis. Informing parents and developing their abilities are important
steps that should be performed.”
Participant 17: “By providing information in public venues such as
mosques, key people may effectively follow the case. Access to important
information should be available to health institutions, schools, mosques,
and families.”

## Informing Factors
The most important facilitator used to control pediculosis is the informing
factors. Informative systems, in fact, can provide specific strategies for
preventing and treating this condition. The informing system, according to
participants' statements, comprises of delivering information and teaching
skills to parents, offering continuing education to families to keep them aware
of the issue, educating school health educators, and providing self-care
training.
Participant 7: “We require ongoing training. One or 2 sessions per year
are insufficient, despite the fact that these sessions and seminars are not
conducted for parents even once a year.”
Participant 10: “In-service training courses for health educators should
be developed to explain how to make people familiar with these problems and
issue management either in class or schools, so school health educators must
be experienced in this sector.”
Participant 8: “Monthly distribution of hygiene kits with educational
catalogs to low-income people, as well as skill training workshops for
them.”
Participant 10: “Lice may lurk in various locations, from carpet lint to
children’s headphones, mattresses, pillow covers, hats, and scarves that
should be washed in hot water every day; this demands self-awareness,
continuity, and family participation to treat the matter
seriously.”
Participant 7: “Self-care is really useful in preventing infestation.
Families that monitor their children’s health had a lower incidence of the
condition. Pediculosis is uncommon in those who visit a clinic on a regular
basis to examine their health. This infestation mostly affects vulnerable
families with inadequate self-care. ”

## Discussion
The current qualitative study was conducted in Bandar Abbas, Iran, to find variables
influencing pediculosis from the viewpoints of parents and teachers of female
elementary school students, as well as health care experts. The findings revealed 7
categories of factors impacting pediculosis control, including economic-political
factors, family factors, social-cultural factors, school, and education factors,
geographical location of the investigated region, and medicine and treatment
factors. Economic and political factors are 2 of the most significant factors
impacting pediculosis control. The findings of Wafa et al on lice infestation are
congruent with the current study’s findings. To avoid pediculosis, parents and
teachers should be taught about the dangers of infestation and transmission in the
home and school.
 
 Pediculosis was more prevalent in low-income families and among illiterate
mothers. Rafiee et al performed studies in Ahwaz and a town in Yasuj and observed a
strong link between family wealth and the prevalence of pediculosis in students. The
high incidence of infestation might be attributed to people’s economic conditions
and standard of living. , The affluence of a household has a substantial influence on the
prevalence of numerous illnesses, including pediculosis.
 
 The larger the family, the worse the family’s sanitary and medical
conditions. In congested houses, parents are unable to routinely inspect their
children’s health, and infestations might spread due to close contact between family
members. The present study’s findings indicated apathy, ineptitude, and a lack of
cooperation in families, as well as the number of children and ignorance of the most
important subcategories of family components. The findings stated above were
consistent with those of Eyvazi’s prior research in Islamabad-e-Gharb.
 
 Hence, hygiene programs, parental and family involvement, better access to
health services, personal hygiene practices, and effective health education must be
implemented to solve this quandary. Mothers may help improve family hygiene and
reduce lice infestations in girls by attending training sessions and collaborating
with schools. El-Khawaga et al conducted a head lice study in Egypt and reported a
lower frequency of head lice infestations among daughters of educated mothers and
higher knowledge about head lice among mothers. Regular inspections, group treatment
of affected people, and health education programs may also assist in reducing
infestation rates. Consequently, awareness of family cleanliness, collaboration, and
attention to the occurrence of pediculosis all play an essential role in reducing
illness recurrence. Families with fewer children pay close attention to their
children’s health. The size of the family also plays a role in minimizing the
frequency of pediculosis.
 
 The findings of Saghafipour et al were compatible with the findings of this study.
 
 Social and cultural characteristics are significant categories that may be
utilized to control the occurrence of pediculosis. Most studies discovered that
girls had a higher infestation rate than boys because of behavioral variables such
as long hair, wearing veils and scarves, close contact of the head, and hair volume.
Similar results were obtained by. , , Due to the veil, which causes
the scalp to sweat and get infested, females in Muslim states, especially Iran, have
a high prevalence of head lice. Girls are more prone than boys to being afflicted
with lice. This observation was consistent with a number of previous
findings. , In contrast, mothers mentioned shame as a reason for not
seeking information and monitoring their children’s treatments at schools and health
centers. Therefore, the relationship between mothers and schools has deteriorated.
Embarrassment, fear of stigma, and a lack of willingness to disclose the issue among
personnel working in schools or health facilities all contribute to limited
participation and involvement with school staff in dealing with the situation.
 
 Mothers' participation in group discussions and the opportunity to express
their experiences, ideas, feelings, and worries about pediculosis appear to help
them address the problem, cope with it without shame, and continue medication.
Personal and mental factors were highlighted as crucial aspects for limiting
pediculosis prevalence in the current study’s findings. According to Rafinezhad et
al, lower-grade students do not adhere to cleaning standards for pathogenic
infestation prevention. The incapacity of children to observe personal hygiene norms
appears to be the root cause of the high incidence of head lice infestations in
elementary schools. As a result, the lower the infestation rate, the better the
individual’s health. Personal hygiene leads to disinfection and a lower infestation rate.
 
 Both Kasiri et al and Maramazi et al observed that regular bathing has a
positive effect on infestation reduction. It indicates that everyday hair combing
aids in the eradication of nits and the reduction of the risk. People who do not
comb their hair often are more likely to be infested by parasites due to excessive
hair tangling. , Those who combed their hair less regularly, according to
Saghafipour et al, were more likely to have head lice infestations.
 
 The decreased infestation among higher-grade students demonstrated that
people’s awareness and competence in terms of personal cleanliness were improving.
 
 Geographical location and habitation are important considerations in
pediculosis infestation. Moradi and colleagues 40 discovered a higher prevalence of
head lice among urban students in Chabahar, Iran.
 
 Personal hygiene leads to disinfection and a lower infestation rate. Poor
environmental health and insufficient health education in schools were also
variables influencing pediculosis control. Hojjati et al reported a statistically
significant difference in head lice incidence rates between pupils who had health
instructors and those who did not.
 
 The more the pupils' understanding and the cleanliness and screening
teachings supplied by the instructors, the lower the pediculosis pandemic will be.
Noori et al observed that health educators have a crucial role in lowering the
incidence of lice infestations. Health educators may monitor students' health status
on a regular basis, find the first lice cases in their early stages, control and
treat the cases by sending them to health facilities, and avoid larger transmission
and prevalence of infestation among the rest of the students. , Rafinezhad et
al identified no statistically significant relationship between the number of health
educators in a city or village and the prevalence of infestation. This outcome might
be related to ineffective screening processes among people with head lice
infestations, fear of infected health professionals, and avoidance of close contact
with sick children.
 
 Zareban et al discovered that providing health education to students and
their parents helped to reduce head lice infestation. The prevalence of head lice
was significantly reduced among trained primary school students in Zabol, while
there was no change in the control group. The above-mentioned training session
included the general lice profile, head lice symptoms, prevention, and treatment
procedures, all of which were delivered in the form of booklets and posters. In
addition, the children and their mothers received training and education in separate sessions
 
 Gholamnia et al studied the impact of educating health-hygiene issues in
control and intervention groups (through speeches, booklets, posters, and pamphlets)
on head lice infestation reduction in Chabahar, Iran. Finally, head lice inspections
before and 2 months after training resulted in a significant reduction in head lice
prevalence in the intervention group. The present study’s findings identified
medicine and treatment as additional barriers to managing pediculosis.
 
 Due to embarrassment, patients develop drug resistance as a result of
excessive and inappropriate use of anti-lice drugs.
 
 Many parents buy anti-lice medicine from pharmacies without a prescription or
instructions on how to take it for the duration of their children’s treatment, which
leads to treatment resistance due to inappropriate pharmaceutical consumption. Thus,
parents of students must be educated about correct anti-lice drug use as well as the
likelihood of treatment resistance.

## Strengths and Weaknesses
Among studies conducted in recent decades, this is one of the few that takes a
qualitative approach to the barriers and facilitators of pediculosis, which is still
widespread in many areas of Iran. The study’s findings might be used as academic and
practical guidance for practitioners in the healthcare and education systems to take
important measures against and treat the infestation at hand. It is desired that an
accurate plan for regional, social, and managerial interventions will be developed
to encourage people to pay attention to health issues by identifying problems and
barriers to preventing and controlling epidemics based on information gathered from
society and the reasons for pediculosis control. On the other hand, in order to
prevent infestation from forming and re-emerging in the future, health practitioners
must be prepared to regulate and avoid drug resistance in the case of pediculosis
medications and medical supplies. The study’s strength was the selection of diverse
participants who were familiar with the case and had firsthand experience with it.
As a result, the study sample comprised parents of pediculosis infested children,
healthcare professionals such as physicians, family health experts, environmental
health experts, and psychologists who work in health facilities, as well as health
educators and instructors in schools. Besides, our research took a comprehensive
approach to the issue.

## Limitations
The current study has certain limitations, such as the strong social stigma
associated with pediculosis, which made some participants hesitant to report their
identities. Therefore, the researchers made every effort to make the participants
remain incognito throughout the interview. Because there was no free access to
pediculosis parents' and families' experiences, researchers had to recruit the next
participants using snowball-sampling, which was a time-consuming strategy. Another
constraint was the time of interviews during the COVID-19 pandemic; so, some
interviews were conducted online. Finally, the last barrier is the issue of
generalization.

## Conclusion
The findings revealed a slew of previously unknown pediculosis control and preventive
hurdles. On the contrary, the aforementioned facilitators might be used to initiate
effective interventions. According to the findings, pediculosis prevention,
treatment, and possibly therapy necessitate a multimodal and multidimensional
strategy. Because the identified factors are tied to the social, cultural, economic,
and geographic structure, as well as family-related challenges, they play an
essential role in the development of educational and managerial programs.
Pediculosis control may therefore be facilitated and its high prevalence rate
lowered by removing impediments, reducing the effect of barriers, employing control
infestation facilitators, and reinforcing them.

## Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge the participants for their participation in
this study.

## Footnotes
Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding: The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.
Authors’ Contributions: All authors participated and approved the study design. RT and ZH
contributed to design the study, AY and SFR collected the data, and analyzed by
AZ. The final report and article were written by RT and NM, AZ and All authors
read and approved the final manuscript.
Ethics Approval and Consent to Participate: The study was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of Hormozgan University
of Medical Sciences (IR. HUMS. REC.1498.435). Written informed consent was
obtained from all group members.

## ORCID iD
Arash Ziapour https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8687-7484

## References