PLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLoS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC8081244PMC8081244.1808124480812443390966910.1371/journal.pone.0250817PONE-D-21-035381Research ArticleSocial SciencesSociologyCommunicationsSocial CommunicationSocial MediaTwitterComputer and Information SciencesNetwork AnalysisSocial NetworksSocial MediaTwitterSocial SciencesSociologySocial NetworksSocial MediaTwitterMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesViral DiseasesCovid 19Medicine and Health SciencesEpidemiologyPandemicsMedicine and Health SciencesPublic and Occupational HealthSocial SciencesSociologyCommunicationsSocial CommunicationSocial MediaComputer and Information SciencesNetwork AnalysisSocial NetworksSocial MediaSocial SciencesSociologySocial NetworksSocial MediaResearch and Analysis MethodsDatabase and Informatics MethodsDatabase SearchingPhysical SciencesMaterials ScienceMaterialsResistorsSocial SciencesPolitical ScienceElections#MaskOn! #MaskOff! Digital polarization of mask-wearing in the United States during COVID-19
Digital polarization of mask-wearing in the United States during COVID-19https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3572-4677LangJunData curationFormal analysisMethodologyVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing EricksonWesley W.Data curationFormal analysisMethodologyVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9164-7824Jing-SchmidtZhuoConceptualizationMethodologySupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 
1
Department of East Asian Languages and Literatures, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon, United States of America

2
Department of Physics, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon, United States of America
CotfasLiviu-AdrianEditor files. This will allow others to access the same data analyzed in this study. The data are available for viewing on the OSF data repository site using the following link: https://osf.io/vgcrf/?view_only=1163e1cad81847f9a63115cae8da46e2 The data are also available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request and subject to Twitter’s Terms and Conditions governing the sharing of Twitter data.OutbreaksCOVID-19

## Data Availability
The authors provided the search criteria used to query the API and retrieve the hashtag data in the files. This will allow others to access the same data analyzed in this study. The data are available for viewing on the OSF data repository site using the following link: https://osf.io/vgcrf/?view_only=1163e1cad81847f9a63115cae8da46e2 The data are also available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request and subject to Twitter’s Terms and Conditions governing the sharing of Twitter data.

## Introduction
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has caused an unprecedented public health crisis worldwide. The WHO declared it a global pandemic on March 11, 2020 [ ]. In the United States, the total number of confirmed cases surpassed 20 million and the total number of recorded deaths from COVID-19 approached 350,000 on January 1, 2021 [ ]. During the pandemic, egregious violations of public health guidelines by high-profile government leaders repeatedly made headlines, underscoring the politicization of the pandemic. At the center of this politicization was the use of face masks as a safety precaution, officially recommended by the Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) on April 3, 2020 to mitigate the spread of the virus [ ]. The White House, openly defying public health guidelines on mask wearing, dominated news headlines at the first peak of the pandemic [ , ]. Public eschewals of masks continued to generate news headlines, whether these occurred at Trump presidential campaign rallies or on the floor of the U.S. Senate [ ].
While the media reports offered glimpses of the politicization of face masks during the pandemic, the extent to which public discourse was polarized on mask wearing has remained anecdotal, and the verbal representation of this polarization has not been explored. The impact of social media as information and advocacy platforms, especially during mass emergencies, is well known [ – ]. The role of social media as a public forum for political discourse has also garnered intense scholarly attention [ – ]. Twitter, in particular, has become “a freewheeling forum that allows instantaneous debate and commentary about virtually every subject under the sun” thanks to its hashtag feature, and plays a prominent role in the arena of public opinion where it has increasingly become a hotbed of political polarization [ – ].
A central theme that has emerged from the body of research on political polarization in social media is that users prefer interactions with like-minded others, reflecting social homophily, defined as “the principle that a contact between similar people occurs at a higher rate than among dissimilar people.” [ ]. Homophily generates a selective pattern of networked communication commonly known as the “echo chamber” effect by reinforcing preexisting views and limiting opposing views [ , , , , – ]. Furthermore, exchanges among value-aligned peers in echo chambers are much more frequent than cross-cutting exchanges. Colleoni et al. [ ] identified 10 times as many Democrats as Republicans based on the content shared whereby Democrats exhibited higher levels of political homophily. Bastos et al. [ ] found six times as many “in-bubble” interactions as “cross-bubble” interactions. Tsai et al. [ ] found many more “echoers” (n = 7754) than “bridgers” (n = 194) in their sample. Similarly, Cossard et al. [ ] found that the vaccine advocates outnumbered the vaccine skeptics by 54% and as the majority side of the debate they engaged in intragroup exchanges, entirely ignoring the postings of the vaccine skeptics. These findings indicate that value-aligned intragroup exchanges outnumber intergroup interactions and thereby consolidate majority views.
Research based on case studies of single issues has found echo chambers in discussions about various issues. These include political issues such as elections [ ], German political parties [ ], the impeachment of the former Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff [ ], Brexit [ ], and politically motivated boycotts [ ], as well as issues that are not distinctly political, as in the Italian vaccination debate [ ]. Studies on Twitter information sharing patterns across different issues have produced evidence that the echo chamber effect pertains primarily to political issues. Barberá et al. [ ] found that retweets about political issues such as the 2012 election campaign, the 2013 government shutdown, and the 2014 State of the Union Address were shared within ideologically coherent echo chambers, but retweets about nonpolitical issues such as the 2013 Boston Marathon bombing, the 2014 Super Bowl, and the 2014 Winter Olympics were shared across partisan lines and displayed little ideological homophily. The study also found a dynamic development of polarization on the Newtown shooting characterized by a rapid change from cross-ideological exchanges to homophilic echo chambers.
A recent study released by the Knight Foundation (KF) [ ] identified four ideological clusters of Twitter users: extreme left (10%), center left (57%), center right (8%), and extreme right (25%). The responses of these segments to six trending news issues, ranging from the Mueller investigation and white nationalism to North Korea and hurricanes, showed a stronger progressive dominance than the baseline ideology distributions, although the boundaries between political and nonpolitical issues are not as clear cut as those studied by Barberá et al. [ ]. In her interpretation of the findings, Alexandera [ ] maintained that users’ baseline ideology distributions and responses to trending issues, along with their information diet and referencing behavior, provide a perfect formula for polarization, stating “birds of a feather flock together, even in the digital skies of social media.”
The KF study is unique in that it distinguishes the extreme segments from the center segments in addition to a left versus right grouping. This allows for a cross-cutting analysis of the relative weight of the center (both center left and center right) and the extreme (both extreme left and extreme right) as an index of political polarization at the level of participation in issues debates. We compared each of the six issues to the baseline in the KF data in terms of how much they engaged the ideological extreme versus the center and found evidence that the six trending issues are not equally polarizing. While responses to mass shootings, sexual harassment, and the Mueller investigation were consistent with the baseline, white nationalism, North Korea, and hurricanes elicited significantly more responses from the center segments and significantly less responses from the two extremes compared to the baseline (See Ideology distributions across data sets based on Knight Foundation study [ ]). Assuming that greater participation of the extreme in response to an issue indexes greater polarization of that issue, we found mass shootings, sexual harassment, and the Mueller investigation to be more polarizing than white nationalism, North Korea, and hurricanes, supporting the observation that political polarization at the level of participation is issue-specific. It is clear the binary distinction between what is political and nonpolitical is too simplistic to capture the gradience between the Mueller investigation with the strongest polarization (67% center vs. 33% extreme) and hurricanes with the weakest polarization (82.5% center vs. 18.5% extreme) in relation to the baseline. The political and nonpolitical dualism also fails to capture the contextual forces that shape public political discourse. For example, white nationalism is a distinctly political issue in American politics with heavy historical baggage [ ]. In the KF data on Twitter discourse, however, it turned out to be one of the less polarizing issues in terms of participation, together with North Korea and hurricanes. In our view, this paradox highlights the need to analyze political polarization both as a rhetorical phenomenon and as a participatory process.
The COVID-19 pandemic knows no ideological divides, which makes it more like hurricanes than the Mueller investigation. It surpasses hurricanes in terms of the scope and depth of its public health and economic impacts and the far-reaching disruptions to daily life. As a distinctly nonpartisan crisis it could conceivably bring the whole country together in a collective response to the collective calamities. Yet the pandemic arrived in an election year, which inevitably set the stage for controversies. Mask wearing is a basic public health measure designed to protect all members of society by mitigating the spread of a dangerous virus. Notwithstanding the collective threats posed by the pandemic, there were a number of contextual forces that apparently deepened the partisan rift in public discourse about this policy. First, the mask guidelines touched upon a deep-seated tension between government authority and individual liberty, which is a perennial challenge in American political life [ ]. Second, mask wearing was politicized in an election year marked by violent partisan vitriol, which was deliberately inflamed by populism and divisive rhetoric and amplified by the media. Third, mass uncertainties about the impacts of a first-in-a-lifetime pandemic were exacerbated by conflicting sources of information and misinformation [ , ]. Fourth, the incumbent presidential candidate publicly downplayed the threats of the virus and repeatedly made news headlines for violating CDC mask guidelines, making mask-wearing even more controversial.
These contextual factors enable the hypothesis that discourse about mask wearing as a rhetorical phenomenon is deeply polarized. On the other hand, there is evidence that the majority of the general public supported masking with 88% saying masks should be worn in public at least some of the time [ ]. There is also evidence that the Twitterverse is more progressive than the general public [ , ]. Therefore, we hypothesize that equivalence between the two sides of the rhetorical polarization will be unlikely. That is, polarization of mask wearing as a participatory process will be disproportionately divided between a pro-mask majority and an anti-mask minority. Based on previous observations of higher frequencies of intragroup exchanges in echo chambers than intergroup exchanges, we expect homophilic exchanges in the majority group made up of mask supporters. In this study, we test these hypotheses by examining mask-related stance-bearing Twitter hashtags posted by users based in the United States.
To this end, we collected a total of 412,959 stance-bearing English language hashtags about mask wearing posted between March 1 and August 1, 2020 by a total of 149,110 Twitter users based in the United States. Twitter hashtags are strings of characters preceded by the hash (#) character. They serve as popular topical markers that highlight the central ideas and themes of tweets [ ]. As such they are handy tools for the linguistic expression and propagation of stance, defined as the “personal feelings, attitudes, value judgments, or assessments” of language users [ ]. Hashtags are meme-like in the sense that they take on a life of their own through repeated sharing in largely unchanged forms and as such play a key role in viral trending of ideas. We examined the themes, frequencies, temporal trends and exchange patterns of the mask-related hashtags, how these trends related to coronavirus case counts, media coverage, and policy mandates, and compared the stance distributions in the hashtag data to the ideology distributions on Twitter. The results showed a sharply delineated rhetorical polarization of mask wearing characterized by emotionally charged semantic antagonism that escalated over the period of interest, along with the spread of the virus. On the other hand, we found that uses of pro-mask hashtags overpowered those of anti-mask hashtags above and beyond the level predicted by the baseline ideology distributions and the issue-based ideology distributions on Twitter whereby mask supporters stayed in “echo chambers” insulated from mask resistors.

## Materials and methods

## Data
The main data used in this study was aggregated population-level data of pro- and anti-mask hashtags collected from Twitter. Four sources of circumstantial data were analyzed in light of which to better understand the digital polarization of mask wearing: U.S. daily confirmed COVID-19 case counts, state executive mask mandates, search interest data from Google Trends, and news headlines of high-profile events related to COVID-19 management from EBSCO Newspaper Source. In addition, we drew on data from two existing studies: Twitter baseline ideology distributions and ideological segment proportions by issue from the Knight Foundation study [ ], and Pew Research Center study on public opinion on mask wearing [ ].
Twitter data was collected for all tweets posted between March 1 and August 1 that included any hashtags from an exploratory list of 15 mask-related hashtags identified in our initial observations of Twitter discourse about mask wearing in relation to COVID-19. This initial list included #WearAMask, #MaskUp, #WearADamnMask, #WearAFuckingMask, #WearYourMask, #WearYourDamnMask, #WearYourFuckingMask, #WearMasksSaveLives, #NoMasks, #MasksKill, #MaskOff, #MasksDontWork, #MasksAreForSheep, #SheepWearMasks, #MaskPropaganda, #Mask(s), #Masker(s), and #Antimasker(s). To avoid retrieval of duplicate items, we only included hashtags from original tweets and excluded retweets. We then refined our initial list by adding mask-related hashtags that were not in the initial list but were found in the retrieved tweets and were used more than 100 times and by removing low-frequency (<100) hashtags (e.g. #MaskPropaganda). We then excluded hashtags that were bare nouns with no explicit indication of stance (e.g. #Mask(s), #Masker(s)). Using the refined list we conducted a further search and retrieved a total of 923,167 tokens of hashtags.
From this sample we selected hashtags with a U.S. origin based on self-reported locations, accepting common U.S.-associated names (e.g. USA, America), all state names including abbreviations, and U.S. location identifiers (e.g. NYC, Bay Area, San Fran, and Midwest). The locationally filtered data consisted of a total of 412,959 mask-related tokens of 35 distinct types of hashtags from a total of 149,110 users for analysis. Of the total users, 138,796 users tweeted exclusively pro-mask hashtags and 7,771 users tweeted exclusively anti-mask hashtags. There were 2,543 users who tweeted both types of hashtags. Of the total hashtags, 3,557 pro-mask hashtags were tweeted by 71 self-organizing advocates and providers of masks who took a proactive approach to masking in response to COVID-19. The hashtags used by this group of users were retained in our data set for analysis. No handles in our data were on the published list of the IRA related bots [ ]. All twitter data was collected using the Twitter API, custom Python scripts and packages, including GetOldTweets3, twitter_scraper, and requests_html, between July 27 and August 12, 2020. Our data was collected and used according to Twitter’s Terms and Conditions. This study has been reviewed by the University of Oregon Research Compliance Services (RCS) under the 2018 Common Rule and determined to qualify for exemption under Title 45 CFR 46.104(d)(4).
The CDC COVID Data Tracker [ ] and the Worldometer COVID-19 Data [ ] were consulted for the number of daily new confirmed cases and cumulative case counts between March 1 to August 1, 2020.
The number and effective dates of state mask mandates were obtained by examining the official websites of state governments. Non-mandatory mask recommendations and mandates limited to business were excluded. By the beginning of August 2020, we counted 33 executive orders issued by governors and one executive order signed by the mayor of Washington D.C. ( Statewide mask mandates (DC. included) and Statewide mask mandates (33 states plus DC.)).
Google Trends indexes search interest on Google in a given time and region and provides a measure of issue salience [ – ]. Utilizing this online tool, we examined the results of keyword searches for “face mask” in the US between March 1 and August 1, 2020 in all search categories, including Web Search, News Search, YouTube Search, Image Search, and Google Shopping Search ( Google Trends searches for “face mask”).
We used EBSCO services to identify high-profile televised events related to mask wearing. This database provides full-text coverage of more than 40 US newspapers and full-text television and radio news transcripts from CBS News, CNN, FOX News, and NPR. Four groups of keywords (“mask” and “CDC”, “mask” and “White House”, “mask” and “Trump”, as well as “mask” and “Pence”) were used to search for news publications and transcripts between March and August, 2020, which yielded over 1000 news headlines. Non-U.S. media and headlines of low relevance were eliminated and a total of 62 headlines were obtained ( Mask-related news headlines).

## Methodology
This study employed both qualitative and quantitative analyses of the 35 stance-bearing mask-related hashtags to test the three hypotheses: 1) Twitter discourse on mask wearing is rhetorically polarized, 2) participation in the rhetorical polarization is asymmetric in favor of a pro-mask majority, and 3) an echo chamber effect is more likely in the pro-mask majority group than in the anti-mask minority group.

## Qualitative analysis
Qualitative analysis focused on content analysis of the 35 mask-related hashtags. The two authors with a background in linguistics and two other linguists not involved in this study performed expert coding of the hashtags. They independently sorted the hashtags into two categories, pro-mask and anti-mask, with perfect intercoder agreement (Fleiss’s Kappa = 1, p < 0.001, 95% CI (0.865, 1). The two coders involved in this study together conducted a granular semantic analysis of the hashtags in each category and grouped them into subcategories based on their lexical and grammatical resemblances, recognizing that subcategories thus identified have fuzzy boundaries while they differ in semantic focus [ ]. Based on their semantic focuses, the pro-mask hashtags were sorted into four subcategories: 1) hortatives urging the use of masks or issuance of mask mandates (henceforth HORT), 2) assertions of the efficacy of masks (henceforth AS_efficacy), 3) assertions of the altruistic value of mask wearing (henceforth AS_altruism), 4) assertions of positive masculinity associated with mask wearing (AS_masculinity). The anti-mask hashtags were grouped into three subcategories: 1) rejection of masks and mask mandates (henceforth REJECTION), 2) insults to mask-wearers (henceforth INSULT), and 3) disinformation in the form of assertions of negative effects of mask wearing (henceforth DISINFORMATION). Here, disinformation is defined as any deceptive information with the potential for harm or intent to harm [ ]. The other two coders not involved in the study were asked independently to sort the pro- and anti-mask hashtags into their respective subcategories identified by the authors, with the option of adding new categories if necessary. No new category was added by either coder. One coder produced incomplete sorting and the other produced complete sorting. The incomplete sorting was excluded from further consideration. Intercoder reliability between the two authors’ sorting and the sorting by the coder with the complete sorting was computed. The intercoder reliability for the sortings of pro-mask hashtags was found to be Cohen’s Kappa = 0.91 (p < 0.001), 95% CI (0.784, 0.998), indicating a substantial agreement between the two sortings. The intercoder reliability for the sortings of anti-mask hashtags was found to be Cohen’s Kappa = 1 (p < 0.001), 95% CI (0.628, 1), indicating a substantial agreement between the two judgments. The only disagreement was on #MaskItOrCasket between a HORT coding and an AS_efficacy coding. An agreement was reached in favor of the latter coding after consultation. Two of the authors also annotated the news headlines and classified them into four content categories: 1) CDC mask guidelines, 2) Compliance with CDC guidelines, 3) Mixed messaging, and 4) Violation of CDC guidelines. The intercoder reliability was robust with Cohen’s Kappa = .959 (p < 0.001), 95% CI (0.866, 0.994). The discrepancies were resolved through discussion between the coders and in consultation with the third author.

## Quantitative analysis
For quantitative analysis, we used RStudio (version 1.2.5033) and Python (version 3.8.5) as data analysis tools to cleanse, inspect, analyze, and visualize our data. R packages used in this study included lubridate, fpp2, zoo, tidyverse, scales, GGally, ggplot2, and RColorBrewer. We first compared our sample of hashtag data with the sample of general Twitter data used in a Pew survey [ ] showing that the majority (80%) of tweets come from a small minority (10%) of users. In our data, the top 10% most active users accounted for 52% of the hashtags and the bottom 90% users accounted for 48% of the hashtags. A Pearson’s chi-square test of independence was computed on the association between data type (Pew sample of general Twitter data vs. mask-related hashtags in the present study) and user power grouping (top 10% vs. bottom 90%). The result showed that our Twitter hashtag data was significantly less skewed than the general Twitter data based on the Pew survey in terms of tweet volume (χ2 = 17.47, p < 0.001).
For each category of the hashtags, we calculated the type frequency (i.e. the number of distinct hashtags) and token frequency (i.e. the total occurrences of each distinct hashtag). To understand the distributions of the different functional subcategories of the hashtags, we calculated the relative frequency of each subcategory by dividing its token frequency by type frequency. To understand how the hashtag uses changed over time, we plotted the temporal trends of pro-mask and anti-mask hashtags as two categories, as well as the temporal distributions of individual hashtags in each category using seven-day moving averages (March 4 to July 28). We first plotted the trajectories of the nine most popular pro-mask hashtags and all anti-mask hashtags and compared the trends. To illustrate the difference in volume between the two categories, we plotted the top three hashtags of each category in a stacked area graph. We then computed exponential growth rates of hashtag uses over selected intervals that appeared linear when viewed on a log scale. To explicitly compute the parameters a and λ for each best-fit exponential y = aeλx over the n days xi and cumulative hashtag counts yi, we follow reference [ ] to avoid weighting small xi too strongly; this is done by minimizing the quantity
 ∑inyi(ln(yi)−ln(a)−λxi)2(1)
which leads to best-fit parameters given by
 ln(a)=∑in(xi2yi)∑in(yiln(yi))−∑in(xiyi)∑in(xiyiln(yi))∑inyi∑in(xi2yi)−(∑inxiyi)2(2)
 λ=∑inyi∑in(xiyiln(yi))−∑in(xiyi)∑in(yiln(yi))∑inyi∑in(xi2yi)−(∑inxiyi)2.(3)
To examine the interaction between pro-mask and anti-mask users, we identified tweets that were direct replies to a parent tweet whereby both the parent tweet and the reply tweet contained at least one stance bearing mask-related hashtag, and performed a Pearson’s chi-square of independence on the association between stance (pro-mask vs. anti-mask) and direction of reply (reply to pro-mask vs. reply to anti-mask tweets).
Building on the results of the response bias, we zoomed in on the types of hashtags used by the two groups of anti-mask tweeters, one replying to the pro-mask tweeters and the other replying to fellow anti-mask tweeters. We cross-tabulated the hashtags used by the two groups, focusing on information type (disinformation vs. non-disinformation) and stance of recipient (anti-mask vs. pro-mask) as categorical variables and performed a Pearson’s chi-square of independence on the association between the two. The DISINFORMATION category includes two hashtags (#MasksDontWork, #MasksKill). The non-disinformation category includes REJECTION and INSULT.
A key to understanding the hashtag trends is to see how they related to the COVID-19 disease trends. We computed and plotted the pairwise correlations between the time series of the daily counts of both types of hashtags and daily confirmed COVID-19 case counts. To further contextualize the temporal trends of the hashtags in the time span, we plotted the temporal trends of the hashtags together with COVID-19 confirmed case counts, state mask mandates, Google search trends for “face mask”, and mask-related news headlines, using daily data based on seven-day moving averages for COVID-19 case counts and mask-related hashtags, and rescaled monthly data for the other categories for which no daily data was available.
Finally, to gauge the degree of digital polarization of public stances toward mask wearing as a participatory process, we compared our hashtag data to two sets of existing data: 1) the Knight Foundation data on baseline ideological segments and issue-based ideological segments averaged over six issues on Twitter [ ] and 2) Pew Research Center data on pro- and anti-mask attitudes in the general public [ ].

## Results
Of a total of 35 distinct hashtags in the data, 74% (n = 26) were pro-mask and 26% (n = 9) anti-mask. Of the 412,959 tokens of hashtags, 93.6% (n = 386, 390) were pro-mask and 6.4% (n = 26, 569) were anti-mask. It is clear that pro-mask hashtags outnumbered anti-mask hashtags in both type and token frequencies (Tables and ). A Fisher’s Exact Test on the association between stance type (pro- vs. anti-mask) and frequency type (type vs. token) was statistically significant (p < 0.001), showing lower than expected token frequency in relation to type frequency for anti-mask hashtags and the opposite trends for pro-mask hashtags. Thematically, the semantic opposition between pro- and anti-mask hashtags is especially clear in the antonymic pairs, e.g. #MaskOn vs. #MaskOff, #MasksSaveLives vs. #MasksKill, #MasksWork vs. #MasksDontWork, and #MaskMandate vs. #NoMaskMandates.
 shows the type, token, and relative frequencies of the four subcategories of the pro-mask hashtags. The majority of pro-mask hashtags fall in the subcategory HORT in which six types contain expletive attributives (e.g. damn, fucking, freaking). These expletive attributives are known as emotive intensifiers and serve the purposes of intensifying the affective strength of language and demanding attention to what is being said [ ]. They help create an emotionally charged atmosphere in the urgent calls to action. The HORT subcategory was broken down into expletive hortatives and non-expletive or neutral hortatives. A Fisher’s Exact Test showed a non-significant lower than expected token frequency relative to type frequency for expletive_HORT and the opposite for neutral_HORT (p = 0.277). shows the type, token, and relative frequencies of the three subcategories of anti-mask hashtags with REJECTION on the top, followed by DISINFORMATION.
 Concerning the trends of the pro-mask hashtags ( ), the first crest occurred in early April with a sharp spike of #Mask(s)(4)All, coinciding with the CDC recommendation of face masks. The second crest occurred in late May with #WearAMask leading the way. This drops to a deep trough in early June, followed by the third and most dramatic crest involving simultaneous surges of multiple hashtags around mid June that peaked in late June and early July with the top three being #WearAMask, #WearADamnMask and #MaskUp. These went down and up again in mid July to a fourth crest, which dipped abruptly at the end of July. The mask-related news headlines form clusters that roughly coincide with the growth peaks of the hashtags, dropping into a hiatus in June with only two headlines on CDC reminders of mask guidelines before the next cluster around early July. As can be seen in the color coding of the headlines, White House violations of the CDC guidelines were intensely reported in the earlier months, interspersed with headlines on mix-messaging by the White House. There was a scattering of both types of content even in July when finally Trump donned a mask.
 Unlike the pro-mask hashtags, the anti-mask hashtags showed no marked peak in early April but exhibited similar temporal trajectories to those of the pro-mask hashtags for the remaining time period ( ). We see a similar upswing starting May, which reached the first peak in late May, falling in early June, and rising again more dramatically toward a second peak in late June and early July, followed by a dip before climbing to its highest peak in mid to late July. #NoMask(s) remained in the lead throughout the period, followed by #Mask(s)Off as a distant second. The same coincidence of news headline clusters with the peaks of the hashtags, as well as the news hiatus in June can be observed in .
 shows that these hashtags followed a very similar trajectory over time, which roughly tracks the temporal distributions of the news headline clusters. The large swaths of blue areas contrast with the thin stripes of red, showing the overwhelming dominance of mask supporters over mask resistors. It is clear that the volumes of the most popular pro-mask hashtags overshadow their anti-mask counterparts in extremely unbalanced proportions. Despite their visible difference in volume, both types of hashtags grew exponentially for the better part of the period under study. shows that the cumulative frequencies of both pro- and anti-mask hashtags experienced periods of exponential growth, with a period of faster exponential growth in March, followed by a period of slower exponential growth from April to early June.
 The presence of two distinct phases of exponential hashtag growth shares some similarity to the observed exponential growth of COVID-19 cases in the U.S., which has a rapid exponential growth in February 2020 (λ ∼ 0.3/day, R2 = 0.99) calculated using Worldometer [ ], before dropping to a slower exponential growth (λ ∼ 0.01/day, R2 = 0.96) from April to October as lockdowns and precautions were implemented. It is also worth noting that the hashtag use of #H1N1 during the 2009 H1N1 pandemic also exhibited exponential growth (λ ∼ 0.01, R2 = 0.99), calculated using data from Chew and Eysenbach [ ]. By contrast, tweet responses to short-term catastrophes do not appear to demonstrate long-term exponential growth, such as the 2010 Black Saturday fire in Australia [ ], the 2015 Paris terrorist attacks [ ], and the onset of a storm at the 2011 Pukkelpop Festival in Belgium [ ]. It seems that the exponential growth of pandemics naturally leads to the exponential growth of related social media indicators, which is unsurprising given the pervasive threat of pandemics.
We found a total of 16,414 tweets that were direct replies to a parent tweet whereby both the parent tweet and the reply tweet contained at least one stance-bearing mask-related hashtag. Of these, 14,761 were pro-mask tweets replying to pro-mask tweets, 313 were pro-mask tweets replying to anti-mask tweets, 410 were anti-mask tweets replying to pro-mask tweets, and 930 were anti-mask tweets replying to anti-mask tweets. There was a significant association between tweet stance and the direction of response (χ2 = 7, 970, p < 0.001). This biased direction of reply is further illustrated by examining user behavior ( ). Defining pro-mask users as users that exclusively tweet pro-mask hashtags, and anti-mask users as users that exclusively tweet anti-mask hashtags, we found that many pro-mask users (teal points) only replied to pro-mask tweets ( ). A smaller trend of anti-maskers (red points) only replying to anti-mask tweets is found along the vertical axis. The region near the origin (0, 0) contains many overlapping points, suggesting a concentration of low-volume replies to both pro- and anti-mask tweets. To investigate the clustering, we examined the normalized reply distributions for users of each opposing stance, which exhibit clear differences between pro-mask and anti-mask users: almost 50% of the anti-mask users replied at least once to pro-mask tweets ( ), whereas nearly 99% of the pro-mask users had 0 responses to anti-mask tweets ( ), indicating that anti-mask users are more likely to initiate intergroup communication while pro-mask users are more likely to engage in intragroup exchanges.
 To further characterize the interactions between pro-mask and anti-mask Twitter users, we defined a tweet’s stance s as +1 if the tweet exclusively uses pro-mask hashtags and −1 if the tweet exclusively uses anti-mask hashtags. Then we defined a user’s response bias
B as the average stance of tweets that the user replied to using stance-bearing hashtags. That is
 B=1N∑iNsi,(4)
where si is the stance of each tweet the user replied to, and N is the number of the user’s stance-bearing replies to tweets containing stance-bearing hashtags. The response bias B is bounded on the interval [−1, +1] and characterizes the involvement in intra- and intergroup conversations of tweeters. B = −1 means the exclusive participation in replying to anti-mask tweets, whereas B = +1 indicates the exclusive participation in replying to pro-mask tweets. Values between −1 and +1 indicate the activity of conversing with both types of users. shows the probability distribution of the response bias for both pro- and anti-mask users, which indicates that pro-mask users almost exclusively interacted with pro-mask users, while anti-mask users are split into those that only interacted with anti-mask users, and those that only interacted with pro-mask users. For both pro- and anti-mask users, it is rare for a given user to engage with both pro- and anti-mask users, which demonstrates the polarized dynamic between tweeters.
 Furthermore, the two groups of anti-mask tweeters that are split based on the stance of their recipients behaved differently in terms of the type of information conveyed by their hashtag choice. There was a statistically significant association between information type and stance of the recipient (χ2 = 4.74, p = 0.029). Anti-mask tweeters who replied exclusively to pro-mask tweeters tweeted more tokens (n = 83) of DISINFORMATION hashtags (e.g.#MasksDontWork and #MasksKill) in their replies than those who replied exclusively to other anti-mask tweeters (n = 19).
To gauge the relationships between the time series of pro-mask hashtags, anti-mask hashtags, and daily confirmed COVID-19 case counts, we plotted each time series against the others. arranges these plots in a scatterplot matrix [ ]. In the upper right half of the plot are shown the correlations, while the scatterplots are shown in the lower left half. The first row, second column of shows a strong positive relationship between pro-mask and anti-mask hashtags (r = .902, p < 0.001). The first and second rows of the third column of shows that daily confirmed COVID-19 case counts were slightly more strongly correlated with anti-mask hashtags (r = .836, p < 0.001) than with pro-mask hashtags (r = .822, p < 0.001). In the density plot of pro-mask hashtags (first row, first column) and that of anti-mask hashtags (second row, second column), we found heavy (right) tailed distributions extending to large volumes, indicating occurrences of rare but significant events with high volume hashtag uses.
 Finally, the temporal trends of COVID-19 case counts, state mask mandate counts, Google search interest in “face mask”, and mask-related news headlines provide additional contextual cues for the temporal trends of the mask-related hashtags. shows that COVID-19 case counts plateaued from May to June, reaching a low in June when the hashtag counts took a bigger dip. shows that all the other circumstantial data categories took a much sharper plunge in June. After the June valley, all the data trends rose sharply in July.
 To better understand the participatory polarization of mask wearing in Twitter hashtags, we compared the proportions of the opposing hashtag stances to the Twitter baseline ideology distributions reported in the KF study, assuming all segments except the extreme right were pro-mask. We found the pro-mask stance to be significantly overrepresented and the anti-mask stance to be significantly underrepresented in the hashtag data compared to the KF data (χ2 = 13.781, df = 1, p < 0.0001). When the hashtag data was compared to the KF issues subset data averaged over six trending issues, again assuming all segments but the extreme right were pro-mask, the association between dataset and stance proportion remained significant, though to a lesser degree (χ2 = 4.31, df = 1, p = 0.038). The proportion of pro-mask hashtags in our data exceeded expectations. It is clear public stances toward mask wearing in the hashtag data are strongly lopsided in favor of a pro-mask majority. The asymmetry is above and beyond the left skewing political landscape of Twitter and the average issue-based left-oriented stance, suggesting an overwhelming support for mask wearing in Twitter hashtags. By contrast, a comparison of our results with the Pew Research Center findings on public opinion on mask wearing [ ] yielded no statistically significant difference (χ2 = 2.198, df = 1, p = 0.138), suggesting a consistency between Twitter hashtag data and the national survey of public opinion on mask wearing.

## Discussion
Based on qualitative and quantitative analysis of aggregated Twitter hashtag data, our study yielded a complex picture of the digital polarization on mask wearing in the United States during the COVID-19 pandemic. On the one hand, we found a stark and persisting rhetorical polarization of public stance, characterized by an emotionally charged semantic antagonism between pro- and anti-mask hashtags. On the other hand, the sharp rhetorical polarization was accompanied by asymmetrical participation dominated by a pro-mask majority that was segregated in an “echo chamber” insulated from an anti-mask minority that attempted to infiltrate the pro-mask majority with disinformation. Taken together, our results demonstrate that the digital discourse on Twitter about mask wearing was rhetorically polarized whereby the rallying calls of the mask supporters were amplified by other mask supporters, and the battle cries of the mask resistors resonated with other mask resistors but were drowned out and ignored by a vocal and overwhelming pro-mask majority.
Both types of hashtags underwent exponential growth in the time span of interest ( ). While there is evidence that pandemics tend to engender exponential increases of relevant social media activities, the parallel surges of the opposing hashtags suggest an escalation of the antagonistic rhetoric where neither side was willing to stand down. The strong correlations between the temporal trends of the hashtags and the temporal trends of COVID-19 case counts ( ) suggest that uncertainties about the impacts of the pandemic grew in response to the spread of the virus. These uncertainties caused by the pandemic were undoubtedly exacerbated by an “infodemic” [ ]. Faced with a first-in-a-lifetime pandemic, ordinary Americans scrambled to obtain information and found themselves grappling with conflicting sources of information [ ]. The clusters of news headlines about leaders of the Trump administration violating mask guidelines, roughly concurrent with the early peaks of the hashtags, understandably magnified the rhetorical polarization of mask wearing, especially when a flurry of news reports on Trump flouting mask guidelines immediately followed the CDC issuance of those guidelines in early April. In response to the mismanagement of the pandemic, the pro-mask Twitterverse generated large volumes of tweets urging everyone to wear a mask whereas the anti-mask segment adhered to resistance modelled by the Trump White House. Apparently, the tensions between the two information sources aggravated the polarization of public opinion on mask wearing. It is worth noting that the CDC recommendation of facial masks to mitigate the spread of COVID-19 came after weeks of government health officials advising against the use of masks among the general public [ , ]. This kind of contradiction in public health messaging contributed to the information crisis and may have deepened the public suspicion of the mask guidelines [ ].
On the policy level, the surge of confirmed coronavirus cases in April compelled more state governors to institute mask mandates to slow the spread of the virus [ ]. This can be seen in the April number of state mask mandates ( ). On the other hand, mask mandates triggered intense push-backs in many U.S. states and localities, as widely reported in the media [ , ]. It is reasonable to assume that the growing number of anti-mask hashtags on Twitter was in part the digital manifestation of those push-backs, exacerbated by the distrust of the news media by those who relied on Trump for information. The public health challenge to enforce mask wearing during a pandemic is not unique to the management of COVID-19. Nor is the politicization of facial masks a new phenomenon in American history [ ]. The anti-mask battle cries on Twitter are the latest illustration of the perennial tensions between government imposed public health measures and individual autonomy, driven by an entrenched distrust of government authority that characterizes politics and civic culture in the United States [ – ]. Needless to say, populist attempts by leaders of the highest office to stoke public resentments and antiscience sentiments during the COVID-19 pandemic added fuel to the flame [ ].
Our finding that the anti-mask stance persisted in a small portion (6.4%) of the hashtag data is consistent with the finding that a portion of Americans failed to follow public health recommendations without mask mandates and a small minority (∼4%) continued to resist masks even when mandates were implemented [ ]. Together, these findings support our hypothesis of a political polarization of mask wearing as a rhetorical phenomenon. Given accumulating evidence of the growing political polarization of the American electorate [ , – ], the polarization of mask wearing as a rhetorical phenomenon is clearly consistent with the partisan political climate in contemporary America.
The strong association between stance type and frequency type suggests that mask resistors were outgunned by mask supporters in the volume of hashtags they produced relative to the variety of hashtags at their disposal. The significant deviations of the hashtag data from Twitter baseline ideology distributions as well as from the issue-based ideology distributions further point to a strong skewness in terms of the participatory strengths of the pro- and anti-mask hashtags in the Twitter discourse about mask wearing. These findings support our hypothesis of an asymmetric participatory polarization of mask wearing in favor of a pro-mask majority. Together with the convergence between the hashtag data and the national survey data, the findings suggest that the American public stepped up in strong support of mask wearing despite the polarizing rhetoric about the policy and the news reports that magnified the rhetorical polarization. The predominance of pro-mask hashtag tokens seems to reflect the grave concern of the majority of the general public with the way the pandemic was managed in the U.S. An August 2020 Pew survey found that the majority of Americans (62% overall, 87% Democrats, 34% Republicans) say that the U.S. had trailed other developed countries in its response to COVID-19 [ ]. The first peak of pro-mask hashtags coincided with the CDC official recommendation of face coverings on April 3. This finding is consistent with the results from national surveys that showed a positive effect of the CDC announcement of mask guidelines on public perceptions of the efficacy of face masks [ ], on reported mask-wearing and buying behaviors [ ], and on real-world observations of mask-wearing behavior among shoppers in retail locations [ ].
The interactions between the tweeters, in particular the polarized distributions of their response bias are evidence of an “echo chamber” effect that reinforces the shared stance of like-minded users [ , , , , , , ]. The low probability of a given tweeter engaging in cross-cutting interactions with both pro- and anti-mask users is a further indicator that tweeters with opposing views on mask wearing are insulated from one another. Our results show it was mostly pro-mask tweeters that stayed in an echo chamber, confirming the hypothesis that stance-congruent homophily is found in the dominant group. On this point, our finding is consistent with previous studies (e.g. [ – , ]). Because the larger group is more naturally an “echo chamber”, fringe groups are much more likely to encounter a “mainstream” view than the reverse. It has been shown experimentally that exposure to opposing views on social media may create backfire effects that intensify political polarization [ ]. Under the backfire effects, the anti-mask users would be prone to increase their commitment to resistance to mask wearing. However, because they were severely outnumbered, their defiance and disinformation would have negligible impact on the pro-mask users as the dominant group. The lopsided participatory polarization as seen in our study and in other studies reveals a false balance or false equivalence often associated with opposing stances when the fringe group is given attention disproportionate to its size. This may be attributable to the general asymmetry in the automatic processing of affective information, known as the negativity bias whereby people pay more attention to negative events than positive and neutral events [ – ]. The role played by the media in creating this false balance by magnifying the anti-mask rhetoric should not be overlooked, given the persisting media bias toward negative news [ ].
The directionality of disinformation on the efficacy of face masks (e.g. #MasksDontWork and #MasksKill) suggests the strategic use of semantic content for social manipulation, as shown in a recent study on bots targeting specific individuals during the Catalan Referendum of October 1, 2017 [ ]. In our data, the overall volume of disinformation hashtags used in the unidirectional interactions targeting mask supporters is small and we have no evidence that they were generated by bots. To the extent that disinformation peddled by a small band of mask resistors failed to penetrate the “echo chamber” of mainstream support for masking, the peril of echo chambers might be “overstated”, to use the word of Dubois and Blank [ ]. This said, the greater media attention given to incendiary rhetoric including disinformation is often a forgotten part of the equation.
The monthly circumstantial data trends converged in June in a visible turning point ( ). The number of state mask mandates dwindled, Google search interests in face masks dropped, and the number of mask-related news headlines plunged. The converging downward trends suggest that state governments, news media, and the public all turned their attention away from the pandemic. This is when states started reopening or loosening restrictions in preparation of reopening. According to the June 2020 Pew survey, 40% of Americans say “the worst is behind us”, a 14% jump compared to April [ ]. The June turning point in the data captures a moment when the collective guard was down, corroborating the reported misperception that the nation was out of the woods. Around the same time, the murder of George Floyd by a Minneapolis police officer set off protests and unrest in major cities across the country, further shifting attention allocations in the public sphere [ ].
Our study has several limitations. First, we did not examine the social network structure of the hashtag users and therefore were ill-prepared to make direct observations of the behaviors of the distinct groups based on information on their followers and mutual followers. Second, our analysis focused on hashtags as the central vehicle of viral ideas and did not include other contents in tweets, which were relevant for understanding public stance toward mask wearing and would have provided a fuller picture of the digital discourse on mask wearing. A sentiment analysis of these other contents would have greatly complemented our results. Third, we focused on reply patterns among the hashtags and did not examine other forms of information exchange on Twitter (e.g. retweets and mentions), which were relevant for gauging interactions between pro-mask and anti-mask tweeters. While providing a window on the relative interaction frequencies of pro- and anti-mask tweeters with robust data, this narrow focus certainly could not capture all interactions or lack of interactions between the tweeters, and may have limited the informativeness of our results, especially in the analysis of the echo chamber effect. Lastly, previous studies found that COVID-19 mask rhetoric in social media is gendered [ ], that there is a gender difference in the likelihood of mask-wearing in public [ , ], and that male leaders who value a macho image tend to eschew masks because they perceive mask wearing as emasculating [ ]. One of the pro-mask hashtags in our data, e.g. #RealMenWearMasks, was clearly designed to refute the view that mask-wearing diminishes masculinity. We did not examine the gender identification of the tweeters in this study, and the extent to which the stances of the hashtags in our data are divided along gender lines awaits future investigation.

## Conclusion
Despite the demonstrated effectiveness of masks in mitigating the spread of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), mask wearing as a safety precaution remained a source of controversy in the United States during the COVID-19 pandemic. Drawing on aggregated data from Twitter, this study provides evidence of a stark digital rhetorical polarization of public opinion on masking that was exceedingly unbalanced in terms of the participation of the opposing sides. Notwithstanding the various limitations, our study highlights the importance of looking at political polarization as an issue-specific problem that is at once a rhetorical phenomenon and a participatory process. That the predominance of the pro-mask stance exceeded the level of support for masking that could be predicted from the ideological partitions of Twitter users cautions against the false equivalence in the perception of the two sides of a political polarization. It suggests that a rhetorical polarization, no matter how uncivil, is not necessarily matched by a participatory process equally divided along partisan lines. This said, considering the exceptional nature of the COVID-19 pandemic in terms of the scope and severity of its impacts, the results found in this study offer us little solace when we contemplate the human cost of this crisis, which is yet to be measured. Nor do the findings offer a source of relief from the pervasive, digitally synchronized, rhetorical polarization in social media that erodes trust in institutions in an unprecedented way [ , ]. This study underscores the importance of interdisciplinary research on public health discourse during a pandemic, and has implications for research on political polarization in social media.

## Supporting information
S1 File

## Search criteria used to query the API.
(TXT)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Fig

## Statewide mask mandates.
The figure shows the effective dates of executive mask mandates (33 states plus D.C.) on the x-axis and the cumulative number of mandates on the y-axis over the time period under study.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Fig

## Google Trends searches for “face mask”.
The figure shows the trajectories of weekly search interests for face mask on Google Trends in the U.S. over the time period under study. The vertical axis represents the relative interest to total search volume. Searches for face mask spiked in early April in all five search categories, coinciding with the CDC mask recommendation. After the sharp decline, search interests rebounded to a second peak in late June and increased further in mid-July in most categories except YouTube search.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Table

## Ideology distributions across data sets based on Knight Foundation study [ ].
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Table

## Statewide mask mandates (DC included).
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Table

## Mask-related news headlines.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.

We thank Vsevolod Kapatsinski for his comments on an earlier draft of this paper. We thank Thomas E. Payne and Eric Pederson for helping with the classification of the hashtags. All errors in the writing belong to the authors.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0250817.r001Decision Letter 0
CotfasLiviu-AdrianAcademic Editor© 2021 Liviu-Adrian Cotfas2021Liviu-Adrian Cotfashttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
1 Mar 2021

PONE-D-21-03538
#MaskOn! #MaskOff! Digital polarization of mask-wearing in the United States during COVID-19
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Jing-Schmidt,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
In the revised version of the paper please address the reviewers' comments listed below. Additionally, please provide a more in depth discussion regarding the results, while better stating the limitations of the study.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Apr 15 2021 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Liviu-Adrian Cotfas
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2. PLOS ONE has specific requirements for studies using personal data from third-party sources, including social media, blogs, other internet sources, and phone companies (https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-personal-data-from-third-party-sources). These requirements include confirming data are collected and used in accordance with the company or website’s Terms and Conditions, obtaining appropriate ethics or data protection body review, and ensuring appropriate consent from individuals whose data are used in research. In this case, please ensure that your Ethics statement is in compliance with guidelines, and that you have complied with the company's (i.e., Twitter's) Terms and Conditions, with appropriate permissions.
3. We note that you have stated that you will provide repository information for your data at acceptance. Should your manuscript be accepted for publication, we will hold it until you provide the relevant accession numbers or DOIs necessary to access your data. If you wish to make changes to your Data Availability statement, please describe these changes in your cover letter and we will update your Data Availability statement to reflect the information you provide.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: Partly
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: I Don't Know
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Thank you for the opportunity to review “#MaskOn! #MaskOff! Digital polarization of mask-wearing in the United States duringCOVID-19.” This is an interesting study of an obviously important and ongoing subject. At this point, I cannot recommend publication, as I believe the manuscript is too disconnected from some important political phenomena. However, I do hope to see a version of this in print, and I have a number of suggestions below that I hope will help.
My main concern about this manuscript is its disconnection from politics. That is, the authors chart some interesting trends in Twitter use of various mask-related hashtags, but it’s not clear *why* we see the various peaks and valleys in the data, or whether the Twitter patterns are instigating or following other discussions in society. The authors do attempt to correlate these tweet trends with some media headlines, but these prove insufficient. For example, is the dip in hashtag use in early June and then the sudden resurgence a few weeks later related to Covid disease rates? Does it track media coverage of the illness? Is it a function of the George Floyd protests of early June that temporarily dominated the national conversation? More generally, do disease rates or media trends track hashtag usage across the larger time span?
I was also struck by how many more pro-mask tweets there were than anti-mask tweets. As the authors note, this is somewhat consistent with public opinion and public behavior, and Democrats are somewhat more prominent on Twitter than Republicans. However, what is striking to me is how much attention anti-maskers received relative to their numbers. (This might again be an area to bring in a media analysis.) Perhaps this is a function of their controversial nature, which makes for good news stories, or their association with violent activism in state legislatures, or that these messages were largely echoed by the President. But by my read, the most prominent pro-mask tweets outnumbered the most prominent anti-mask tweets by a factor of ten, making it unclear why or how this was even considered a debate. I’m assuming this is an accurate depiction of Twitter activity on masking, although it makes me curious whether anti-maskers use hashtags not detected by the authors or perhaps eschew hashtags altogether. Is it possible to examine tweets in another way looking for content other than hashtags on this topic?
Related to this, I was wondering if anti-maskers had used Twitter to elevate their prominence in excess of their numbers in the population and draw attention to their efforts, or if they were essentially out-gunned on Twitter, relying on other political methods to capture attention.
The authors include some commentary in their discussion section noting the patterns of discussion across mask networks, with mask tweeters mostly tweeting among their own groups, but occasionally engaging those of the opposing viewpoint. The authors suggest, rather fatalistically, that “echo chambers” can induce polarization, but that engagement with people of opposing viewpoints can also induce polarization. Yet surely there are forms of interaction that can depolarize communities. Twitter might not be the best venue for such interaction, but surely some of that occurred. I would encourage the authors to investigate the political communications or political networks literature on this subject.
Related to that topic, I found Figure 4 rather difficult to interpret, and the accompanying text was not terribly Illuminating.
In general, I encourage the authors to situate this research more in the political phenomena surrounding the Twitter usage, rather than just the Twitter usage itself.
I hope these comments are useful.
Reviewer #2: In this paper the authors analyze 412,959 stance-bearing hashtags about mask wearing and identify 35 unique hashtags related to mask wearing. Ultimately, they argue that the use of these hashtags exhibit typical signs of modern partisan polarization within American politics, including conflict that invokes emotional responses and the siloing of ideas into echo chambers. This paper provides a unique approach and a relatively robust look at some interesting data. However, the manuscript is not prepared for publication. The authors lack a clear and articulated theoretical underpinning for their findings that might drive hypothesis. Ultimately, the authors bury their lead at the end and need to engage in significant revision to unpack their claims and the theory they are building upon for this manuscript to be publishable.
I have included a number of notes below. In the interest of illustrating the main issue, that you bury a lead which is actually quite compelling, I preserved all my comments as I wrote them so that you can follow the train of thought a reader might go through.
First, I would like to know more about your qualitative coding scheme for the 35 hashtags, including how many coders participated, was there intercoder reliability across the tests, and finally how did you deal with tags that invoked multiple categories. In addition, was the content of the tweet analyzed in any way to confirm that the hashtags are being used legitimately? In other words, could people sarcastically use the hashtag #maskskill in order to undermine that campaign. I am also interested in your use of the #coverup hashtag. Is that not a mask hashtag? Consider you are writing for a broad audience at PlosOne you really need to unpack this more.
Your discussion of the text content of mask tags is striking, though I am surprised that you include merely the N for the number of tags that, say, employ expletive attributes. I would be much more interested in a clearer discussion of the frequency in use of those attributes relative to other attributes. The existence of these tags is less interesting, their use is far more interesting and speaks volumes to the narrative around mask wearing. The paragraph from lines 162-172 could be divided into two and include this additional discussion of relative frequency of use.
Having arrived at your results section, I am struck by your lack of clear theory and supported hypotheses. I really think there is room before the methodology section to spend more time discussing the current literature on polarization and social media interaction to make your claims more clear.
The paragraph from lines 194-210 is really interesting and compelling with regard to the literature on group-think and echo chambers within social media platforms. This might be a way to incorporate more theoretical grounding within the manuscript. This improved ground could even generate some interesting testable hypothesis regarding the use of tags to 1.) signal identity vs 2.) convince opposition (which implies interaction). Lines 216-228 further emphasize this need for theoretical underpinnings to the argument.
Ultimately, your argument really hits its stride with the first paragraph of the discussion section. Unfortunately, you have buried the lead here. This needs to be up front, with some theory behind it and some expectations in the form of hypotheses. You pack a lot of citations into this paragraph (for example, line 293). These need to be unpacked in a more robust way that produces hypotheses to test.
The paragraph from line 271-283 seems like additional analysis in the discussion section. It seems disjointed placed there. Perhaps it would better fit in the results section as an alternative explanation or as a potential explanation of interaction. What might be interesting to see is if major events, like CDC announcements or COVID increases produced actual conflict as opposed to mere digital echo chambers. This would make better use of this data and add a layer to your analysis.
In terms of your main argument, I think a figure plotting the top 3 pro and anti-mask figures over time would be really interesting. Again, I think you need a theoretical hook here. Perhaps identifying events which drive interaction between the two echo chambers might be an interesting direction. Splitting your Fig 1 and Fig 2 into separate figures makes this less clear.
Ultimately, to reiterate, this paper presents a really interesting analysis without providing any compelling theoretical hook up front to draw the reader in. Further, when you come around to your theoretical claim, you pay passing reference without unpacking the implications of your discoveries on the broader literature on polarization and social media use. This is the most glaring omission in this paper and needs to be corrected before publication.
Other editorial notes:
Table 1: The top line repeats twice.
Equation 4: Why? Most of us know what averages are. This seems excessive.
The resolution on all of your figures is really poor. Be sure this gets resolved if you make it to the proofing phase.
Reviewer #3: The study seems to be well-constructed and carried out. I would not require changes but will point out two possible missed opportunities, which the authors might consider adding at their discretion, depending on how data has been collected and stored. The first is sentiment analysis for the tweets using positive and negative mask hashtags—this seems significant and would add a noteworthy dimension to the data which could not account for other significant demographic vectors (314, 325-30). The second is that the "echo chamber" effect might be further illuminated beyond "interactions between the tweeters" (291) if it were possible to plot, using social network analysis, the follower and mutual followers among and between the hashtag-using communities. I imagine that, if significant enough to be valuable, these might help to describe more fully the behaviors of distinct groups (such as mask makers, trolls, potentially even bot behaviors). Both introduce substantial complexity, but, I believe, potential value added for the study, again, at the authors' discretion.
Reviewer #4: The article addresses an interesting topic regarding the politics of mask wearing during the pandemic. They conduct this analysis by scraping Twitter to find useage of various hashtags that are related to both pro- and anti-mask wearing. The idea and execution of this analysis is well done. I recommend it be published.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
Reviewer #4: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0250817.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
25 Mar 2021

Please see attached "Response to reviewer comments".
AttachmentSubmitted filename: PLSONE_responses to reviewer comments.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0250817.r003Decision Letter 1
CotfasLiviu-AdrianAcademic Editor© 2021 Liviu-Adrian Cotfas2021Liviu-Adrian Cotfashttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
15 Apr 2021

#MaskOn! #MaskOff! Digital polarization of mask-wearing in the United States during COVID-19
PONE-D-21-03538R1
Dear Dr. Jing-Schmidt,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Liviu-Adrian Cotfas
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #3: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #4: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: I appreciate the work the authors have done here to address my concerns and those of the other reviewers. I am comfortable with the manuscript's publication.
Reviewer #2: Excellent job adding some theoretical rigor to your argument. I appreciated the citations up front. Though I can contest some of your assertions about polarization, this will add greatly to the conversation.
Reviewer #3: I saw my comments and other reviewers' were addressed in this revision; my suggestion about social network analysis was said not to be easily implemented, and its value might not have merited the effort.
Reviewer #4: The authors have addressed my concerns and the manuscript should be published. Thank you for the opportunity to review this paper.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
Reviewer #4: No
10.1371/journal.pone.0250817.r004Acceptance letter
CotfasLiviu-AdrianAcademic Editor© 2021 Liviu-Adrian Cotfas2021Liviu-Adrian Cotfashttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
19 Apr 2021

PONE-D-21-03538R1 
#MaskOn! #MaskOff! Digital polarization of mask-wearing in the United States during COVID-19 
Dear Dr. Jing-Schmidt:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Liviu-Adrian Cotfas 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE