PLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLoS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC8075201PMC8075201.1807520180752013390118310.1371/journal.pone.0249320PONE-D-20-342811Research ArticleComputer and Information SciencesNeural NetworksBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceNeural NetworksBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyLearningBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyLearningSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyLearningBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceLearning and MemoryLearningBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsNeuronsBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCellular NeuroscienceNeuronsPhysical SciencesPhysicsThermodynamicsEntropyResearch and Analysis MethodsSimulation and ModelingBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitionComputer and Information SciencesArtificial IntelligenceMachine LearningDeep LearningResearch and Analysis MethodsMathematical and Statistical TechniquesStatistical MethodsMultivariate AnalysisPrincipal Component AnalysisPhysical SciencesMathematicsStatisticsStatistical MethodsMultivariate AnalysisPrincipal Component AnalysisThe phase space of meaning model of psychopathology: A computer simulation modelling study
The Phase Space of Meaning Model of Psychopathologyhttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-1256-2089KleinbubJohann RolandData curationFormal analysisMethodologySoftwareVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing TestolinAlbertoConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisMethodologySoftwareWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing PalmieriAriannaConceptualizationProject administrationSupervisionWriting – review & editing SalvatoreSergioConceptualizationFormal analysisMethodologyProject administrationSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Department of Philosophy, Sociology, Education, and Applied Psychology, University of Padua, Padua, Italy2
Department of General Psychology, University of Padova, Padua, Italy3
Department of Information Engineering, University of Padova, Padua, Italy4
Padova Neuroscience Center, University of Padua, Padua, Italy5
Department of Dynamic and Clinical Psychology, and Health Studies, Sapienza Università di Roma, Rome, ItalyChenChi-HuaEditor – ], several authors have recently proposed the hypothesis of a general psychopathology factor—the so-called p factor hypothesis—underpinning all common forms of mental disorders [ ]. In analogy with the g factor [ , ], explaining the positive correlation among all cognitive test scores, the p factor has been seen as a way to account for individuals’ propensity to develop any and all forms of psychopathological conditions.
Various studies have provided empirical support for the p factor hypothesis (e.g., [ – ]), showing that it predicts mental disorders and behavioural problems (e.g., difficulties in academic performance). In the last decade, the scientific literature has proposed a broad range of candidate constructs to represent the p factor, such as super-ordered personality trait [ ], unpleasant affective state [ ], low impulse control [ ], deficit in cognitive function [ ], and psychological liability [ ]. These partially conflicting explanations seem to share, at their core, the same general approach, i.e., the idea that the p factor reflects a given single (or restricted set of) latent construct(s) to be detected empirically. The p factor hypothesis has drawn attention because of its potential to fulfil the need for a unified interpretative framework of psychopathology in the broader context of the ongoing debate on the validity of psychiatric/psychopathological diagnoses [ , ].
There is still no agreement on its clinical significance or the underpinning mechanisms [ ]. Recently, the p factor has been interpreted as the expression of the rigidity of meaning-making (i.e., a way of making sense of experience, characterised by low variability) [ , ]. The idea that interferences in the way meaning-making develops represents a pathway for psychopathology that has been discussed by Tronick and Beeghly [ ] in the context of infant research. The authors describe how infants’ mental growth is driven by so-called ‘acts of meaning’, which consist of the collection and organisation of information about their environment in superordinate dimensions. For instance, through their ongoing engagement with caregivers, infants create internal working models (i.e., new meanings) that can either be based on feelings of security or the need to defend themselves from some of these engagements, possibly leading to maladaptive behaviours later in life.
In accordance with this perspective, a semiotic, embodied, and psychoanalytic conceptualisation of the p factor has been proposed—the Harmonium Model [ ]—which focuses on the global dynamics underpinning the meaning-making process. The specificity of the harmonium model lies in the fact that it provides a computational account of the p factor, and therefore of psychopathology; namely, a fine-grained depiction of the operative rules of the way it works.

## The harmonium model and the phase space of meaning
The Harmonium Model is grounded in the well-established general view of psychopathology as rigidity in meaning-making, the person’s tendency to interpret and respond in more or less the same ways to different self-environmental patterns. As a result, the meaning-maker is unable to take the relevant facets of the context into account to address the environmental demands successfully (e.g., [ , ]).
The Harmonium Model (schematically illustrated in ) provides a model of rigidity of meaning-making underpinning psychopathology. It can be described in terms of one major assumption, one related corollary, and four tenets (for a systematic presentation, see [ ]).
 

## Assumption: Cognition is at the service of action
According to Embodied Cognition, cognition works in terms of online dynamic sensorimotor representations of the environment, shaped by the need to coordinate the person’s interaction with it [ – ]. The general rule and ultimate purpose of cognition is to keep the action coupled with ever-changing environmental states.

## Corollary: Cognition is future oriented and searches for fit
In order to keep action coupled with a continuously changing environment, cognition is oriented to forecast the incoming variation of the environmental state [ , ]. More particularly, cognition uses the information from sensory input to forecast the incoming environmental state and complements the forecast with the simulation of a response that enables the fit of the forecast to be upheld, that is, the coupling between action and environment.

## Tenet 1. The Phase Space of Meaning (PSM)
Cognition can be modelled as an ongoing activity of mapping the moment-by-moment environmental states in terms of dimensions of meaning, each of which maps a component of the environmental variability. The Phase Space of Meaning (PSM) model is the representational space defined by these dimensions. For instance, a ball can be represented as a point on the PSM having as coordinates the values on dimensions like form, colour, function, owner, and so forth.

## Tenet 2. PSM dimensionality modulation
Given that at any moment most of the environment’s characteristics are not relevant for the regulation of action, the cognitive system has to background most of the environmental complexity, and in so doing, bring only the pertinent facets to the fore [ ]. For instance, the tennis player is interested in the speed and direction of the ball, not its colour. This process of backgrounding/foregrounding can be modelled in terms of the modulation of the PSM dimensionality: the cognitive system reduces potentially infinite PSM dimensionality by giving salience to a subset of dimensions only. In this way, the cognitive system selects a portion of the environmental variability to be processed, sourced from environmental components mapped by the active PSM dimensions.

## Tenet 3. The harmonium mechanism
The modulation of PSM dimensionality is a way of optimising the trade-off between capacity of fit and the information power of the forecast. Indeed, the lower the dimensionality, the fewer the components of environmental variability taken into account; therefore, the lower the uncertainty the forecast has to address. In the final analysis, this means that the forecast prioritises the capacity of fit (i.e., its success) over its information power (i.e., its capacity of reducing uncertainty). The greater the dimensionality, the more the uncertainty, and the higher the forecast’s information power. In summary, like a harmonium, the cognitive system expands and contracts its inner space moment by moment in order to optimise the balance between the reproduction of its inner organisation (i.e., the capacity of fit) and the need for action regulation (i.e., the information power) [ ].

## Tenet 4. Psychopathology and poor modulation of PSM
The rigidity of meaning-making, which is typical of psychopathology, can be modelled in terms of a poorly modulable PSM. The Harmonium Model holds that PSM is characterised by two different kinds of dimensions [ ] (see also [ ]). Primary dimensions, namely a few basic dimensions corresponding to generalised, embodied affect-laden meanings (e.g., pleasantness vs unpleasantness) are the basis of meaning-making and provide global, homogenising connotations of the field of experience as a whole [ ]. Due to these characteristics, the primary dimensions tend to be invariant within and between individuals [ , ]. Thus, they constitute the stable nucleus of the PSM: dimensions that are activated in any meaning-making process, regardless of the specificity of the environmental states (for a model of affects consistent with this view, see [ ]). Secondary dimensions, each of which corresponds to a property/quality through which a certain set of environmental states (e.g., an object, a circumstance), can be represented. A car might be represented as being speedy, expensive, or safe, but not as tasty, happy, or lazy. The secondary PSM dimensions correspond to information-oriented meanings, activated variably by the characteristics of the environmental states and, more generally, the need for action regulation. The modulation of the PSM concerns the secondary dimensions. The Harmonium Model maintains that the higher the weight of these dimensions within the PSM, the more it is capable of modulation; conversely, a poorly modulable PSM reflects the high weight of primary dimensions and the low weight of secondary dimensions. The high weight of primary dimensions means that most of the meaning-making is saturated by the invariant affective meanings (e.g., the connotation of experience in terms of friend-foe affect-laden schema; see [ ]), while little room is left for further PSM components, namely, the components on which the detection of the nuances of the experience depends [ ]. In brief, the high weight of the primary dimensions can be considered the computational model of a cognitive system constrained to provide simplified, homogenising interpretations of the environment, unable to attune its variability, and therefore to address the requirements of action regulation.
In what follows, a clinical vignette is used to exemplify the view of psychopathology in terms of dimensionality. James is a 65-year-old patient, meeting DSM-5 criteria for narcissistic personality disorder, followed in individual psychotherapy by one of the authors. He addresses any circumstance and events, both in interpersonal and job contexts, in terms of highly salient generalised affective connotation; in this case, as if it were destined to lead to a defeat and/or a negative evaluation by a severe judge. Sometimes, he feels he is lucky to avoid failure. Most of his feelings and actions are modelled by the anticipation of or reaction to this dichotomy: failure vs. avoiding failure. This dichotomy constitutes the major affect-laden meaning (i.e., the primary dimensions of James’ PSM), in terms of which the patient maps most of the variability of his environments, and by which he represents circumstances and their evolution, with little room left for secondary dimensions. As a result, the patient is rigidly enslaved to an invariant mode of meaning-making, unable to detect important environmental facets and therefore modulate his feelings and actions accordingly. Such facets affect his responses to his significant others’ desire towards him and others, his own and their needs and plans, and so forth. Such an inability considerably narrows his capacity to adjust, e.g., learn from feedback and enter reciprocal, symmetrical relationships, leading him to assume the position of one who has to protect himself from the risk of failure, regardless of the actual content of the circumstances.

## Aims and hypothesis
The Harmonium Model of psychopathology is in its first stage of development. Thus far, it is supported by clinical and theoretical justifications and indirect empirical evidence only (see [ ] for a review). For instance, Tonti and Salvatore [ ] found that the dimensionality of meaning-making is directly associated with markers of emotional activation and affect-laden forms of evaluation. Ciavolino and colleagues [ ] developed a method of estimating interrater reliability based on a measure related to the dimensionality of judgment. Salvatore and colleagues [ ] showed that affect-laden, polarised, identity-oriented evaluations and attitudes towards relevant social issues (e.g., foreigners) are associated with low-dimensional worldviews.
This indirect evidence is encouraging but far from conclusive. The purpose of this simulation study is to move a step ahead in the development of the PSM model by providing a first direct test of the core tenet of the Harmonium Model, the idea that psychopathology can be modelled at a computational level as a low-dimension PSM. Our study adopts a simulation design, based on a deep learning model [ ] simulating a cognitive process, in this case, a classification task. It considers the level of task performance as the simulated equivalent of the cognitive process, and therefore its position on an ideal normality-psychopathology continuum. Moreover, it considers the dimensionality of the neural network’s internal computational dynamics (ICD) as the simulated equivalent of the PSM’s dimensionality. Our computational approach is based on a popular cognitive architecture that relies on energy-based models [ ], which can simulate a form of ‘learning by observation’ that does not require labelled examples and exploits Hebbian learning principles [ ]. In line with predictive coding theories of the brain [ , ], learning in these models corresponds to fitting a hierarchical probabilistic generative model to the sensory environment. A separate decision layer was implemented as a read-out classifier, which was stacked on top of the deep network in order to simulate an explicit behavioural task [ – ].
On this basis, this study is aimed at testing the following hypothesis: The neural network’s level of performance is positively associated with the dimensionality of its internal computational dynamics. More specifically, it is expected that: (a) the higher the weight of the primary dimensions and (b) the lower the weight of secondary dimensions, the lower the performance will be. Incidentally, it must be noted that (a) and (b) are worth considering separately because, though the primary and secondary dimensions are complementary within each individual PSM, the magnitude of both vary between PSMs (i.e., a certain PSM can be characterised by a higher or lower weight of both primary and secondary dimensions than another PSM). Despite our modelling approach being inspired by recent advances in artificial neural networks and deep learning research, our goal here is not to implement a state-of-the-art machine vision system, but rather to operationalise a recent psychopathological theory in the form of a computational model.

## Materials and methods

## Design
Two studies were performed.

## Study 1
In order to generate variability in the neural networks’ performance, two instances of the same neural network architecture were subjected to different training conditions (TC): high entropy (TC-HE) and low entropy (TC-LE). After an unsupervised learning phase, the two instances were tested on a classification task, which required reading out the internal representations of the stimuli by mapping them into one of the 26 possible categories (see details below). Finally, the relationship between classification performance and dimensionality of the internal computational dynamics was estimated.

## Study 2
This second study was carried out to collect sample statistics that allowed controlling for the possible effect of the idiosyncratic characteristics of the single instances used in Study 1. To this end, Study 2 replicated the procedure and analyses of Study 1 on a set of 40 replicas (20 each subjected to TC-HE and 20 to TC-LE) of the same neural network architecture. To reduce the computational complexity of the simulations, analyses were performed on only two categories of stimuli.

## Materials and procedures
Both studies relied on a deep learning model consisting of a multi-layered deep belief network [ ]. This kind of neural network is able to learn hierarchical representations by progressively discovering more abstract features from sensory input [ ]. Our model is based on a recently proposed architecture that has been used to simulate the psychophysics of letter recognition in humans [ ]. describes the neural network’s architecture. It comprises: a) one input layer (900 neurons), which receives the vectorised stimulus encoded as grey-level activations of image pixels; b) two layers of hidden neurons (400 and 800 neurons, respectively), deployed to learn a set of visual features from the sensory data [ ]; and c) one output layer (26 neurons) that is used to simulate the behavioural response—each output neuron corresponds to one of the possible perception classes (i.e., letters). During the unsupervised learning phase, the network extracted a set of visual features by learning a generative model of its environment (i.e., the training dataset). Connection weights were adjusted using the contrastive divergence algorithm, which implemented a Hebbian-like learning rule [ ]. Learning continued for 40 epochs, which guaranteed convergence of the reconstruction error. In order to simulate a behavioural response, a supervised phase was then carried out by training a read-out classifier on the top-layer internal representations of the model (for details, see [ ]). Connection weights were adjusted using the delta rule, which implemented a simple form of associative learning.
 In both studies, neural networks were attributed to one of the two training conditions (TC-HE and TC-LE), each of which was characterised by a set of training inputs. TC-HE and TC-LE sets were designed to have the same number of stimuli (26 letters) and the same global amount of information, but a different entropy, namely a different degree of within-set variability: high and low entropy, in the TC-HE and TC-LE, respectively. In the case of the TC-HE, the set of stimuli consisted of 27 different versions of each of the 26 letters, obtained by the combination of nine fonts and three styles (normal, italic, and bold). In the case of the TC-LE, the set of stimuli consisted of two versions of each of the 26 letters (two fonts, no style variation). In order to equalise the number of learning trials used in the two training conditions, the TC-LE stimuli were replicated several times until the size of the two training sets were matched. reports some instances of the set of inputs used.
 In Study 1, after the unsupervised learning stage, the two instances of neural networks were applied to the same classification task. To this aim, a read-out classifier was stacked on top of each deep network and trained on the corresponding dataset used during the unsupervised phase. The classification accuracy was then evaluated on an independent test set consisting of letter images created using four new fonts and three styles (normal, italic, and bold), which were also reduced in contrast by dividing the pixel luminosity by a factor of two to make recognition more challenging.
In Study 2, we tested 40 instances of the neural network architecture (20 subjected to TC-HE and 20 to TC-LE) to check the possible effect of the specificity of the neural networks used in Study 1. Due to computational limitations, the analysis of the internal computational dynamics was performed only on two randomly sampled images of two letters (‘A’ and ‘M’).

## Measures
In order to check the design assumption that the TC-HE set of training inputs did not have a higher global amount of information than the TC-LE set, the number of active pixels characterising each training input set was calculated. To check the second design assumption—i.e., that the sets of training stimuli adopted in TC-HE had a higher level of entropy than the TC-LE set—the entropy was estimated in terms of dimensionality of the factorial space obtained by the principal component analysis (PCA), applied to the distributions of pixels. The higher the number of dimensions needed to explain the whole distribution, the higher the entropy (for a discussion of this approach, see [ ]).
To control the effect of the complexity of the input signal to be classified, the latter was estimated by means of the perimetric complexity (PeCo). PeCo has been computed as the ratio between the surface and perimetry of the stimulus [ ].
The performance of each classification task was measured as a percentage of correct classification. The neural network’s dimensionality of internal computational dynamics (ICD) was measured in terms of dimensionality of the factorial space obtained by the PCA applied to the dataset containing the activations of the hidden neurons recorded for each stimulus presentation during the unsupervised learning phase. More particularly, the following procedure was followed (see ).
 First, the analysis focused on the 800 neurons of the second hidden layer, which interfaced the output layer, corresponding to the crucial stage of processing, where the information was subjected to abstraction and synthesis [ ]. We considered the cycle activation of these neurons; that is, after every 120 learning events repeated for 40 epochs, we presented all letter images to the network, and we recorded the corresponding activation of every neuron in the second hidden layer. As a result, for each class of stimuli (i.e., for each letter), an 800 neurons*4,800 cycles matrix was built, with the ij cell reporting the degree of activation of the i-th neuron in the j-th cycle.
Second, given our focus on the neural network micro-dynamics, the local variation across close cycles was foregrounded. To this end, the standard deviation (SD) was calculated for each window of 20 adjacent cycles (one micro-stage). Thus, for each neuron 240 (4,800/20) micro-stage scores were calculated, each of them indicative of the variation of the neuron’s activation within 20 cycles. This led to building a second kind of matrix– 800 neurons*240 micro-stages.
This procedure was carried out separately for each neural network and each letter. This means that 132 (800*240) matrixes were built: 52 (26 letters*2 neural network) in Study 1, and 80 (2 letters*40 neural networks) in Study 2.
Each of these 132 matrixes was subjected to PCA separately. The dimensionality of the factorial spaces was analysed in terms of the following two indicators:
Weight of the primary dimensions (WGHT_PD). This indicator is the sum of the variance explained by the first two factors of each PCA. The choice to focus on such a number of factors is based on the preliminary analysis of the distribution of the variance across the PCAs, which showed that these components worked systematically as the main dimensions in PCA outputs. In 95% of the PCAs (5% were excluded as outliers), the first and second factors together explained no less than 75.71%, and the cumulative explained variance did not increase greatly once the third factor was added (from at least 75.71% to at least 79.06%), as can be seen in , left panel. Additionally, the choice to consider the first two factors is consistent with the literature, which converges in detecting two basic dimensions of affective meanings, e.g., pleasure/displeasure and activated/deactivated [ , ], or evaluation and dynamism [ ]).
Weight of the secondary dimensions (WGHT_SD). This indicator is the sum of the variance explained by the relevant factors beyond the first two. In order to identify the relevant factors, a Kaiser-like criterion was adopted: the median number of factors having eigenvalues higher than 1 was calculated. The computation was performed separately for Study 1 and Study 2’s sets of PCAs; however, in both studies, factor 6 was identified as the last factor to have an eigenvalue higher than 1 in at least 50% of the PCAs, as represented in , right panel. WGHT_SD was calculated as the sum of the explained variance from factor 3 up to factor 6.
 

## Data analysis

## Preliminary check
1) The amount of information of the two training input sets was checked by means of a one-tailed Welch t-test. 2) The assumed different entropy between TC-HE and TC-LE’s training input sets was checked by means of visual inspection of the slope mapping the percentage of variance explained by the factorial component obtained by the two PCAs, applied separately to the distribution of active pixels in the two training input sets. 3) The assumed effect of the two training conditions in differentiating the neural networks’ performance was checked by means of a two-tailed Welch t-test with paired samples.

## Studies 1 and 2
The relationship between the neural network’s performance and the dimensionality of its dynamics (ICD) was modelled by means of two multiple regression models. The networks’ performance was the dependent variable, and the characteristics of their dimensionality (WGHT_PD and WGHT_SD) and the letters’ perimetric complexity were the independent variables. All independent variables were transformed to standard scores. Although the two parameters of dimensionality (WGHT_PD and WGHT_SD) are related to each other as part of a global distribution with a sum equal to 1, they are both worthy of being included as separate predictors, because each refers to a specific characteristic of the factorial space (i.e., the weight of primary and secondary dimensions), having at least a partial independent chance to vary with respect to the whole distribution of the variance across the factorial dimensions. This is shown by the fact that, taken together, WGHT_PD and WGHT_SD refer to the first six of the 240 factors extracted by each PCA. Finally, each letter is characterised by a specific PeCo, so the introduction of the PeCo in the regression models operates as a control for the possible letter effect.
All analyses were performed using R statistical software, version 3.6.3 [ ], and PCAs were performed with the Psych package, version 1.9.12 [ ].

## Results

## Preliminary checks

## 1) Amount of information
In order to verify that the amount of information in the TC-HE training set was not higher than TC-LE, a one-tailed Welch t-test was performed on the number of active pixels characterising each training input set (MTC-LE
= 102.96, SDTC-LE = 27.99; MTC-HE = 93.82, SDTC-HE = 33.42). The test showed no significant evidence to reject the null hypotheses (MTC-LE−MTC-HE< 0), t(81712) = 43.05, p = 1.

## 2) Comparison of the entropy of the training input sets
 compares the distribution of the percentage of total variance explained by each factorial dimension obtained by the two PCAs. Each of them is applied to the active pixel distribution of one training input set (TC-HE vs TC-LE). As expected, the TC-HE is demonstrated to have higher entropy, as shown by the fact that more components are needed to explain the variance than in the TC-LE distribution. Though differences are not highly marked (the main difference concerns the last 1% of variance), they are consistent with the expected effect pursued by the design. Indeed, even if the two training input sets were designed with different degrees of complexity, the visual structure of the inputs used on the two sets are mostly similar to each other.
 

## 3) Effect of the training condition
The TC-HE network (M = 0.913, SD = 0.107) achieved a higher performance than the TC-LE network (M = 0.475, SD = 0.220) for each of the 26 letters of Study 1. A Welch two-sample t-test with paired samples was significant, with t(25) = 12.87, p < 0.001. This result shows that the limited variability of the TC-LE state resulted in overfitting the training data, preventing a flexible generalisation of the learned features to the test stimuli.

## Study 1
The regression model showed that performance decreased by -0.13 ± 0.037 (p < 0.0009) for each SD of WGHT_PD and increased by 0.073 ± 0.036 (p = 0.0465) for WGHT_SD. No association was found between perimetric complexity and performance (ßPeCo = 0.056 ± 0.037, p = 0.1288). The model’s intercept (representing performance values expected with average dimensionality and letter complexity) was estimated at 0.694 ± 0.035. The model had an adjusted R2 of 19.86%, showing a moderate fit.

## Study 2
The same model was used for Study 2 datasets, except for the perimetric complexity that was not included, given that only two letters were considered in this case, and on the basis that PeCo showed no effect in Study 1. The model estimated similar parameters to Study 1’s with higher precision, given the increased sample size. Specifically, dimensionality predicted lower performance levels by -0.24 ± 0.007 (p < 0.0001) for WGHT_PD, and higher performance levels by 0.618 ± 0.007 (p < 0.0001) for WGHT_SD. The model’s intercept (representing performance values expected with average dimensionality and letter complexity) was estimated at 0.618 ± 0.007. The model had an adjusted R2 of 94.59%, showing a high fit.

## Discussion and conclusion
Study 1 and Study 2 regression models supported the hypothesis. As expected, the neural networks’ level of performance was negatively associated with WGHT_PD and positively associated with WGHT_PD. This showed that low performance was determined by the combination of the high weight of primary dimensions (WGHT_PD) and low weight of secondary dimensions (WGHT_SD) of the neural networks’ internal computational dynamics.
Preliminary checks and statistical controls ensured that these results were indicative of the hypothesised relation between dimensionality and performance.
The three assumptions underlying the studies’ procedure were verified. Although the TC-HE training input set was not characterised by a higher amount of information than the TC-LE set, the network trained over the complex dataset presented higher entropy. As expected, the two training conditions were effective in differentiating the levels of neural network performance.
Study 1’s regression model showed no residual effect of the letters’ perimetric complexity on the networks’ performance. This leads us to conclude that the effects detected by the regression model were independent from the variability related to inherent characteristics of input letters.
Study 2’s regression model replicated the Study 1 regression model over a larger sample of trained models. This indicates that the performance-dimensionality relation was not due to the idiosyncratic characteristics of the Study 1 neural networks. On the contrary, the larger magnitude of the effect of dimensionality on performance shown by Study 2 suggests that, if the specific characteristics of Study 1 neural network had played a role, it would have been in the direction of underestimation of the effect of dimensionality on performance.
In summary, if we assume that the relationship between neural networks’ performance and dimensionality of its internal computational dynamics simulates the relationship between psychopathology and PSM dimensionality, the main findings of Studies 1 and 2 are consistent with the Harmonium Model interpretation of the p factor, namely that psychopathology is due to a poorly modulable Phase Space of Meaning (PSM) as a consequence of a combination of high incidence of affect-laden meanings and low incidence of information-oriented meanings [ ].
Some implications of our simulation model are worth highlighting. First, to the best of our knowledge, the two studies reported in the present paper are the first attempts to adopt a simulation framework based on state-of-the-art computational cognitive models in the analysis of psychopathology. Connectionist models, network analyses, and artificial intelligence (AI) techniques (in which deep learning has its roots) have been used in clinical psychology research since the 1990s [ – ]. Yet, they are employed as data analysis tools to model the clinical phenomena under investigation, rather than to simulate the cognitive processes underpinning psychopathology (a partial exception is provided by Del Giudice [ ], which simulated life trajectories in samples of virtual psychiatric patients). With respect to these studies, the current paper shows that the simulation approach can provide an efficacious way to build formal models of the computational mechanisms underpinning clinical phenomena, and in so doing, contribute to opening the black box of psychopathology [ , ].
Second, it is worth mentioning that the factorial spaces used to represent the neural network’s internal computational dynamics were demonstrated to have an inner organisation consistent with the Harmonium Model’s view of the PSM as characterised by an affect-laden nucleus comprised of two (or very few) basic dimensions [ ]. Indeed, the preliminary analysis of the distribution of the explained variance showed that the first two factorial dimensions covered ¾ of the whole variance in at least 95% of the 132 PCAs performed. This finding may not be considered a direct support for the Harmonium Model’s assumption (and indeed it was not included in the hypothesis), but it should be considered a computational characteristic of the simulation model, which, due to its consistency with the simulated process, supports its construct validity.
Third, the relationship between the entropy associated with the two training conditions and performativity is worth discussing. This relationship is not contained in the paper’s hypothesis; indeed, the low vs high entropy training conditions were implemented instrumentally to obtain the required variability of the neural networks’ performance. However, this does not prevent us from pointing out that the relation between entropy/complexity and performance is analogically evocative of an ontogenetic model of psychopathology, namely, of the idea that the PSM low-modulation underpinning psychopathology is due to the low complexity of the ontogenetic environment. According to this view, PSM rigidity at the basis of psychopathology is the consequence of a flow of past environmental states that has been unable to ‘challenge’ the cognitive system, and therefore compel it to develop its dimensionality to map the environmental complexity. That being said, although studies’ findings do not disconfirm this idea, they do not support it either. It is not possible to discard the alternative hypothesis that the different complexity of the neural networks’ internal computational dynamics is due to other causes (e.g., the genetic equipment), which the training conditions have set in the neural network, without being their computational analogue. The analogy is clear and quite provocative, thus motivating further exploration.
Fourth, the method we introduced for analysing the activation dynamics of hidden neurons might also be successfully applied in other contexts, for example, to quantitatively characterise the representational capacity of deep neural networks. In the field of machine learning, this topic is currently being investigated by a variety of approaches based on dimensionality reduction [ ], trajectory analysis [ ], algebraic topology [ ], and manifold theory [ ], among others. Furthermore, our approach, based on the eigenspectrum analysis of the internal activations’ dimensionality, might potentially be combined with graph theoretical measures to provide further insights into the relationship between structural and functional properties of neural networks [ ]. Very recent AI research has shown that the empirical spectral density of deep networks’ weight matrixes can be used to characterise the self-regularisation properties of these models [ ], and that spectral properties of the weight matrixes (such as power-law fits of eigenvalues distribution) can provide useful metrics to assess the quality of deep learning models [ ]. Others have shown that the effective dimensionality of the parameter space of deep networks can be estimated by computing the eigenspectrum of the Hessian on the training loss, providing a useful proxy to characterise model complexity and generalisation performance [ ]. These results suggest that eigenspectrum analysis can be successfully applied to study the inner organisation of deep networks at the connectivity level, providing a useful complementary perspective to the activation-based analysis we introduced here.
From a broader perspective, the present study aims to offer a contribution to the identification of a diagnostic strategy characterised by a limited number of parameters, addressed to satisfy the increasing need for the validity of psychopathological diagnoses [ , ]. The conception of psychopathology, also in terms of an embodied, evidence-based factor, could lead to overcoming some impasses of the current nosographic/tassonomic classification systems, which are heterogenous and not scientifically falsifiable [ ], contributing to a more effective diagnostic process and, consequently, more appropriate therapeutic strategies.
Before concluding, limitations of the studies have to be highlighted to recognise the constraints on the generalisability of the findings. Due to their pioneering nature, the two studies reported in the current paper are based on only one neural network architecture, one kind of cognitive function (a classification task), one set of input stimuli (letters), and two training conditions.
Finally, a general caveat is worth mentioning. The findings discussed above have to be interpreted as supporting the hypothesis that psychopathology can be modelled at the computational level in terms of dimensionality of the cognitive system’s functioning. This is a necessary but insufficient condition to conclude that psychopathology actually works in this way. On the other hand, the hypothesis focused on by the current simulation study was not intended in ontological terms as explicative of the actual mechanism of psychopathology. Rather, the aim of our simulation study was to test the Harmonium Model as a valid computational model, able to describe the computational micro-dynamics assumed to underpin psychopathology. The support obtained for this hypothesis paves the way for further studies, conveying more complex and realistic conditions, and aimed at developing further the phase space of meaning model and using it to support the explicative mechanisms of psychopathology suggested by the Harmonium Model.
More precisely, subsequent studies could increase—qualitatively and quantitatively—the gamut of neural network architectures, tasks, input sets, and training conditions. For example, a promising venue for future research would be to scale up our model to more realistic stimuli, such as images of faces [ ] and real objects [ ]. This would require adopting more advanced deep learning approaches, such as modern computer vision models based on convolutional architectures [ ]. Moreover, specifications and constraints on the neural network models will need to be introduced, and reverse engineering procedures carried out. This would increase the validity of the simulation model with respect to the clinical phenomena they refer to. In doing so, we intend to go ahead in the Harmonium computational modelling of psychopathological meaning-making and of the role of affects in it.

 10.1371/journal.pone.0249320.r001Decision Letter 0
ChenChi-HuaAcademic Editor© 2021 Chi-Hua Chen2021Chi-Hua Chenhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
11 Dec 2020

PONE-D-20-34281
The Phase Space of Meaning Model of Psychopathology. An Initial Validation Through Computer Simulation Modeling
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Salvatore,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jan 17 2021 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Chi-Hua Chen, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2. In your Data Availability statement, you have not specified where the minimal data set underlying the results described in your manuscript can be found. PLOS defines a study's minimal data set as the underlying data used to reach the conclusions drawn in the manuscript and any additional data required to replicate the reported study findings in their entirety. All PLOS journals require that the minimal data set be made fully available. For more information about our data policy, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability.
Upon re-submitting your revised manuscript, please upload your study’s minimal underlying data set as either Supporting Information files or to a stable, public repository and include the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers within your revised cover letter. For a list of acceptable repositories, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-recommended-repositories. Any potentially identifying patient information must be fully anonymized.
Important: If there are ethical or legal restrictions to sharing your data publicly, please explain these restrictions in detail. Please see our guidelines for more information on what we consider unacceptable restrictions to publicly sharing data: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions. Note that it is not acceptable for the authors to be the sole named individuals responsible for ensuring data access.
We will update your Data Availability statement to reflect the information you provide in your cover letter.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: I Don't Know
Reviewer #2: No
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: This paper examines in-depth the fundamental issue of the continuum between normality and psychopathology by use and implementation of computational models, including neural networks/computer simulation techniques. Authors manage to defend the view that there exists a dimensional model of psychopathology, anchored in the Phase Space of Meaning concept developed on the level of computational modelling. The paper will benefit from few amendments:
1. Deliver more precise and straigtforward conclusion in terms of core message to more general mental health audience without background in cognitive science. Perhaps a summary of main contributions would fit the purpose.
2. Include some critical premises from methodological perspective, which are relevant to that core message, e.g.
https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s13148-010-0014-2.pdf
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyt.2019.00869/full
Reviewer #2: The authors seek to prove that the Harmonium model can be used to explain general psychopathology. Their theory states that rigidity in meaning-making is psychopathology, which can be represented through the Phase Space of Meaning (PSM).
They hypothesize that a PSM that puts more emphasis on its primary dimensions (representing the global meaning of the environment exposed too) and rather than its secondary dimensions (representing minor subjective details of the environment) leads to psychopathology.
They test this by learning a classification network and looking at the network's inner layers through training. They conceptualize the change in primary dimensions as the standard deviation of the first two PCs (wght_pd) and the change in secondary dimensions as the standard deviation of the other PCs (wght_sd) (with eigenvalue higher than 1). They find that high SD for wght_sd means higher accuracy, while the opposite is true for wght_pd. Thus, they conclude that this reflects how focusing only on the primary dimensions leads to worse internal decisions (which means psychopathology from their theory).
The Harmonium model's description is quite complicated; I understand that compressing the description into a few pages is difficult. What would really help is some infographics representing the PSM, the ongoing signal, the output, and modulability (or lack of).
I'm unsure that there is a well-established view of psychopathology as rigidity in meaning-making. Citations would help make your case. It's unlikely that psychopathology, in general, can be attributed simply to one element. Tenet 4 really ought to be toned down, it's completely over-generalizing as if this is a theory of everything.
More talk about "meaning" would help as it is never defined in the paper. This paper, for example, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3135310/ could be part of the introduction on the Harmonium model.
For the visual system, a fully-connected network does not represent a realistic architecture of the true brain's processing of an image. A convolutional neural network (CNN) is much more biologically plausible, which is likely why they also perform much better. I would do the same experiment on a CNN. Unsupervised training with Contrastive divergence and then using supervised learning of the final layer is rarely used nowadays. Modern visual neural networks do not work as such, and it is doubtful that human brains would work as such (although modern stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is still not entirely plausible either).
I would start from a popular GitHub repository on a classification network, take a good CNN and its training algorithm rather than the very old-fashion architecture and algorithms you use.
The whole experiment seems unnecessary because it is well known in modern AI literature that the inner layer's eigenspectrum is important. If one eigenvalue (or one principal component) dominates all others, then training is unstable, and results will be poor. Also, classifiers/discriminators used to trained Generative adversarial network (GAN) with poor eigenspectrum lead to the GAN only learning to generate one mode of the distribution (mode collapse).
You should review modern AI literature. I recommend looking at Charles H. Martin's work; see his blog: https://calculatedcontent.com/. He shows that the eigenspectrum of inner layers often fit a power-law (with parameter alpha), and low alpha is better (low alpha implies heavy tail distribution, so more entropy). Note that this work is on the networks' weights, not the inner's representation of your input. Nevertheless, both inner layer input and weights effectively answer a similar question (how collapsed/single-minded is your decision-making).
We also know from the literature that a model trained on a low-variability dataset will not generalize well. Researchers often pre-train on imagenet (see VGG16) because it is a huge dataset, and then they fine-tune train on their small specific dataset. Result 1 from p13 is thus obvious.
About b in p13, there is no effect of perimetric complexity because the neural network has the capacity for learning much more complex tasks.
"the network trained over the complex network" reword, p 13
PC means two things; this is confusing (Principal components and perimetric complexity).
It seems arbitrary to consider wght_pd to be the first two factors and wght_sd to be all factors with eigenvalue less than 1. Looking at the distribution would be interesting.
It's interesting to see that SD of wght_sd means better performance. It shows that the main PCs should stay stable, while minor ones should vary. But it does not really reflect adaptation to change and it's more just a process of learning. It could also reflect the eigenspectrum changing to more heavy-tail distributions.
The connection between the theory and teh experiment is not convincing. It is far-reaching to connect the two, in my opinion.
I would call it a "simulation study", not a "study".
The following would be needed in the rewriting of this paper:
- make it more approachable for a broad audience; right now, very few people in the world will understand the content
- use of modern deep learning simple tools (VGG or ResNet in TensorFlow or Torch) for your experiments.
- use of the experiment as an extra, not as the main course. Moreover, use multiple seeds to rerun your experiments since neural networks can be very unstable.
- focus more on bringing AI literature on eigenspectrum and the like to the argument and discussion as your main course
- reframe how these simulations provide arguments in favor of the Harmonium model being the correct one, ie frame it as using AI theory and simulations to understand better and test your Harmonium model. This is not proof of the Harmonium model being general psychopathology. There are significant gaps between humans brain functioning and artificial neural networks. The connection as it stands is very weak.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0249320.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
21 Jan 2021

please, see the file "response to Reviewers_Harmonium_NeuralNet_2021-01-17"
AttachmentSubmitted filename: response to Reviewers_Harmonium_NeuralNet_2021-01-17.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0249320.r003Decision Letter 1
ChenChi-HuaAcademic Editor© 2021 Chi-Hua Chen2021Chi-Hua Chenhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
19 Feb 2021

PONE-D-20-34281R1
The Phase Space of Meaning Model of Psychopathology. A Computer Simulation Modeling Study
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Salvatore,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Reviewer 1 suggested that authors are advised to provide additional round of proofreading prior to typesetting of the manuscript as it has some technical spelling errors. Please address reviewer's comments to revise and resubmit the manuscript.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Apr 05 2021 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Chi-Hua Chen, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: I Don't Know
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Authors are advised to provide additional round of proofreading prior to typesetting of the manuscript as it has some technical spelling errors.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0249320.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
12 Mar 2021

please, see the file "response to Reviewers"
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers 2.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0249320.r005Decision Letter 2
ChenChi-HuaAcademic Editor© 2021 Chi-Hua Chen2021Chi-Hua Chenhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
16 Mar 2021

The Phase Space of Meaning Model of Psychopathology. A Computer Simulation Modeling Study
PONE-D-20-34281R2
Dear Dr. Salvatore,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Chi-Hua Chen, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: I Don't Know
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: The manuscript is recommended for publication in its current form. It has addressed in a proper way the comments of the peer review.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
10.1371/journal.pone.0249320.r006Acceptance letter
ChenChi-HuaAcademic Editor© 2021 Chi-Hua Chen2021Chi-Hua Chenhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
15 Apr 2021

PONE-D-20-34281R2 
The Phase Space of Meaning Model of Psychopathology: A Computer Simulation Modelling Study 
Dear Dr. Salvatore:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Professor Chi-Hua Chen 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE