pmcPLoS Comput BiolPLoS Comput Biol328ploscomp101238922plosPLoS Computational Biology1553-734X1553-7358PLOSPMC8478199PMC8478199.1847819984781993452965410.1371/journal.pcbi.1009426PCOMPBIOL-D-21-010391Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesZoologyEntomologyInsectsHymenopteraBeesBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaAnimalsInvertebratesArthropodaInsectsHymenopteraBeesBiology and Life SciencesZoologyAnimalsInvertebratesArthropodaInsectsHymenopteraBeesResearch and Analysis MethodsSpecimen Preparation and TreatmentMechanical Treatment of SpecimensSonicationBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyBiological LocomotionAnimal FlightInsect FlightBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyBiological LocomotionAnimal FlightPhysical SciencesMathematicsApplied MathematicsAlgorithmsMachine Learning AlgorithmsResearch and Analysis MethodsSimulation and ModelingAlgorithmsMachine Learning AlgorithmsComputer and Information SciencesArtificial IntelligenceMachine LearningMachine Learning AlgorithmsBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaPlantsFruitsTomatoesBiology and Life SciencesPlant SciencePlant AnatomyFlowersBiology and Life SciencesTaxonomyComputer and Information SciencesData ManagementTaxonomyMachine learning approach for automatic recognition of tomato-pollinating bees based on their buzzing-sounds
Automatic recognition of tomato-pollinating bees based on buzzing-soundsRibeiroAlison PereiraFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologySoftwareValidationVisualizationWriting – original draft da SilvaNádia Felix FelipeConceptualizationFormal analysisMethodologySupervisionVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2010-4088MesquitaFernanda NeivaConceptualizationInvestigationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing AraújoPriscila de Cássia SouzaData curationInvestigationResourcesValidationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7117-3994RosaThierson CoutoConceptualizationInvestigationMethodologySupervisionWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1519-638XMesquita-NetoJosé NeivaConceptualizationFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 
1
Instituto de Informática, Universidade Federal de Goiás, Goiánia, Goiás, Brazil

2
Programa de Pós-graduação em Zoologia, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil

3
Centro de Investigación en Estudios Avanzados del Maule, Vicerrectoría de Investigación y Postgrado, Universidad Católica del Maule, Talca, Chile
StowellDanEditor ]. Global tomato production was around 180, 766 tonnes in 2019 and the production grew 14.1% over the past decade [ ]. Despite cultivated tomato being self-pollinated, bee-mediated pollination greatly enhances the quantity and quality of the fruits (greater size and weight), also, contributing to the increase of overall crop productivity [ – ]. The tomato pollinator-dependency is so evident that when it is cultivated in greenhouses, it typically needs to be done by bumblebees that are reared particularly for this purpose, generating an extra cost to the growers [ ]. For instance, the pollination service in the tomato crop is estimated at about US$ 992 million/year in Brazil [ ].
The morphological specialization of tomato flowers, characterized by the presence of poricidal anthers, restricts the exit of the pollen to a tiny opening sited at the apex of the anther [ , , ]. During visits to these flowers, pollen-collecting bees firmly grasp the anthers and quickly contract their flight muscles, but without moving the wings, producing an audible sound [ , ]. The resulting vibrations are transferred to the anthers, which shake the pollen inside them, stimulating it to leave by the pores, a phenomenon known as floral sonication or buzz-pollination [ , , ].
Although sonicating bees are among the best pollinators of tomatoes, bees belonging to different taxonomic groups tend to differ in their performance as pollinators [ , – , ]. In this context, the taxonomic recognition is an indispensable requirement to distinguish among the local set of flower-visiting bees those that are the most efficient pollinators.
However, the huge number of bee species and other insects is a challenge for taxonomists. It is estimated that there are about 20, 000 bee species worldwide [ ], and 58% of them, about 11, 600 species of 74 genera, are able to vibrate flowers to extract pollen [ ]. Furthermore, the taxonomic identification normally depends on visible morphological characteristics of tiny size, which requires the active participation of experts in the decision-making process, since, for an untrained eye, the species are very similar [ ]. Besides that, the decreasing number of taxonomists seriously affects the efficiency of species recognition [ ]. This is especially evident in regions where the bee diversity is poorly sampled and underestimated like in Africa, Asia, and some tropical regions [ ]. Therefore, the development and implementation of new technologies that also fulfill taxonomic requirements are needed [ – ].
Due to the limitations of the traditional taxonomy, the automatic classification based on artificial intelligence algorithms has been applied for the identification of plants and animals during the last decades. The automatic classifications based on the recognition of images and/or sounds has been implemented [ – ]. However, recognition based on images is difficult due to complications derived from the orientation of the object, the image quality, the condition of the light, and/or the image background [ ]. On the other hand, the sound is relatively easy to acquire and can, in principle, be picked up remotely and continuously [ ].
The classification based on Machine Learning (ML) algorithms have demonstrated high efficiency and accuracy for the recognition of animal vocalizations, such as birds and frogs [ – ]. The ML algorithms powered by a method for sound feature extraction (e.g., Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients, Hilbert–Huang Transform) have been also employed for beehives monitoring using audio as one of the inputs (see for a detailed description; [ ] and references therein). These studies sought to differentiate the bee buzzing sounds from other sounds (cricket chirping and ambient noise) [ ], recognize the presence of the queen in a beehive and detect an orphaned colony [ , ], or identify the circadian rhythm of a honeybee colony [ ]. However, only three studies address the problem of automatic bee species classification, and these deal with twelve, two and four classes respectively [ , , ]. Random Forest, Support Vector Machines, and Logistic Regression are the most applied classifiers, and Mel Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCC) is the most used feature extraction strategy (see ). Although preliminary restricted to a few bees taxa, these studies indicated that the ML algorithms could generate classifiers able to quickly and accurately recognize bee identity.
In this context, the automatic recognition of bees would be especially relevant for the pollination of commercial tomatoes, which need the local native pollinators to enhance the crop productivity [ , – ]. Moreover, the professionals typically involved with the management of tomato crops (e.g. farmers, agronomists) have no experience in bee taxonomy. Based on this, we aim to verify the capacity of ML algorithms to automatically recognize the taxonomic identity of visiting bees of tomato flowers based on the characteristics of their buzzing-sounds. In addition, we compared the performance of the ML algorithms and MFCC feature extraction method with classifications based on fundamental frequency realized on the same data set, thus, providing a direct comparison between the two approaches. Due to the high efficiency and accuracy demonstrated by ML tools powered by MFCC features in automatic sound classification, we expected that the join of these two methods would obtain a greater performance compared to classifications based solely on fundamental frequency (hypothesis 1). Additionally, we related the performance of ML algorithms in recognizing bees taxa from buzzing-sounds produced during two different behavioral contexts: flight and sonication. While the flight sound generally has few oscillations and is roughly time-independent [ , ], the sonication produces more complex sounds that may be associated with intrinsic characteristics of the bee [ – ]. Based on this, we predicted that the buzzing-sounds produced by floral vibrations are more relevant for recognizing bees taxa (hypothesis 2). Therefore, the main contributions of our work are: (1) To evidence the ML classifiers performance in recognizing flower visiting-bees species in relation to the statistical approach used by [ ]; (2) To classify a higher diversity of taxonomic groups than previous studies, grouping the largest number of genera and families of bees; (3) To provide evidence of which buzzing sounds is more relevant for taxonomic recognition of the bees by the ML classifiers; (4) To indicate the best ML algorithms that could lead to automatize the taxonomic recognition of flower visiting bees of tomato crops.

## Materials and methods

## Buzzing sounds acquisition
The acoustic recording of buzzes was carried out using tomato plants (Solanum lycopersicum ac. BGH 7488) grown at the experimental fields of the Federal University of Viçosa (Minas Gerais, Brazil). A portable hand recorder (SongMeter SM2, Wildlife Acoustics, USA) was used to record the buzzing sounds of bees visiting the tomato flowers. To record the buzzing sounds, a researcher constantly walking through the rows of tomatoes handing-held the recorder while searching the flower-visiting-bees. When the researcher spotted a visiting bee, she carefully approached holding the recorder microphone as close as about 10 cm from the flower being visited. The microphone was constantly pointed toward the bee body, and whenever possible to the dorsum. Sound recordings were obtained for 15 bee species from eight genera and two families (See ). Just after leaving the flower, the bees were captured with an entomological net and placed in glass vials with ethyl acetate, for taxonomic identification. When the researcher was not able to capture a bee individual, the corresponding audio sample was not considered for our analysis. We adopted this procedure for ensuring a correct bee taxonomic recognition, then, the number of bee individuals sampled corresponds to the number of audio files (see ). All bee individuals sampled were identified at the species level by an expert in bee taxonomy.
 

## Acoustic pre-processing
The original sound recordings (.wav files) were manually classified into two behavioral contexts: (i) Sonication; (ii) flight, see . We categorized as sonication all the segments of buzzing-sounds produced by bees vibrating tomato flowers and as flight the sounds produced by the flying displacement of the bees between tomato flowers, as illustrated in . As a result, the set of 59 recordings generated 321 segments, 218 of sonication and 103 of flight (see ). The flight and sonication buzz present pronounced differences in acoustic characteristics, so they can be easily distinguished from the recordings afterward by an experienced user. Parts with no bee sound were not selected, but were kept for the subsequent analyses. We performed these analyses using the Raven Lite software (Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology, Ithaca, New York). The length of recordings ranged from five seconds to over one minute.
 

## Audio feature extraction
After the acoustic processing, audio feature extraction was applied to transform raw audio data into features that explicitly represent properties of the data and may be relevant for classification. This process is carried out through the MFCC [ ], which is present in the librosa library [ ]. As input, the algorithm takes an audio segment (flight or sonication), which goes through the following steps: pre-emphasis, framing, windowing, Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT), and filter bank (applying Discrete Cosine Transform—DCT), as described by [ ] (see ).
 The Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) was applied in each frame and we calculate the spectrum; and subsequently compute the filter banks, which are formed by triangular filters, spaced according to the MEL frequency scale; then we obtained the log-energy output of each one of the MEL filters. Finally, the MFCC coefficients were obtained by applying the inverse transformation of the cosine (DCT) to the logarithm of the energy coefficients obtained in the previous step. The parameters applied to generate the MFCC coefficients were maintained by default, except for the minimum frequency of each audio segment and the number of features that was set to 40. This was necessary because MFCC cannot generate a larger number of features and the average duration of the segments was small, approximately 1.54 seconds.

## Similarity of the buzzing-sounds
After audio feature extraction by the MFCC, we applied the euclidean distance score to estimate the similarity between the two types of sounds produced by bees visiting tomato flowers (sonication and flight). We calculated the euclidean distance score to all possible combinations between sonication and flight sounds and the average euclidean distance per bee taxon (species and genera). The euclidean distance has been used to measure sound similarities, especially in the human context (e.g. between the voice produced by different speakers [ ], the speech of music and non-vocal sounds [ ], and characteristics from the signals and to model its probability density functions [ ]), being therefore, likely to be applied to bee buzzing classification. By definition, the greater the distance, the less similar the sonication and flight features would be. However, to simplify the interpretation of the results, we standardized the index between 0 and 1, where 1 represents maximum similarity and 0 no similarity (according to [ ]).

## Classification

## Data splitting
During an exploratory analysis, we detected an unbalance of the sampled data between the classes (species/genera) and between the two behaviors (sonication and flight). There were 103 samples containing segments of flight and 218 of sonication. Moreover, the distribution of these segments by the classes was even more unbalanced (see ). For example, the flight of the species Augochloropsis brachycephala was recorded just once. Considering that we need to distribute the data into training and testing sets, this species could not be part of both. This problem does not occur at the genus-level, because the number of classes decreases, consequently, the number of samples per class increases.
Due to the mentioned issues, the data division was stratified. As shown in , the data set was divided into 50% for training and 50% for testing. The division was done through the function train_test_split of scikit-learn [ ], this function is able to separate the data in a stratified way through the StratifiedKFold method. This method is a variation of k-fold that returns stratified folds: each set contains approximately the same percentage of samples of each target class as the complete set, dividing the classes by 50%.
After data division, it is necessary to apply standardization to the data set, this step is important for many machine learning estimators, because they can behave badly if the individual resources do not look more or less like standard normal distributed data set (for example, Gaussian with mean 0 and unit variance) [ ]. Elements used in the objective function of a learning algorithm (such as the RBF kernel of Support Vector Machines or the L1 and L2 regularizers of linear models) assume that all resources are centered around 0 and have variance in the same order. If a feature has a variance that is orders of magnitude greater than others, it may dominate the objective function and make the estimator unable to learn from other features correctly as expected. Therefore, in order to solve this problem, data normalization was done with the StandardScaler method.

## Machine learning algorithms
Machine Learning techniques have demonstrated high efficiency and accuracy for classification of bumblebees and other groups of bees based on the characteristics of their buzzing-sounds [ , , ]. Therefore, we chose some of the most common used ML classifiers to recognize the taxonomic identity of bees during visits to tomato flowers (according to ): Logistic Regression [ ], Support Vector Machines [ , ], Random Forest [ ], Decision Trees [ , ], and a classifier ensemble [ , ]—a combination of multiple and diversified classifiers to generate a single classifier model. Ensemble methods train multiple learners to solve the same problem [ ]. In contrast to classic learning approaches, which construct one learner from the training data, ensemble methods construct a set of learners and combine them. Therefore, we combine three classifiers (Random Forest, SVM e Logistic Regression) by majority vote. These classifiers were chosen because they achieved the best performance in recognizing bees buzzing-sounds (see ).

## Tuning the hyperparameters
In many cases, the performance of an algorithm in a given learning task depends on its hyperparameter settings. In order to obtain the best performance, the hyperparameters have been thoroughly tested. Methods to tune hyperparameters to the problem at hand require the definition of a search space: the set of hyperparameters and ranges that need to be considered.
An important problem is to decide which hyperparameters should be considered, because a very large set of hyperparameters is computationally expensive and becomes more expensive as the search space augments. So far, there is no empirical evidence on which hyperparameters are most important to adjust and which hyperparameters result in similar performance when set to a reasonable default value. Hyperparameters that fall into this last category can be completely eliminated from the search space when the computational resources are limited [ ].
We used the GridSearchCV method found in the scikit-learn library [ ]. This method performs an exhaustive search, as input, it receives an estimator, a hyperparameter dictionary, and the cross-validation method then creates a model for each combination. Cross-validation is used to evaluate each individual model, this step divides the training data into 5 folds, see . The 5 folds are also built with the StratifiedKFold method. After training and validation, the GridSearchCV method returns the model that achieved the best performance and uses it for the test set.
The sets of hyperparameters were defined as follows: for SVM, we vary the Kernel (Rbf, polynomial, sigmoid, linear), C ranging in {0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1, 10}, and γ ranging in {1e − 2, 1e − 3, 1e − 4}. For Logistic Regression, we considered penalty {l1, l2} and C ranging in {0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1, 10}. For Decision Trees, we validated the “Gini impurity” and “entropy” for the information gain, these functions are used to measure the quality of a split in the tree. For Random Forest, we considered the number of trees in the forest varying in {100, 200}. Finally, for the ensemble model we vary only the C parameter as already described, this is due to the great computational processing that this model requires.

## Evaluation metrics
To evaluate the performance of the classification generated by the algorithms and baselines, we used the following metrics: Accuracy (Acc), Macro-Precision (MacPrec), Macro-Recall (MacRec) and Macro-F1 (MacF1).
Let i be a class from the set of classes . Let be test set and let c be a classifier, such that c(t) = l, where t is an element of the test set and is a label corresponding to a class in assigned to t by c. Let g(t) be the ground truth class label of t. In regard to the c classifier we define:
True Positives of classi, denoted by TPi, as the number of elements in correctly labeled with class i by c, i.e., .
False Positives of classi, denoted by FPi, as the number of elements in that were wrongly classified by c as belonging to class i. Formally, .
False Negatives of classi, denoted by FNi, as the number o elements in belonging to class i but classified by c with a label different from i, that is, .
The above numbers are used to define traditional effectiveness measures of classifiers. These measures are: Precision, Recall and F1 [ ]. Precision p(c, i) of a classifier c in relation to a class i is defined in 
 p(c,i)=TPiTPi+FPi.(1)
Informally, precision is the ratio between the number of test elements correctly labeled by c with the class label i and the number of all elements labeled (correctly or incorrectly) by c.
Recall, denoted by r(c, i), of a classifier c in relation to a class i is defined by 
 r(c,i)=TPiTPi+FNi.(2)
Thus, recall is the ratio between the number of test elements belonging to class i which were correctly labeled by c and the total number of test elements of class i.
The F1 measure is a combination of the precision and recall measures and is defined by .
 F1(c,i)=2p(c,i)r(c,i)p(c,i)+r(c,i)(3)
When comparing the effectiveness of classifiers generated from distinct learning methods, it is common to use a global measure of effectiveness. A global measure aims at resuming the effectiveness of the classifier over all classes in the test set. In this work we use the following global measures to compare the results of classifiers we use: Accuracy (Acc) (which is equivalent to Micro-F1), Macro-Precision (MacPrec), Macro-Recall (MacRec) and Macro-F1 (MacF1). Accuracy of a classifier c is the fraction of test elements that were correctly labeled by c, and is formally defined by 
 Acc(c)=∑i=1|C|TPi∑i=1|C|(TPi+FPi)(4)
The Macro measure (Macro-Precision, Macro-Recall and Macro-F1) is the average of the corresponding measure (Precision, Recall and F1) over all classes and are defined by Eqs , and .
 MacPrec(c)=∑i=1|C|p(c,i)|C|(5)
 MacRec(c)=∑i=1|C|r(c,i)|C|(6)
 MacF1(c)=∑i=1|C|F1(c,i)|C|(7)

## Baselines establishment
To assess and compare the performance of ML algorithms in recognizing bees based on their buzzing sounds, we built three baselines. The first one, named “fundamental frequency” was estimated to compare our results —based on ML techniques and audio feature extraction by the MFCC—with results obtained by [ ]—based on differences in the average fundamental frequency of the bees buzzing. The fundamental frequency was obtained by dividing each sound recording into three sections of similar duration and the lowest frequency of each section was measured using Avisoft-SASLab Lite (Avisoft Bioacoustics, Germany); the average fundamental frequency of each sound recording was the mean of the three frequencies, as performed by [ ]. Then, the values of average fundamental frequency (±SD) were associated with the corresponding bee taxon (species/genus). The species/genus whose average was between the lowest and highest frequency will be selected and the species/genus that has the lowest standard deviation will be predicted. For the second baseline, named as “Fundamental frequency (SVM)”, we employed the best classifier here (based on the best F1-score) to recognize the bees taxa based only on the fundamental frequency. Lastly, we report the result of a majority baseline that assigns all the classes to the majority class, that is Exomalopsis for genus-level and Exomalopsis analis for species-level classification.

## Results

## Acoustic characteristics of the buzzing sounds
The acoustic proprieties (amplitude, frequency, and duration) of the buzzing can vary depending on the behavioral activity and bee species visiting tomato flowers. For example, the spectrograms of Melipona bicolor and Exomalopsis analis show that the flight and sonication buzzing-sounds are distinct from each other ( ). During the flight ( ), the spectrograms are time-independent and consist of a continuous frequency; amplitude variations may be related to the intensity of the sound over time, since the distance from the bee to the microphone can also vary. During the sonication, the fundamental frequency increases significantly (around 240 Hz) and the amplitude reaches higher values at higher frequencies.
The acoustic proprieties of the buzz are also different among the bee species. For example, while M. bicolor ( upper spectrogram) presents successive short sonication buzzing-sounds, with brief breaks among them, the E. analis ( bottom spectrogram) shows sonication intervals with irregular duration (generally longer than M. bicolor) and longer breaks among them.

## Performance of the machine learning algorithms

## Regarding the type of buzzing-sound
The sonication and flight features extracted by the MFCC can be easily distinguished. They presented very low similarity among each other, ranging from 0.01 to 0.03 (Euclidean distance score) for bee species and between 0.01–0.02 for the genus. Moreover, the type of buzzing-sound also influenced the capacity of classifiers to recognize the visiting bees of tomato flowers. The ML algorithms reached a better performance, recognizing bees at species level based on sonication sounds (based on the best Macro-F1 score, see ). The accuracy and Macro-F1-score were higher in classifications considering only the segments of floral sonication sounds rather than those of flight ( ). The sonication sounds classified by the SVM algorithm achieved the best performance among all combinations tested here (Accuracy = 73.39%; Macro-F1 = 59.06%, ).
 Nonetheless, at genus-level recognition, the performance of the algorithms did not seem to depend on the type of buzzing-sound (based on the higher Macro-F1 measure, ). However, the buzzing sounds from flights led to a marginally better ML algorithms performance than sonication in recognizing the genera of bees ( ).
 

## Regarding the level of taxonomic resolution
The performance of ML classifiers was different for acoustic recognition of bees at species and genus levels. Indeed, the complexity increases for species recognition in relation to genus recognition: there are 15 classes (against 8 genera) and the number of samples for some of them is very small (N ≤ 5). The SVM reached the best Macro-F1 values at genus-level recognition (Flight, 60.2%; ), which was similar to the Macro-F1 obtained by the SVM in species recognition (Sonication, 59.06%; ). However, based on Accuracy, the Ensemble was the best for genus recognition and the SVM for species (Tables and ).
Just the LR and SVM classifiers always presented Macro-F1 values higher than the baselines at genus-level classification ( ). On the other hand, only the DTree continually achieved lower performance than the baselines (based on the Macro-F1 measure, ). Considering the species recognition, besides the LR and SVM, the Ensemble also reached a better score than the baselines (based on the Macro-F1 measure, ).
The confusion matrix shows the number of correctly predicted genera versus erroneously predicted genera by SVM, the classifier with the best performance here (based on Mac-F1 score, ). The SVM was capable to correctly recognize 64% (34 of 53) of the flight sounds samples. However, the capacity of the algorithm to identify bees was unequal among the genera. The SVM was able to correctly recognize more than 50% of the samples of four out of eight genera (Bombus, Centris, Melipona and Eulaema, ).
 On the other hand, for species-level recognition, the SVM was able to correctly predict 79% of the sonication samples (80 of 109) ( ). Moreover, this algorithm was capable to recognize E. analis (28 of 30 samples), the most representative species ( ). Moreover, this algorithm correctly recognized some species with a small number of samples, like Augochloropsis brachycephala, Augochloropsis sp.2, Melipona quadrisfaciata and Centris trigonoides.
 

## Discussion
The accuracy of tested ML algorithms in recognizing flower-visiting bees of tomato crops ranged from 49 to 74% on a data set of 59 audio recording samples. The algorithms reached a better performance to assign the bees buzzing sounds to their respective taxa than frequency-based trials. Moreover, we found that the sonication sounds are more relevant to bees species recognition. The ML algorithms achieved a greater performance in recognizing bee species when we considered only the sounds produced during sonication. On the other hand, the genera recognition was not dependent on the type of buzzing-sound.

## Advantages of machine-learning over classifications based on fundamental frequency
The ML algorithms achieved higher performance recognizing bee taxa than analyses based on fundamental frequency and realized on the same data set. Moreover, the statistical analysis based on fundamental frequency differences performed by [ ], failed to distinguish between most bee species. In fact, analyses based solely on the fundamental frequency (average frequency) must lose part of the intrinsic complexity of buzzing sounds, which is multifactorial and time-dependent [ ]. The buzz has other acoustic features, like the amplitude and duration, that combined between them and with the frequency must contribute to characterize the buzzing-sounds [ ]. However, this must result in a huge amount of data with unusual distributions, non-linearity, complex data interactions, dependence on the observations that would not be well handled by commonly used statistical methods in ecology [ , ]. On the other hand, the ML algorithms combined with the MFCC method has been able to correctly predict 66% of all samples; 79% of the samples of species based on sonication sounds and SVM algorithm. Likely due to the ML attributes boosted by MFCC, we reached here a higher performance on acoustic recognition of bees than classifications based only on the fundamental frequency.

## The recognition of bees depends on the type of buzzing
There are pronounced differences between the biomechanical properties of the buzzing produced during sonication and those produced during the flight [ ]. The sonication sounds have amplitudes and frequencies higher than flight buzzes [ ]. The flight sound has few oscillations and roughly time-independent. It consists of the natural frequency (the frequency at which the wings oscillate) and its higher harmonics [ , ]. Therefore, the flight buzzing can be more similar among species over the higher-level taxa. This may be the reason why flight sounds were more relevant to the recognition of the genus than to the species. Besides that, the incorporation of both buzzing sounds (sonication+flight) does not seem to interfere with the performance of the algorithms in recognizing bees at genus-level, because the performance of the ML algorithms was similar.
On the other hand, the sonication sounds were associated with higher performance in recognizing bee species. Although, the mechanical characteristics of the sonication have been related to the amount of pollen released from poricidal anthers [ , , – ], the acoustic properties of buzzing-sounds are also related to intrinsic attributes of the species [ – ]. Consequently, the higher specificity related to sonication sounds makes it more relevant to species recognition by the ML algorithms. Although the behavioral context that the buzzing-sound was produced was not relevant for genera recognition by ML algorithms, it was for the recognition of species.

## Limitations of buzzing-sound classification with machine learning
Although here we classified a greater taxonomic diversity of flower-visiting bees based on their buzzing than previous studies (see ); grouping the largest number of genera and families of bees (15 species from 8 genera and 2 subfamilies; ), the machine-learning approach presented some limitations in recognizing bees based on buzzing sounds. Firstly, the ML algorithms are domain-dependent. This means that a classifier can perform very well when it is applied on the same domain to the one it was trained, yet the performance decreases when it is applied to a different domain (e.g. species/genus, sonication/flight). Thus, the classifier needs to be retrained in order to perform well on a different domain. Secondly, the performance of ML algorithms was not homogeneous among the classes of species and genera. The performance was very high for some bee taxa, especially the most sampled, and varied for unrepresentative taxa (Augochloropsis sp.2, 100%; E. analis, 93%; P. graminea, 72%), which may be related to the unbalanced number of samples per bee taxa, an issue also reported by related studies (see ). Consequently, bees that rarely visited the tomato flowers and/or were difficult to capture were under-sampled. This bias is inherent to the system since the local abundance of individuals per species naturally varies and the bees spontaneously visit the flowers. On the other hand, to ensure taxonomic identification, all specimens had to be captured. This was a requirement to include the buzz sound associated with a given bee on the acoustic analysis, in case the bee could not be sampled, we deleted the corresponding sound file. The oil collecting bees (Centris sp.), for example, were more difficult to sample, because they flew quite fast between flowers, remained for a short time in the same flower, and/or did not visit nearby flowers, which make it difficult to follow them. The general consequence of these two factors mentioned above (different abundance of individuals among bee taxa and sampling bias) was an unbalanced sampling among classes of buzzing bees. Unfortunately, the Machine Learning algorithms have a considerable loss of performance in classifying unbalanced data [ ].
Nevertheless, the performance in recognizing the buzzing sounds was uneven among the ML algorithms. The LR and especially the SVM outstanding from the other algorithms and constantly obtained better performance than the baselines. The SVM through weighted evaluation metrics stood out among the classifiers, achieving the best performance in recognizing the visiting-bees of tomato. In fact, the SVM has strong theoretical foundations with excellent empirical successes [ ] and has demonstrated tolerance to data sets with few samples per class and unbalanced data (see Evaluation metrics in text) [ ]. This may be the main reason that this classifier was almost always produced the best classifications in relation to baselines and other algorithms. Despite that, the SVM performance is still lowed on the small data set tested here, compared to ML standards (see ). Therefore, we suppose that there is so little audio data that no classical ML classifier can, in principle, generalize well on it. Further studies, considering larger recording samples, and/or applying algorithms that can perform more complex processing tasks like unsupervised learning systems (e.g., clustering, dimensionality reduction, recommender systems, deep learning) may reach better classification performance.

## Consequences of automating the bee recognition to tomato yields
The bee identity is associated with pollination effectiveness and fruit yields since the performance as pollinators tends to be different among species/groups of visiting bees (e.g. [ , – , ]. Differences in the body size of the bees in relation to the distance between anthers and stigma may be a key factor in explaining this. Larger pollinators transfer more pollen than smaller ones [ ], since their body size fits or exceeds the distance between anthers and stigma [ – ]. Therefore, automating the taxonomic recognition of flower-visiting bees would be especially relevant for tomato production, whereas the quality of the pollination provided is linked to the identity of the bee. Then, farmers, agronomists, and other professionals interested in improving the pollination of cultivated tomatoes could identify the species of visiting bees without needing an expert in insect taxonomy. Aware of the value of bees to the crop income, the farmer could be motivated to adopt practices to benefit the most successful pollinators and indirectly the overall local bee community, promoting profitable and sustainable agricultural practices.
Moreover, the automated taxonomic recognition of bees may apply to other buzz-pollinated plants, since they are primarily visited by bees that produce buzzing sounds to extract pollen [ , , , ]. Some of these plants are, as well as tomato, important food crops, like blueberry, kiwi, cranberry, and eggplant [ , – ]. However, some procedures must be adopted to avoid sampling bias and facilitate acoustic recognition: (1) studies must focus on one plant species because the same bee species produce vibrations with different frequencies and duration when visiting different plant taxa [ , ]; (2) consider the limitations when analyzing the relative acoustical amplitude because this energy-related parameter is dependent on measurement procedures (e.g. the recorder model and configuration, the distance of the focal object) and does not necessarily correspond to the vibrational amplitude [ , ].
In summary, the ML algorithms powered by the MFCC feature extraction method could lead to automate the taxonomic recognition of flower-visiting bees of tomato crop. We found advantages of ML classifiers in recognizing species of bees based on their buzzing sounds over conventional analyzes based on fundamental frequency alone [ ]. Some classifiers, especially the SVM, an algorithm that better handles a data set of low sampling, achieved better performance in relation to the randomized and sound frequency-based trials. The buzzing sounds produced during sonication were more relevant for the taxonomic recognition of bees species than the flight sounds. On the other hand, we found that the ML classifiers achieve better performance to recognize bee genera based on flight sounds. As far as we know, the use of ML algorithms to explore these two kinds of bee sounds for bee taxa identification has not been reported previously. Future studies may focus on the extension of this approach to other buzz-pollinated crops as well as on the technological application of this model, for example, the development of apps based on ML techniques and compatible with smartphones.

## Supporting information
S1 Table

## Overview of the studies applying machine learning and audio feature extraction methods to the acoustic monitoring/detection of bees.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Table

## Pairwise comparison of the performance of the machine-learning algorithms and baseline scenarios (majority class, fundamental frequency, and fundamental frequency (SVM)) in acoustic recognition of bee genera based on buzzing-sounds produced during three behavioral contexts (flight, sonication, and flight + sonication).
Internal numbers correspond to P-values obtained by the T-test; P-values highlighted in bold (p ≤ 0.05) indicate significant differences among the F1-score of the ML algorithms/baselines.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Table

## Pairwise comparison of the performance of the machine-learning algorithms and baseline scenarios (majority class, fundamental frequency, and fundamental frequency (SVM)) in acoustic recognition of bee species based on buzzing-sounds produced during three behavioral contexts (flight, sonication, and flight + sonication).
Internal numbers correspond to P-values obtained by the T-test; P-values highlighted in bold (p ≤ 0.05) indicate significant differences among the F1-score of the ML algorithms/baselines.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.

We thank Eduardo Almeida of the University of São Paulo (USP) and Fernando Silveira of the Federal University of Minas Gerais (UFMG) for identifying bees.
 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009426.r001Decision Letter 0
KomarovaNatalia L.Deputy EditorStowellDanAssociate Editor© 2021 Komarova, Stowell2021Komarova, Stowellhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
22 Jul 2021

Dear Dr. Mesquita-Neto,
Thank you very much for submitting your manuscript "Machine Learning approach for automatic recognition of tomato-pollinating bees based on their buzzing-sounds" for consideration at PLOS Computational Biology.
As with all papers reviewed by the journal, your manuscript was reviewed by members of the editorial board and by several independent reviewers. In light of the reviews (below this email), we would like to invite the resubmission of a significantly-revised version that takes into account the reviewers' comments.
The reviewers agree on the strengths of the article, but all have important feedback. In particular, I concur with many of the issues that Reviewer 2 raises. Thus we would require major corrections before we consider publishing the paper with Plos Computational Biology.
A definite issue is data availability: in the submission information, you state that the data are available from https://doi.org/10.1111/1744-7917.12602 but this links to a 2018 journal article which does not seem to offer any raw data. Plos Comp Biol has specific requirements for data availability (see https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/s/submission-guidelines for information). If the data availability issue is not fixed, the article will certainly be rejected.
The same is true of software code: please see https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/s/code-availability
As Reviewer 2 points out, the application of MFCCs in ML classifiers such as SVM, random forests, or decision trees to classify audio bee samples is not novel. It has been done before, and is now part of the peer-reviewed electronic beehive monitoring literature. (Lines 112-126 are redundant, and MFCCs can be cited to a standard textbook.) A resubmission should more clearly cite and review previous literature that uses MFCCs and machine learning for bee monitoring, even if the monitoring is of hives rather than pollination.
The abstract uses some non-standard English, so I also suggest some small improvements to the abstract:
"The bee-mediated pollination" -> "Bee-mediated pollination"
"it becomes primordial" -> "it is important"
"The ML techniques could lead to automate" -> "ML techniques could be used to automate"
I have highlighted specific issues here in my editor's decision, but all of the reviewers' detailed comments should be addressed.
We cannot make any decision about publication until we have seen the revised manuscript and your response to the reviewers' comments. Your revised manuscript is also likely to be sent to reviewers for further evaluation.
When you are ready to resubmit, please upload the following:
[1] A letter containing a detailed list of your responses to the review comments and a description of the changes you have made in the manuscript. Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.
[2] Two versions of the revised manuscript: one with either highlights or tracked changes denoting where the text has been changed; the other a clean version (uploaded as the manuscript file).
Important additional instructions are given below your reviewer comments.
Please prepare and submit your revised manuscript within 60 days. If you anticipate any delay, please let us know the expected resubmission date by replying to this email. Please note that revised manuscripts received after the 60-day due date may require evaluation and peer review similar to newly submitted manuscripts.
Thank you again for your submission. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive so far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Dan Stowell
Associate Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
Natalia Komarova
Deputy Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
***********************
Thank you for submitting your paper. The reviewers agree on the strengths of the article, but all have important feedback. In particular, I concur with many of the issues that Reviewer 2 raises. Thus we would require major corrections before we consider publishing the paper with Plos Computational Biology.
A definite issue is data availability: in the submission information, you state that the data are available from https://doi.org/10.1111/1744-7917.12602 but this links to a 2018 journal article which does not seem to offer any raw data. Plos Comp Biol has specific requirements for data availability (see https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/s/submission-guidelines for information). If the data availability issue is not fixed, the article will certainly be rejected.
The same is true of software code: please see https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/s/code-availability
As Reviewer 2 points out, the application of MFCCs in ML classifiers such as SVM, random forests, or decision trees to classify audio bee samples is not novel. It has been done before, and is now part of the peer-reviewed electronic beehive monitoring literature. (Lines 112-126 are redundant, and MFCCs can be cited to a standard textbook.) A resubmission should more clearly cite and review previous literature that uses MFCCs and machine learning for bee monitoring, even if the monitoring is of hives rather than pollination.
The abstract uses some non-standard English, so I also suggest some small improvements to the abstract:
"The bee-mediated pollination" -> "Bee-mediated pollination"
"it becomes primordial" -> "it is important"
"The ML techniques could lead to automate" -> "ML techniques could be used to automate"
I have highlighted specific issues here in my editor's decision, but all of the reviewers' detailed comments should be addressed.
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Authors:

Please note here if the review is uploaded as an attachment.

Reviewer #1: In the paper, Pereira Ribeiro et al. studied the use of machine-learning algorithms to classify bees visiting the tomato flowers. They first collected a dataset containing flight and sonication buzzes of 15 bee species of 8 genera. After isolating the buzzing sounds, they developed a series of ML classification algorithms to work either on a species or on a genus level. They discuss the results in view of advantages and limitations and possibilities for future implementation in an automated tool for crop monitoring.
The paper is clearly written, the methodology is correct, and the results are reasonable, especially in view of the classification metrics of some related studies that the paper cites. The authors are well-aware of the issues related to the unbalanced data samples and I believe they handled it appropriately. In my opinion, the paper represents a substantial contribution to the field of bioacoustics in pollinator science and has promising implications for future studies.
I have some minor comments that the authors may consider.
• Introduction: Perhaps mention that the pollination of tomatoes in greenhouses is typically done by bumblebees that are reared particularly for the purpose.
• At some points, the reference is shown as (??), for example lines 61, 183, 191, etc.
• Acoustic pre-processing. Here, perhaps mention that the flight and sonication buzzes are pronouncedly different in structure, so they can be easily distinguished from the recordings afterwards (as clearly seen in one of the later figures).
• Line 294: “quite different” … consider using more concise term
• Early in the paper you mention that you would compare the ML results with those of conventional statistical methods, but you only cite a previous paper on the same dataset regarding statistical methods. I suggest you mention this the first time you talk about the comparison and write a couple of sentences more of the discussion.
• As a possible experiment, perhaps it would be interested to construct a binary classifier between the most common species and “others”, if the most common species is so much more abundant. But probably this is beyond the scope of the present paper.
Reviewer #2: Overall, I have enjoyed reading this article but it has serious problems that must be addressed before it is published.
Summary: The objective of the paper of the paper is to provide a preliminary demonstration that some ML algorithms can be used in recognizing the taxonomic identify of bees visiting tomato flowers from audio samples of their buzzing sounds.
The authors formulate two hypothesis:
Hypothesis 1: "Due to the high efficiency and accuracy demonstrated by ML tools in automatic sound classification, we expected that these ML algorithms would obtain a greater performance compared to conventional statistics."
Hypothesis 2: "Based on this, we predicted that the buzzing-sounds produced by floral vibrations are more relevant for recognizing bees taxa."
My Comments:
Comment 1: It was unclear to me as I was reading the paper what the authors mean by "conventional statistics." In the section "Advantages of Machine-Learning over conventional statistics" they give references to publication [31] and where they state that their analysis "based on fundamental frequency differences, failed to distinguish between most bee species."
Fundamental frequency differences are not conventional statistics. Perhaps, the authors could explain more clearly what they mean by "conventional statistics."
Comment 2: Line 61: Reference is missing in the sentence "Random Forest, Support Vector Machines, and Logistic Regression are the most applied classifiers, and Mel Frequency Cepstral Coefficients is the most used feature extraction strategy (see ??)."
Comment 3: Lines 91-92: "The acoustic recording of buzzes was carried out using tomato plants (Lycopersicon esculentum ac. BGH 7488) grown at the experimental fields of the Federal University of Viçosa (Minas Gerais, Brazil). A professional
hand recorder (SongMeter SM2, Wildlife Acoustics, USA) was used to record the buzzing sounds of bees visiting the tomato flowers."
This is a very insufficient description for me to assess the accuracy of the obtained samples. How were the audio samples obtained? Where was the recorder placed? Was it hand-held? How closely was it placed to the pollinating bees? For a method to be scientific, it must be replicated by other researchers. As a researcher I cannot replicate the data acquisition method of the authors. The authors should provide a picture/drawing of how they recorder was placed with respect to the bee and the tomato plans.
Comment 4: I might have missed it, but I did not see any references to the availability of the authors' dataset, which has a negative impact on replicability.
Comment 5: It looks like there were a total of 321 individual bees captured. Are these the bees from which the audio samples were obtained? How many audio files (wav files) were obtained from these bees?
Comment 6: Line 104: "Parts with no bee sound or high background noise disturbance were not considered."
This makes the results significantly weaker. This fact should be explicitly mentioned in the abstract. When an audio classifier is deployed in the real world, it must deal with the problem of noise, especially ambient noise such as lawn mowers, cars, human
speech, wind, music, etc.
Comment 7: Lines 106-107: "The length of individual recordings ranged from five seconds to over one minute."
How were these recordings distributed among the training and testing data?
Comment 8: The authors write: "After, the resulting data set was split into 50% for the training/development
set (delimited by the red dashed line) and 50% for the testing data set."
A more standard split is 70-30? Why 50-50? I guess there is an explanation of sorts in lines 161-166.
Comment 9: Lines 112 -- 126 are redundant. MFCCs are very well know since the 1980's in
the audio processing communities. A couple of references are sufficient.
Comment 10: Lines 134 - 136: "This was necessary because MFCC cannot generate a larger number of
features and the average duration of the fragments was small, approximately 1.54 seconds."
This is where I got very confused. In lines 106-107, the authors write: "The length of individual recordings ranged from five seconds to over one minute."
What is the difference b/w an individual recording and a fragment? What do
the authors mean by a "fragment"?
Comment 11: Lines 152-155: "During an exploratory analysis, we detected an unbalance of the sampled data between
the classes (species/genera) and between the two behaviors (sonication and flight). There were 103 sound samples referring to flight and 218 samples corresponding to sonication, totaling 321 samples."
So, if my understanding is accurate, 1) there are 321 individual bees (Table 1); 2) there are "fragments" with an average duration of approximately 1.54 seconds (lines 134-136); 3) there are a total 642 audio samples (lines 152-155).
How are these entities related? How are the 642 audio samples obtained? The authors must include another table with a detailed distribution of the samples among the bee tax: number of Augochloropsis brachycephala samples; number of Augochloropsis sp.1 samples; number of Augochloropsis sp.2 samples, etc.
Comment 12: Lines 188-191: "Therefore, we combine three classifiers (Random Forest, SVM e Logistic Regression)
by majority vote. These classifiers were chosen because they achieved the best performance in recognizing bees buzzing-sounds (see ??)."
There is a missing reference in the above sentence.
Comment 13: The authors report that the best flight perfromance metrics of the SVM classifier in Table 2 are 55.76, 56.91, 53.78, 49.00. These are weak by ML standards on such a small dataset. The sonification metrics of the SVM are better: 73.39 61.75 60.70 59.06, but are still very low, which suggests to me one of the three things:
1) the SVM, although the best among the reported classifiers, is not a good fit for this domain;
2) the MFCC features are either inappropriate or insufficient for this domain;
3) there is so little audio data that no classifier can, in principle, generalize well
on it.
I came to the same conclusions when going through the data in Table 3. The authors should
address these points both in the abstract and the discussion.
Comment 14: Lines 317-318: "Just the LR and SVM classifiers always presented Macro-F1 values higher than the
baselines at genus-level classification (??)."
There is a missing reference in the above sentence.
Comment 15: Lines 319-321: there are two missing references.
Comment 16: Lines 336-337: "The ML algorithms were capable of recognizing most of the flower-visiting bees of the
tomato crop, based only on the characteristics of their buzzing sounds."
This is a very vague statement, and a misleading one. A more accurate description would be that the tested ML algorithms' accuracy ranged from 49 to 74% on a dataset of 642 audio samples with the audio samples with ambient noise removed from the dataset.
Comment 17: Lines 358-362: "Moreover, the ML combined with the MFCC method has been able to correctly predict
66% of all samples; 79% of the samples of species based on sonication sounds and SVM algorithm. Likely due to the ML attributes and boosted by MFCC, we reached here higher performance on acoustic recognition of bees than the conventional statistics, thus, corroborating our hypothesis 1."
Comment 18: The authors never made clear what they mean by "conventional statistics." What exactly is being
compared? The comparisons from [31] should be briefly summarized in this article? What were they? Are they significantly better than the results reported in this article? Otherwise, there is little evidence corroborating hypothesis 1.
Comment 19: Many references are missing in the section "Advantages and limitations of buzzig-sound classifications
with Machine Learning."
Comment 20: Lines 381-382: "Therefore, corroborating our hypothesis 2 only for species recognition."
There is insufficient evidence to corroborate this hypothesis. This sentence should be either reworded or removed from the article altogether.
Reviewer #3: The manuscript ID PCOMPBIOL-D-21-01039 entitled "Machine Learning approach for automatic recognition of tomato-pollinating bees based on their buzzing-sounds" is an interesting and novel contribution about taxa recognition of bees which buzz-pollinated the tomato using buzzing sounds. However, it is not very clear why it is importance that farmers or agronomists know the taxonomical identification of buzzing bees. All buzzing bee could be consider efficient pollinators of tomato? In other solanaceous plants if bees is too small only function as thief or if is too big could damage the flower. Authors need to review more literature to justify better the use of this application. Does this ML is possible to use with other buzz-pollinated plants? It will be interesting to discuss this possibility. This application could be very useful to buzzing bee identification in other buzz-pollinated plants.
Also, I included the following minor’s corrections:
L17 Please review the actual scientific name of tomato. It seems that the actual is Solanum lycopersicum L. and the synonym is Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.
Please review “Augochloropsis” spelling in Table 4 and along the paper.
L61, 183, 191, 318, 320, 321, 395, 418. Please check “??”
**********

Have the authors made all data and (if applicable) computational code underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?

The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data and code underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data and code should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data or code —e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: None
Reviewer #2: None
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No

Figure Files:

While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org.

Data Requirements:

Please note that, as a condition of publication, PLOS' data policy requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions outlined in your manuscript. Data must be deposited in an appropriate repository, included within the body of the manuscript, or uploaded as supporting information. This includes all numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.. For an example in PLOS Biology see here: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5.

Reproducibility:

To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009426.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
24 Aug 2021

AttachmentSubmitted filename: PLOSLetter.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009426.r003Decision Letter 1
KomarovaNatalia L.Deputy EditorStowellDanAssociate Editor© 2021 Komarova, Stowell2021Komarova, Stowellhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
6 Sep 2021

Dear Dr. Mesquita-Neto,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'Machine Learning approach for automatic recognition of tomato-pollinating bees based on their buzzing-sounds' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Computational Biology.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us now if you or your institution is planning to press release the article. All press must be co-ordinated with PLOS.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Computational Biology. 
Best regards,
Dan Stowell
Associate Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
Natalia Komarova
Deputy Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
***********************************************************
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Authors:

Please note here if the review is uploaded as an attachment.

Reviewer #1: The authors have addressed my comments, together with the comments from the other two reviewers, the paper has been significantly improved. I now fully support the publication of the paper in the journal.
Reviewer #2: I've carefully read your responses to all reviewers' comments. I appreciate you taking time to write detailed responses and address all the issues in the reviewers' comments and making your dataset available. Thank you very much! I wish you best of luck with your research. This is an important and valuable research venue and I hope you'll continue to make valuable contributions to it.
Reviewer #3: The new version of manuscript entitled "Machine Learning approach for automatic recognition of tomato-pollinating bees based on their buzzing-sounds" is stronger than old version, and authors address majority of comments and suggestions for three reviewers. Authors explain deeper the methods than early version. In addition, they discussed the relevance of their results to other buzz-pollinated plants, and the applicability to tomato farmers.
I suggest only minor corrections:
L17. Incomplete parentheses
L107. I am not sure if the number and unit is join or separate. Please check!
**********

Have the authors made all data and (if applicable) computational code underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?

The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data and code underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data and code should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data or code —e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: None
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes: Lislie Solís-Montero
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009426.r004Acceptance letter
KomarovaNatalia L.Deputy EditorStowellDanAssociate Editor© 2021 Komarova, Stowell2021Komarova, Stowellhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
10 Sep 2021

PCOMPBIOL-D-21-01039R1 
Machine Learning approach for automatic recognition of tomato-pollinating bees based on their buzzing-sounds
Dear Dr Mesquita-Neto,
I am pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Computational Biology. Your manuscript is now with our production department and you will be notified of the publication date in due course.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. 
Soon after your final files are uploaded, unless you have opted out, the early version of your manuscript will be published online. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
Thank you again for supporting PLOS Computational Biology and open-access publishing. We are looking forward to publishing your work! 
With kind regards,
Andrea Szabo
PLOS Computational Biology | Carlyle House, Carlyle Road, Cambridge CB4 3DN | United Kingdom ploscompbiol@plos.org | Phone +44 (0) 1223-442824 | ploscompbiol.org | @PLOSCompBiol