pmcInt J Ethics EducInternational Journal of Ethics Education3814phenaturepg9919254716406676International Journal of Ethics Education2363-99972364-0006pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleSpringer Nature - PMC COVID-19 CollectionPMC9409618PMC9409618.19409618940961810.1007/s40889-022-00153-71531EditorialA global platform for ethics education
ten HaveHenktenhaveh@duq.edu ). This was partly the result of the adoption of the Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights in 2005. Article 23 of this Declaration states: “In order to promote the principles set out in this Declaration and to achieve a better understanding of the ethical implications of scientific and technological developments, in particular for young people, States should endeavour to foster bioethics education and training at all levels as well as to encourage information and knowledge dissemination programmes about bioethics” (UNESCO ). A few years earlier, Comest, Unesco’s World Commission on the Ethics of Scientific Knowledge and Technology had published the report The teaching of ethics (Comest ). The first recommendation in the report is that universities and other institutions of higher education are encouraged to establish ethics teaching at three levels: elementary ethics courses for all students, more advanced courses, and courses that lead to a PhD in ethics. The report also recommended that Unesco develops courses in ethics, supports ethics teaching in developing countries, establishes fellowships and Unesco chairs and institutes a prize for the best teaching programme in ethics. The importance of ethics education was further reinforced in the Recommendation on Science and Scientific Researchers, adopted in 2017. It underlines the importance of ethical sensitivity and behavior, particularly intellectual integrity, sensitivity to conflict of interest, and respect for ethical principles pertaining to research. In Article 12 the Recommendation declares: “Member States should have regard for the fact that effective scientific research calls for scientific researchers of integrity and intellectual maturity, combining high, intellectual qualities and respect for ethical principles.” This is true for all domains of science, technology, engineering and mathematics. States are therefore encouraged to “incorporate or develop in each domain’s curricula and courses the ethical dimensions of science and of research.” (UNESCO ).
To implement these statements about ethics education, UNESCO launched its Ethics Education Program in 2004. This Program aims at the integration of ethics into scientific education in all Member States. It has been built up in several steps. The first step was focused on providing information. Policy-makers at governmental levels, but also in universities and academies of science do not often have adequate information about what exist and what is lacking in the field of ethics education. It is therefore necessary to identify existing ethics programs as well as expertise, and to exchange experiences. Standardized and validated descriptions of ethics teaching programs across the world have been made available through the Global Ethics Observatory. One common finding was the vulnerability of ethics teaching programs. Often, the programs were taught by enthusiastic teachers but there was no firm institutional basis, nor any systematic effort to create a future generation of ethics teachers. The second step was the establishment of an ethics teacher training course to remedy these problems and to make sure that a new generation of professionals and scientists would be encouraged to teach ethics in a professional manner. The focus of the courses, offered in a variety of countries, was on didactic skills required for ethics teaching rather than on content issues of ethics. The third step in the Ethics Education Program has been the development of a proposal for a core curriculum in bioethics, on the basis of the Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights. Because there is consensus on the fundamental principles of bioethics in the Declaration, this can be considered as a basis for what should be minimally included in a bioethics course. An Advisory Expert Committee on the Teaching of Ethics developed the proposal with teaching units related to the principles of the Declaration. For each unit, the possible objectives and contents are described, and proposals for teaching materials, resources and assessment methods are provided. The proposal was tested in a number of universities all over the world, and based on these experiences, the proposal has been revised, updated, and the English version translated into Arabic, French, Russian and Spanish. The core bioethics course can assist scholars who want to establish teaching programs in bioethics in various cultures and regions. Also books with cases from various countries are available to be used in the units of the course.
These activities in the area of ethics teaching led to the conclusion that a global platform to exchange experiences and expertise with ethics education was missing. For this purpose, the International Association for Education in Ethics was established with the aim to create a platform for scholars interested in ethics teaching (not only in bioethics but in other areas of applied ethics also). By bringing them together, they could exchange information about teaching programs and improve their expertise. The same idea was behind the launch of the International Journal of Ethics Education. It is now in its seventh year and is attracting more submissions every year.
This issue of the journal demonstrates the diversity of contributions, from countries such as the United States, Philippines, Taiwan, Denmark, Finland, the United Kingdom, Russia and Switzerland, but also focused on different areas of ethics teaching such as social research, precision medicine, health and social care, policey training, science, and health research. The first contribution addresses a challenge that many readers will have experienced during the Covid-19 pandemic: the disruption of educational activities and the need to convert onsite courses to online formats (Cummins et al. ). The authors describe how they successfully transferred educational activities such as student presentations, interviewing, communication skills training, a mock ethics committee meeting, and standardized patient encounters into virtual formats. Though students could not be immersed in clinical environments, effective occasions could be created to learn them to integrate theoretical knowledge with practical skills. Most challenging were the Standardized Patient simulations since they are practical learning experiences. The authors narrate how they produced a setting which as best as possible approximated the in-person communication and encounter. Students appreciated the individualized attention they received in the online course. Faculty however noted that the dimension of social and professional interaction which is important for onsite courses is missing. Distance learning is different from close personal encounters, and this social, interactive dimension is essential for ethics teaching programs. This is also why we enjoy the opportunity to participate in conferences again, not simply to hear the presentations of colleagues but also to engage, interact and debate with them in person.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.