pmcPLoS BiolPLoS Biol212plosbiol101183755plosPLoS Biology1544-91731545-7885PLOSPMC9140244PMC9140244.1914024491402443562286810.1371/journal.pbio.3001633PBIOLOGY-D-21-025901Methods and ResourcesBiology and Life SciencesMycologyFungal EvolutionBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyMicrobial EvolutionViral EvolutionBiology and Life SciencesEvolutionary BiologyOrganismal EvolutionMicrobial EvolutionViral EvolutionBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyVirologyViral EvolutionBiology and Life SciencesEvolutionary BiologyEvolutionary ProcessesEvolutionary AdaptationBiology and Life SciencesEvolutionary BiologyEvolutionary ProcessesNatural SelectionBiology and Life SciencesEvolutionary BiologyEvolutionary ProcessesEvolutionary RateResearch and Analysis MethodsSimulation and ModelingResearch and analysis methodsMathematical and statistical techniquesStatistical methodsMonte Carlo methodPhysical sciencesMathematicsStatisticsStatistical methodsMonte Carlo methodBiology and Life SciencesEvolutionary BiologyEvolutionary GeneticsNeural networks enable efficient and accurate simulation-based inference of evolutionary parameters from adaptation dynamics
Simulation-based inference of evolutionary parametershttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-1525-0873AvecillaGraceConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSoftwareValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4388-9458ChuongJulie N.Methodology LiFangfeiInvestigation SherlockGavinSupervision https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4028-0364GreshamDavidConceptualizationFunding acquisitionProject administrationSupervisionWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9653-4458RamYoavConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSoftwareSupervisionWriting – review & editing 1
Department of Biology, New York University, New York, New York, United States of America2
Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, New York University, New York, New York, United States of America3
Department of Genetics, Stanford University, California, Stanford, United States of America4
School of Zoology, Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israelde VisserJ. Arjan G. M.Academic Editor , ], and mutation rates are typically estimated using mutation accumulation or Luria–Delbrück fluctuation assays [ , ]. An alternative approach to estimating both the rate and effect of beneficial mutations entails quantifying the dynamics of adaptive evolution and using statistical inference methods to find parameter values that are consistent with the dynamics [ – ]. Approaches to measure the dynamics of adaptive evolution, quantified as changes in the frequencies of beneficial alleles, have become increasingly accessible using either phenotypic markers [ ] or high-throughput DNA sequencing [ ]. Thus, inference methods using adaptation dynamics data hold great promise for determining the underlying evolutionary parameters.
Fitness effects of beneficial mutations comprise a portion of a distribution of fitness effects (DFE). Determining the parameters of the DFE in a given condition is a central goal of evolutionary biology. Typically, beneficial mutations can occur at multiple loci and thus variance in the DFE reflects genetic heterogeneity. However, in some scenarios, a single locus is the dominant gene in which beneficial mutations occur, such as the case of mutations in the β-lactamase gene underlying β-lactam antibiotic resistance or in rpoB underlying rifampicin resistance in bacteria [ , ]. In this case, different mutations at the same locus confer differential beneficial effects resulting in a locus-specific DFE. Typically, a DFE of beneficial mutations encompasses both allelic and locus heterogeneity.
Copy number variants (CNVs) are defined as deletions or amplifications of genomic sequences. Due to their high rate of formation and strong fitness effects, they can underlie rapid adaptive evolution in diverse scenarios ranging from niche adaptation to speciation [ – ]. In the short term, CNVs may provide immediate fitness benefits by altering gene dosage. Over longer evolutionary timescales, CNVs can provide the raw material for the generation of evolutionary novelty through diversification of different gene copies [ ]. As a result, CNVs are common in human populations [ – ], domesticated and wild populations of animals and plants [ – ], pathogenic and nonpathogenic microbes [ – ], and viruses [ – ]. CNVs can be both a driver and a consequence of cancers (reviewed in [ ]).
Although critically important to adaptive evolution, our understanding of the dynamics and reproducibility of CNVs in adaptive evolution is poor. Specifically, key evolutionary properties of CNVs, including their rate of formation and fitness effects, are largely unknown. As with other classes of genomic variation, CNV formation is a relatively rare event, occurring at sufficiently low frequencies to make experimental measurement challenging. Estimates of de novo CNV rates are derived from indirect and imprecise methods, and even when genome-wide mutation rates are directly quantified by mutation accumulation studies and whole-genome sequencing, estimates depend on both genotype and condition [ ] and vary by orders of magnitude [ – ].
Fitness effects of CNVs vary depending on gene content, genetic background, and the environment. In evolution experiments in many systems, CNVs arise repeatedly in response to strong selection [ – ], consistent with strong beneficial fitness effects. Several of these studies measured fitness of clonal isolates containing CNVs and reported selection coefficients ranging from −0.11 to 0.6 [ , , ]. However, the fitness of lineages containing CNVs varies between isolates even within studies, which could be due to additional heritable variation or to differences in fitness between different types of CNVs (e.g., aneuploidy versus single-gene amplification).
Due to the challenge of empirically measuring rates and effects of beneficial mutations across many genetic backgrounds, conditions, and types of mutations, researchers have attempted to infer these parameters from population-level data using evolutionary models and Bayesian inference [ , , ]. This approach has several advantages. First, model-based inference provides estimations of interpretable parameters and the opportunity to compare multiple models. Second, the degree of uncertainty associated with a point estimate can be quantified. Third, a posterior distribution over model parameters allows exploration of parameter combinations that are consistent with the observed data, and posterior distributions can provide insight into certain relationships between parameters [ ]. Fourth, posterior predictions can be generated using the model and either compared to the data or used to predict the outcome of differing scenarios.
Standard Bayesian inference requires a likelihood function, which gives the probability of obtaining the observed data given some values of the model parameters. However, for many evolutionary models, such as the Wright–Fisher model, the likelihood function is analytically and/or computationally intractable. Likelihood-free simulation-based Bayesian inference methods that bypass the likelihood function, such as Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC; [ ]), have been developed and used extensively in population genetics [ , ], ecology and epidemiology [ , ], cosmology [ ], as well as experimental evolution [ , , – ]. The simplest form of likelihood-free inference is rejection ABC [ , ], in which model parameter proposals are sampled from a prior distribution, simulations are generated based on those parameter proposals, and simulated data are compared to empirical observations using summary statistics and a distance function. Proposals that generate simulated data with a distance less than a defined tolerance threshold are considered samples from the posterior distribution and can therefore be used for its estimation. Efficient sampling methods have been introduced, namely Markov chain Monte Carlo [ ] and Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) [ ], which iteratively select proposals based on previous parameters samples so that regions of the parameter space with higher posterior density are explored more often. A shortcoming of ABC is that it requires summary statistics and a distance function, which may be difficult to choose appropriately and compute efficiently, especially when using high-dimensional or multimodal data, although methods have been developed to address this challenge [ , , ].
Recently, new inference methods have been introduced that directly approximate the likelihood or the posterior density function using deep neural density estimators—artificial neural networks that approximate density functions. These methods, which have recently been used in neuroscience [ ], population genetics [ ], and cosmology [ ], forego the summary and distance functions, can use data with higher dimensionality, and perform inference more efficiently [ , , ].
Despite being originally developed to analyze population genetic data, e.g., to infer parameters of the coalescent model [ – ], likelihood-free methods have only been used in a small number of experimental evolution studies. Hegreness and colleagues [ ] estimated the rate and mean fitness effect of beneficial mutations in Escherichia coli. They performed 72 replicates of a serial dilution evolution experiment, starting with equal frequencies of 2 strains that differ only in a fluorescent marker in a putatively neutral location and allowed them to evolve over 300 generations. Following the marker frequencies, they estimated from each experimental replicate 2 summary statistics: the time when a beneficial mutation starts to spread in the population and the rate at which its frequency increases. They then ran 500 simulations of an evolutionary model using a grid of model parameters to produce a theoretical distribution of summary statistics. Finally, they used the one-dimensional Kolmogorov–Smirnov distance between the empirical and theoretical summary statistic distributions to assess the inferred parameters. Barrick and colleagues [ ] also inferred the rate and mean fitness effect from similar serial dilution experiments using a different evolutionary model implemented with a τ-leap stochastic simulation algorithm. They used the same summary statistics but applied the two-dimensional Kolmogorov–Smirnov distance function to better account for dependence between the summary statistics. de Sousa and colleagues [ ] also focused on evolutionary experiments with 2 neutral markers. Their model included 3 parameters: the beneficial mutation rate and the 2 parameters of a Gamma distribution for the fitness effects of beneficial mutations. They introduced a new summary statistic that uses both the marker frequency trajectories and the population mean fitness trajectories (measured using competition assays). They summarized these data by creating histograms of the frequency values and fitness values for each of 6 time points. This resulted in 66 summary statistics necessitating the application of a regression-based method to reduce the dimensionality of the summary statistics and achieve greater efficiency [ , ]. A simpler approach was taken by Harari and colleagues [ ], who used a rejection ABC approach to estimate a single model parameter, the endoreduplication rate, from evolutionary experiments with yeast. They used the frequency dynamics of 3 genotypes (haploid and diploid homozygous and heterozygous at the MAT locus) without a summary statistic. The distance between the empirical results and 100 simulations was computed as the mean absolute error. Recently, Schenk and colleagues [ ] inferred the mean mutation rate and fitness effect for 3 classes of mutations from serial dilution experiments at 2 different population sizes, which they sequenced at the end of the experiment. They used a Wright–Fisher model to simulate the frequency of fixed mutations in each class and used a neural network approach to estimate the parameters that best fit their data. These prior studies point to the potential of simulation-based inference.
Previously, we developed a fluorescent CNV reporter system in the budding yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, to quantify the dynamics of de novo CNVs during adaptive evolution [ ]. Using this system, we quantified CNV dynamics at the GAP1 locus, which encodes a general amino acid permease, in nitrogen-limited chemostats for over 250 generations in multiple populations. We found that GAP1 CNVs reproducibly arise early and sweep through the population. By combining the GAP1 CNV reporter with barcode lineage tracking and whole-genome sequencing, we found that 102 to 104 independent CNV-containing lineages comprising diverse structures compete within populations.
In this study, we estimate the formation rate and fitness effect of GAP1 CNVs. We tested both ABC-SMC [ ] and a neural density estimation method, Neural Posterior Estimation (NPE) [ ], using a classical Wright–Fisher model [ ] and a chemostat model [ ]. Using simulated data, we tested the utility of the different evolutionary models and inference methods. We find that NPE has better performance than ABC-SMC. Although a more complex model has improved performance, the simpler and more computationally efficient Wright–Fisher model is appropriate in most scenarios. We validated our approach by comparison to 2 different experimental methods: lineage tracking and pairwise fitness assays. We estimate that in glutamine-limited chemostats, beneficial GAP1 CNVs are introduced at a rate of 10−4.7 to 10−4 per cell division and have a selection coefficient of 0.04 to 0.1 per generation. NPE is likely to be a useful method for inferring evolutionary parameters across a variety of scenarios, including tumor and viral evolution, providing a powerful approach for combining experimental and computational methods.

## Results
In a previous experimental evolution study, we quantified the dynamics of de novo CNVs in 9 populations using a prototrophic yeast strain containing a fluorescent GAP1 CNV reporter. [ ]. Populations were maintained in glutamine-limited chemostats for over 250 generations and sampled every 8 to 20 generations (25 time points in total) to determine the proportion of cells containing a GAP1 CNV using flow cytometry (populations gln_01-gln_09 in ). In the same study, we also performed 2 replicate evolution experiments using the fluorescent GAP1 CNV reporter and lineage-tracking barcodes quantifying the proportion of the population with a GAP1 CNV at 32 time points (populations bc01-bc02 in ) [ ]. We used interpolation to match time points between these 2 experiments ( ) resulting in a dataset comprising the proportion of the population with a GAP1 CNV at 25 time points in 11 replicate evolution experiments. In this study, we tested whether the observed dynamics of CNV-mediated evolution provide a means of inferring the underlying evolutionary parameters.
 

## Overview of evolutionary models
We tested 2 models of evolution: the classical Wright–Fisher model [ ] and a specialized chemostat model [ ]. Previously, it has been shown that a single effective selection coefficient may be sufficient to model evolutionary dynamics in populations undergoing adaptation [ ]. Therefore, we focus on beneficial mutations and assume a single selection coefficient for each class of mutation. In both models, we start with an isogenic population in which GAP1 CNV mutations occur at a rate δC and other beneficial mutations occur at rate δB ( ). In our simulations, cells can acquire only a single beneficial mutation, either a CNV at GAP1 or some other beneficial mutation (i.e., single nucleotide variant, transposition, diploidization, or CNV at another locus). In all simulations (except for sensitivity analysis, see the “Inference from empirical evolutionary dynamics” section), the formation rate of beneficial mutations other than GAP1 CNVs was fixed at δB = 10−5 per genome per cell division, and the selection coefficient was fixed at sB = 0.001, based on estimates from previous experiments using yeast in several conditions [ – ]. Our goal was to infer the GAP1 CNV formation rate, δC, and GAP1 CNV selection coefficient, sC.
The 2 evolutionary models have several unique features. In the Wright–Fisher model, the population size is constant, and each generation is discrete. Therefore, genetic drift is efficiently modeled using multinomial sampling ( ). In the chemostat model [ ], fresh medium is added to the growth vessel at a constant rate and medium, and cells are removed from the growth vessel at the same rate resulting in continuous dilution of the culture ( ). Individuals are randomly removed from the population through the dilution process, regardless of fitness, in a manner analogous to genetic drift. In the chemostat model, we start with a small initial population size and a high initial concentration of the growth-limiting nutrient. Following inoculation, the population size increases and the growth-limiting nutrient concentration decreases until a steady state is attained that persists throughout the experiment. As generations are continuous and overlapping in the chemostat model, we use the Gillespie algorithm with τ-leaping [ ] to simulate the population dynamics. Growth parameters in the chemostat are based on experimental conditions during the evolution experiments [ ] or taken from the literature ( ).
 

## Overview of inference strategies
We tested 2 likelihood-free Bayesian methods for joint inference of the GAP1 CNV formation rate and the GAP1 CNV fitness effect: Approximate Bayesian Computation with Sequential Monte Carlo (ABC-SMC) [ ] and NPE [ – ]. We used the proportion of the population with a GAP1 CNV at 25 time points as the observed data ( ). For both methods, we defined a log-uniform prior distribution for the CNV formation rate ranging from 10−12 to 10−3 and a log-uniform prior distribution for the selection coefficient ranging from 10−4 to 0.4.
We applied ABC-SMC ( ), implemented in the Python package pyABC [ ]. We used an adaptively weighted Euclidean distance function to compare simulated data to observed data. Thus, the distance function adapts over the course of the inference process based on the amount of variance at each time point [ ]. The number of samples drawn from the proposal distribution (and therefore number of simulations) is changed at each iteration of the ABC-SMC algorithm using the adaptive population strategy, which is based on the shape of the current posterior distribution [ ]. We applied bounds on the maximum number of samples used to approximate the posterior in each iteration; however, the total number of samples (simulations) used in each iteration is greater because not all simulations are accepted for posterior estimation (see ). For each observation, we performed ABC-SMC with multiple iterations until either the acceptance threshold (ε = 0.002) was reached or until 10 iterations had been completed. We performed inference on each observation independently 3 times. Although we refer to different observations belonging to the same “training set,” a different ABC-SMC procedure must be performed for each observation.
 We applied NPE ( ), implemented in the Python package sbi [ ], and tested 2 specialized normalizing flows as density estimators: a masked autoregressive flow (MAF) [ ] and a neural spline flow (NSF) [ ]. The normalizing flow is used as a density estimator to “learn” an amortized posterior distribution, which can then be evaluated for specific observations. Thus, amortization allows for evaluation of the posterior for each new observation without the need to retrain the neural network. To test the sensitivity of our inference results on the set of simulations used to learn the amortized posterior, we trained 3 independent amortized networks with different sets of simulations generated from the prior distribution and compared our resulting posterior distributions for each observation. We refer to inferences made with the same amortized network as having the same “training set.”

## NPE outperforms ABC-SMC
To test the performance of each inference method and evolutionary model, we generated 20 simulated synthetic observations for each model (Wright–Fisher or chemostat) over 4 combinations of CNV formation rates and selection coefficients, resulting in 40 synthetic observations (i.e., 5 simulated observations per combination of model, δC, and sC). We refer to the parameters that generated the synthetic observation as the “true” parameters. For each synthetic observation, we performed inference using each method 3 times. Inference was performed using the same evolutionary model as that used to generate the observation. We found that NPE using NSF as the density estimator was superior to NPE using MAF, and, therefore, we report results using NSF in the main text ( using MAF are in ).
For each inference method, we plotted the joint posterior distribution with the 50% and 95% highest density regions (HDR) [ ] demarcated ( , S1 Data in https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/E9D5X). The true parameters are expected to be covered by these HDRs at least 50% and 95% of the time, respectively. We also computed the marginal 95% highest density intervals (HDIs) [ ] using the marginal posterior distributions for the GAP1 CNV selection coefficient and GAP1 CNV formation rate. We found that the true parameters were within the 50% HDR in half or more of the tests (averaged over 3 training sets) across a range of parameter values with the exception of ABC-SMC applied to the Wright–Fisher model when the GAP1 CNV formation rate (δC = 10−7) and selection coefficient (sC = 0.001) were both low ( ). The true parameters were within the 95% HDR in 100% of tests (S1 Data in https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/E9D5X). The width of the HDI is informative about the degree of uncertainty associated with the parameter estimation. The HDIs for both fitness effect and formation rate tend to be smaller when inferring with NPE compared to ABC-SMC, and this advantage of NPE is more pronounced when the CNV formation rate is high (δC = 10−5) ( ).
 We computed the maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimate of the GAP1 CNV formation rate and selection coefficient by determining the mode (i.e., argmax) of the joint posterior distribution, and computed the log ratio of the MAP relative to the true parameters. We find that the MAP estimate is close to the true parameter (i.e., the log ratio is close to zero) when the selection coefficient is high (sC = 0.1), regardless of the model or method, and much of the error is due to the formation rate estimation error ( ). Generally, the MAP estimate is within an order of magnitude of the true parameter (i.e., the log ratio is less than 1), except when the formation rate and selection coefficient are both low (δC = 10−7, sC = 0.001); in this case, the formation rate was underestimated up to 4-fold, and the selection coefficient was slightly overestimated ( ). In some cases, there are substantial differences in log ratio between training sets using NPE; however, this variation in log ratio is usually less than the variation in the log ratio when performing inference with ABC-SMC. Overall, the log ratio tends to be closer to zero (i.e., estimate close to true parameter) when using NPE ( ).
We performed posterior predictive checks by simulating GAP1 CNV dynamics using the MAP estimates as well as 50 parameter values sampled from the posterior distribution (S1 Data in https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/E9D5X). We computed both the root mean square error (RMSE) and the correlation coefficient between posterior predictions and the observation to measure the prediction accuracy ( , ). We find that the RMSE posterior predictive accuracy of NPE is similar to, or better than, that of ABC-SMC ( ). The predictive accuracy quantified using correlation was close to 1 for all cases except when GAP1 CNV formation rate and selection coefficient are both low (sC = 0.001 and δC = 10−7) ( ).
We performed model comparison using both Akaike information criterion (AIC), computed using the MAP estimate, and widely applicable information criterion (WAIC), computed over the entire posterior distribution [ ]. Lower values imply higher predictive accuracy and a difference of 2 is considered significant ( ) [ ]. We find similar results for both criteria: NPE with either model have similar values, although the value for Wright–Fisher is sometimes slightly lower than the value for the chemostat model. When sC = 0.1, the value for NPE is consistently and significantly lower than for ABC-SMC. When δC = 10−5 and sC = 0.001, the value for NPE with the Wright–Fisher model is significantly lower than that for ABC-SMC, while the NPE with the chemostat model is not. The difference between any combination of model and method was insignificant for δC = 10−7 and sC = 0.001. Therefore, NPE is similar or better than ABC-SMC using either evolutionary model and for all tested combinations of GAP1 CNV formation rate and selection coefficient, and we further confirmed the generality of this trend using the Wright–Fisher model and 8 additional parameter combinations ( ).
We performed NPE using 10,000 or 100,000 simulations to train the neural network and found that increasing the number of simulations did not substantially reduce the MAP estimation error, but did tend to decrease the width of the 95% HDIs for both parameters ( ). Similarly, we performed ABC-SMC with per observation maximum accepted parameter samples (i.e., “particles” or “population size”) numbers of 10,000 and 100,000, which correspond to increasing number of simulations per inference procedure, and found that increasing the budget decreases the widths of the 95% HDIs for both parameters ( ). Overall, amortization with NPE allowed for more accurate inference using fewer simulations corresponding to less computation time ( ).

## The Wright–Fisher model is suitable for inference using chemostat dynamics
Whereas the chemostat model is a more precise description of our evolution experiments, both the model itself and its computational implementation have some drawbacks. First, the model is a stochastic continuous time model implemented using the τ-leap method [ ]. In this method, time is incremented in discrete steps and the number of stochastic events that occur within that time step is sampled based on the rate of events and the system state at the previous time step. For accurate stochastic simulation, event rates and probabilities must be computed at each time step, and time steps must be sufficiently small. This incurs a heavy computational cost as time steps are considerably smaller than one generation, which is the time step used in the simpler Wright–Fisher model. Moreover, the chemostat model itself has additional parameters compared to the Wright–Fisher model, which must be experimentally measured or estimated.
The Wright–Fisher model is more general and more computationally efficient than the chemostat model ( ). Therefore, we investigated if it can be used to perform accurate inference with NPE on synthetic observations generated by the chemostat model. By assessing how often the true parameters were covered by the HDRs, we found that the Wright–Fisher is a good enough approximation of the full chemostat dynamics when selection is weak (sC = 0.001) ( ), and it performs similarly to the chemostat model in parameter estimation accuracy ( ). The Wright–Fisher is less suitable when selection is strong (sC = 0.1), as the true parameters are not covered by the 50% or 95% HDR ( ). Nevertheless, estimation of the selection coefficient remains accurate, and the difference in estimation of the formation rate is less than an order of magnitude, with a 3- to 5-fold overestimation (MAP log ratio between 0.5 and 0.7) ( ).
 

## Inference using a set of observations
Our empirical dataset includes 11 biological replicates of the same evolution experiment. Differences in the dynamics between independent replicates may be explained by an underlying DFE rather than a single constant selection coefficient. It is possible to infer the DFE using all experiments simultaneously. However, inference of distributions from multiple experiments presents several challenges, common to other mixed-effects or hierarchical models [ ]. Alternatively, individual values inferred from individual experiments could provide an approximation of the underlying DFE.
To test these 2 alternative strategies for inferring the DFE, we performed simulations in which we allowed for variation in the selection coefficient of GAP1 CNVs for each population in a set of observations. We sampled 11 selection coefficients from a Gamma distribution with shape and scale parameters α and β, respectively, and an expected value E(s) = αβ [ ], and then simulated a single observation for each sampled selection coefficient. As the Wright–Fisher model is a suitable approximation of the chemostat model ( ), we used the Wright–Fisher model both for generating our observation sets and for parameter inference.
For the observation sets, we used NPE to either infer a single selection coefficient for each observation or to directly infer the Gamma distribution parameters α and β from all 11 observations. When inferring 11 selection coefficients, one for each observation in the observation set, we fit a Gamma distribution to 8 of the 11 inferred values ( , green lines). When directly inferring the DFE, we used a uniform prior for α from 0.5 to 15 and a log-uniform prior for β from 10−3 to 0.8. We held out 3 experiments from the set of 11 and used a 3-layer neural network to reduce the remaining 8 observations to a 5-feature summary statistic vector, which we then used as an embedding net [ ] with NPE to infer the joint posterior distribution of α, β, and δC ( , blue lines). For each observation set, we performed each inference method 3 times, using different sets of 8 experiments to infer the underlying DFE.
 We used Kullback–Leibler divergence to measure the difference between the true DFE and inferred DFE and find that the inferred selection coefficients from the single experiments capture the underlying DFE as well or better than direct inference of the DFE from a set of observations for both α = 1 (an exponential distribution) and α = 10 (sum of 10 exponentials) ( , ). The only exception we found is when α = 10, E(s) = 0.001, and δC = 10−5 ( , ). We assessed the performance of inference from a set of observations using out-of-sample posterior predictive accuracy [ ] and found that inferring α and β from a set of observations results in lower posterior predictive accuracy compared to inferring sC from a single observation ( ). Therefore, we conclude that estimating the DFE through inference of individual selection coefficients from each observation is superior to inference of the distribution from multiple observations.

## Inference from empirical evolutionary dynamics
To apply our approach to empirical data we inferred GAP1 CNV selection coefficients and formation rates using 11 replicated evolutionary experiments in glutamine-limited chemostats [ ] ( ) using NPE with both evolution models. We performed posterior predictive checks, drawing parameter values from the posterior distribution, and found that GAP1 CNV were predicted to increase in frequency earlier and more gradually than is observed in our experimental populations ( ). This discrepancy is especially apparent in experimental populations that appear to experience clonal interference with other beneficial lineages (i.e., gln07, gln09). Therefore, we excluded data after generation 116, by which point CNVs have reached high frequency in the populations but do not yet exhibit the nonmonotonic and variable dynamics observed in later time points, and performed inference. The resulting posterior predictions are more similar to the observations in initial generations (average MAP RMSE for the 11 observations up to generation 116 is 0.06 when inference excludes late time points versus 0.13 when inference includes all time points). Furthermore, the overall RMSE (for observations up to generation 267) was not significantly different (average MAP RMSE is 0.129 and 0.126 when excluding or including late time points, respectively; ). Restricting the analysis to early time points did not dramatically affect estimates of GAP1 CNV selection coefficient and formation rate, but it did result in less variability in estimates between populations (i.e., independent observations) and some reordering of populations’ selection coefficients and formation rate relative to each other ( ). Thus, we focused on inference using data prior to generation 116.
The inferred GAP1 CNV selection coefficients were similar regardless of model, with the range of MAP estimates for all populations between 0.04 and 0.1, whereas the range of inferred GAP1 CNV formation rates was somewhat higher when using the Wright–Fisher model, 10−4.1 to 10−3.4, compared to the chemostat model, 10−4.7 to 10−4 ( ). While there is variation in inferred parameters due to the training set, variation between observations (replicate evolution experiments) is higher than variation between training sets ( ). Posterior predictions using the chemostat model, a fuller depiction of the evolution experiments, tend to have slightly lower RMSE than predictions using the Wright–Fisher model ( ). However, predictions using both models recapitulate actual GAP1 CNV dynamics, especially in early generations ( ).
 To test the sensitivity of these estimates, we also inferred the GAP1 CNV selection coefficient and formation rate using the Wright–Fisher model in the absence of other beneficial mutations (δB = 0), and for 9 additional combinations of other beneficial mutation selection coefficient sB and formation rate δB ( ). In general, perturbations to the rate and selection coefficient of other beneficial mutations did not alter the inferred GAP1 CNV selection coefficient or formation rate. We found a single exception: When both the formation rate and fitness effect of other beneficial mutations is high (sB = 0.1 and δB = 10−5), the GAP1 CNV selection coefficient was approximately 1.6-fold higher and the formation rate was approximately 2-fold lower ( ); however, posterior predictions were poor for this set of parameter values ( ), suggesting that these values are inappropriate.

## Experimental confirmation of fitness effects inferred from adaptive dynamics
To experimentally validate the inferred selection coefficients, we used lineage tracking to estimate the DFE [ , , ]. We performed barseq on the entire evolving population at multiple time points and identified lineages that did and did not contain GAP1 CNVs ( ). Using barcode trajectories to estimate fitness effects ([ ]; see ), we identified 1,569 out of 80,751 lineages (1.94%) as adaptive in the bc01 population. A total of 1,513 (96.4%) adaptive lineages have a GAP1 CNV ( ).
 As a complementary experimental approach, selection coefficients can be directly measured using competition assays by fitting a linear model to the log ratio of the GAP1 CNV strain and ancestral strain frequencies over time ( ). Therefore, we isolated GAP1 CNV containing clones from populations bc01 and bc02, determined their fitness ( ), and combined these estimates with previously reported selection coefficients for GAP1 CNV containing clones isolated from populations gln01-gln09 [ ] to define the DFE.
The DFE for adaptive GAP1 CNV lineages in bc01 inferred using lineage-tracking barcodes and the DFE from pairwise competition assays share similar properties to the distribution inferred using NPE from all experimental populations ( ). Thus, our inference framework using CNV adaptation dynamics is a reliable estimate of the DFE estimated using laborious experimental methods that are gold standards in the field.

## Discussion
In this study, we tested the application of simulation-based inference for determining key evolutionary parameters from observed adaptive dynamics in evolution experiments. We focused on the role of CNVs in adaptive evolution using experimental data in which we quantified the population frequency of de novo CNVs at a single locus using a fluorescent CNV reporter. The goal of our study was to test a new computational framework for simulation-based, likelihood-free inference, compare it to the state-of-the-art method, and apply it to estimate the GAP1 CNV selection coefficient and formation rates in experimental evolution using glutamine-limited chemostats.
Our study yielded several important methodological findings. Using synthetic data, we tested 2 different algorithms for joint inference of evolutionary parameters, the effect of different evolutionary models on inference performance, and how best to determine a DFE using multiple experiments. We find that the neural network–based algorithm NPE outperforms ABC-SMC regardless of evolutionary model. Although a more complex evolutionary model better describes the evolution experiments performed in chemostats, we find that a standard Wright–Fisher model can be a sufficient approximation for inference using NPE. However, the inferred GAP1 CNV formation rate under the Wright–Fisher model is higher than under the chemostat model ( ), which is consistent with the overprediction of formation rates using the Wright–Fisher model for inference when an observation is generated by the chemostat model and selection coefficients are high ( ). This suggests that Wright–Fisher is not the best suited model to use in all real-world cases, in particular if many beneficial CNVs turn out to have strong selection coefficients. Finally, although it is possible to perform joint inference on multiple independent experimental observations to infer a DFE, we find that inference performed on individual experiments and post facto estimation of the distribution more accurately captures the underlying DFE.
Previous studies that applied likelihood-free inference to results of evolutionary experiments differ from our study in various ways [ , , ]. First, they used serial dilution rather than chemostat experiments. Second, most focused on all beneficial mutations, whereas we categorize beneficial mutations into 2 categories: GAP1 CNVs and all other beneficial mutations; thus, they used an evolutionary model with a single process generating genetic variation, whereas our study includes 2 such processes, but focuses inference on our mutation type of interest. Third, we used 2 different evolutionary models: the Wright–Fisher model, a standard model in evolutionary genetics, and a chemostat model. The latter is more realistic but also more computationally demanding. Fourth and importantly, previous studies applied relatively simple rejection ABC methods [ , , , ]. We applied 2 modern approaches: ABC with sequential Monte Carlo sampling [ ], which is a computationally efficient algorithm for Bayesian inference, using an adaptive distance function [ ]; and NPE [ – ] with NSF [ ]. NPE approximates an amortized posterior distribution from simulations. Thus, it is more efficient than ABC-SMC, as it can estimate a posterior distribution for new observations without requiring additional training. This feature is especially useful when a more computationally demanding model is better (e.g., the chemostat model when selection coefficients are high). Our study is the first, to our knowledge, to use neural density estimation to apply likelihood-free inference to experimental evolution data.
Our application of simulation-based inference yielded new insights into the role of CNVs in adaptive evolution. Using a chemostat model we estimated GAP1 CNV formation rate and selection coefficient from empirical population-level adaptive evolution dynamics and found that GAP1 CNVs form at a rate of 10−4.7 to 10−4.0 per generation (approximately 1 in 10,000 cell divisions) and have selection coefficients of 0.04 to 0.1 per generation. We experimentally validated our inferred fitness estimates using barcode lineage tracking and pairwise competition assays and showed that simulation-based inference is in good agreement with the 2 different experimental methods. The formation rate that we have determined for GAP1 CNVs is remarkably high. Locus-specific CNV formation rates are extremely difficult to determine and fluctuation assays have yielded estimates ranging from 10−12 to 10−6 [ – ]. Mutation accumulation studies have yielded genome-wide CNV rates of about 10−5 [ , , ], which is an order of magnitude lower than our locus-specific formation rate. We posit 2 possible explanations for this high rate: (1) CNVs at the GAP1 locus may be deleterious in most conditions, including the putative nonselective conditions used for mutation-selection experiments, and therefore underestimated in mutation accumulation assays due to negative selection; and (2) under nitrogen-limiting selective conditions, in which GAP1 expression levels are extremely high, a mechanism of induced CNV formation may operate that increases the rate at which they are generated, as has been shown at other loci in the yeast genome [ , ]. Empirical validation of the inferred rate of GAP1 CNV formation in nitrogen-limiting conditions requires experimental confirmation.
This simulation-based inference approach can be readily extended to other evolution experiments. In this study, we performed inference of parameters for a single type of mutation. This approach could be extended to infer the rates and effects of multiple types of mutations simultaneously. For example, instead of assuming a rate and selection coefficient for other beneficial mutations and performing ex post facto analyses looking at the sensitivity of inference of GAP1 CNV parameters in other beneficial mutation regimes, one could simultaneously infer parameters for both of these types of mutations. As shown using our barcode-sequencing data, many CNVs arise during adaptive evolution, and previous studies have shown that CNVs have different structures and mechanisms of formation [ , ]. Inferring a single effective selection coefficient and formation rate is a current limitation of our study that could be overcome by inferring rates and effects for different classes of CNVs (e.g., aneuploidy versus tandem duplication). Inspecting conditional correlations in posterior distributions involving multiple types of mutations has the potential to provide insights into how interactions between different classes of mutations shape evolutionary dynamics.
The approach could also be applied to CNV dynamics at other loci, in different genetic backgrounds, or in different media conditions. Ploidy and diverse molecular mechanisms likely impact CNV formation rates. For example, rates of aneuploidy, which result from nondisjunction errors, are higher in diploid yeast than haploid yeast, and chromosome gains are more frequent than chromosome losses [ ]. There is considerable evidence for heterogeneity in the CNV rate between loci, as factors including local sequence features, transcriptional activity, genetic background, and the external environment may impact the mutation spectrum. For example, there is evidence that CNVs occur at a higher rate near certain genomic features, such as repetitive elements [ ], tRNA genes [ ], origins of replication [ ], and replication fork barriers [ ].
Furthermore, this approach could be used to infer formation rates and selection coefficients for other types of mutations in different asexually reproducing populations; the empirical data required is simply the proportion of the population with a given mutation type over time, which can efficiently be determined using a phenotypic marker, or similar quantitative data such as whole-genome whole-population sequencing. Evolutionary models could be extended to more complex evolutionary scenarios including changing population sizes, fluctuating selection, and changing ploidy and reproductive strategy, with an ultimate goal of inferring their impact on a variety of evolutionary parameters and predicting evolutionary dynamics in complex environments and populations. Applications to tumor evolution and viral evolution are related problems that are likely amenable to this approach.

## Methods
All source code and data for performing the analyses and reproducing the figures is available at https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/E9D5X. Code is also available at https://github.com/graceave/cnv_sims_inference.

## Evolutionary models
We modeled the adaptive evolution from an isogenic asexual population with frequencies XA of the ancestral (or wild type) genotype, XC of cells with a GAP1 CNV, and XB of cells with a different type of beneficial mutation. Ancestral cells can gain a GAP1 CNV or another beneficial mutation at rates δC and δB, respectively. Therefore, the frequencies of cells of different genotypes after mutation are

 x†A=(1−δB−δC)xA,

 x†B=xAδB+xB,

 x†C=xAδC+xC

For simplicity, this model neglects cells with multiple mutations, which is reasonable for short timescales, such as those considered here.
In the discrete time Wright–Fisher model, the change in frequency due to natural selection is modeled by

 x*i=wkxiw¯,w¯=∑i∈{A,B,C}wixi,

where wi is the relative fitness of cells with genotype i, and is the population mean fitness relative to the ancestral type. Relative fitness is related to the selection coefficient by

 wi=1+si,i=B,C

The change in frequency due random genetic drift is given by

 ni=Multinomial(N,(x*A,x*B,x*C)),x′i=niN,

where N is the population size. In our simulations N = 3.3 × 108, the effective population size in the chemostat populations in our experiment (see the “Determining the effective population size in the chemostat” section).
The chemostat model starts with a population size 1.5 × 10−7 and the concentration of the limiting nutrient in the growth vessel, S, is equal to the concentration of that nutrient in the fresh media, S0. During continuous culture, the chemostat is continuously diluted as fresh media flows in and culture media and cells are removed at rate D. During the initial phase of growth, the population size grows, and the limiting nutrient concentration is reduced until a steady state is attained at which the population size and limiting nutrient concentration are maintained indefinitely. We extended the model for competition between 2 haploid clonal populations for a single growth-limiting resource in a chemostat from [ ] to 3 populations such that

 dxAdt=xA(rASS+kA−D),

 dxBdt=xB(rBSS+kB−D),

 dxCdt=xC(rCSS+kC−D),

 dSdt=(S0−S)D−xArAS(S+kA)YA−xBrBS(S+kB)YB−xCrCS(S+kC)YC

Yi is the culture yield of strain i per mole of limiting nutrient. rA is the Malthusian parameter, or intrinsic rate of increase, for the ancestral strain, and in the chemostat literature is frequently referred to as μmax, the maximal growth rate. The growth rate in the chemostat, μ, depends on the the concentration of the limiting nutrient with saturating kinetics . ki is the substrate concentration at half-maximal μ. rC and rB are the Malthusian parameters for strains with a CNV and strains with another beneficial mutation, respectively, and are related to the ancestral Malthusian parameter and selection coefficient by [ ]

 si=ri−rArAln2,i=B,C.

The values for the parameters used in the chemostat model are in .
We simulated continuous time in the chemostat using the Gillespie algorithm with τ-leaping. Briefly, we calculate the rates of ancestral growth, ancestral dilution, CNV growth, CNV dilution, other mutant growth, other mutant dilution, mutation from ancestral to CNV, and mutation from ancestral to other mutant. For the next time interval τ, we calculated the number of times each event occurs during the interval using the Poisson distribution. The limiting substrate concentration is then adjusted accordingly. These steps repeat until the desired number of generations is reached.
For the chemostat model, we began counting generations after 48 hours, which is approximately the amount of time required for the chemostat to reach steady state, and when we began recording generations in [ ].

## Determining the effective population size in the chemostat
In order to determine the effective population size in the chemostat, and thus the population size to use in with the Wright–Fisher model, we determined the conditional variance of the allele frequency in the next generation p’ given the frequency in the current generation p in the chemostat. To do this, we simulated a chemostat population with 2 neutral alleles with frequencies p and q (p + q = 1), which begin at equal frequencies, p = q. We allowed the simulation to run for 1,000 generations, recording the frequency p at every generation, excluding the first 100 generations to ensure the population is at steady state. We then computed the conditional variance Var(p’|p) in each generation and estimated the effective population size as (where t = 900 is the total number of generations) [ ]:

 Ne=p(1−p)1t∑tvar(p′|p).

The estimated effective population size in our chemostat conditions is 3.3 × 108, which is approximately two-thirds of the census population size N when the chemostat is at steady state.

## Inference methods
For inference using single observations, we used the proportion of the population with a GAP1 CNV at 25 time points as our summary statistics and defined a log-uniform prior for the formation rate ranging from 10−12 to 10−3 and a log-uniform prior for the selection coefficient from 10−4 to 0.4.
For inference using sets of observation, we used a uniform prior for α from 0.5 to 15, a log-uniform prior for β from 10−3 to 0.8, and a log-uniform prior for the formation rate ranging from 10−12 to 10−3. For use with NPE, we used a 3-layer sequential neural network with linear transformations in each layer and rectified linear unit as the activation functions to encode the observation set into 5 summary statistics, which we then used as an embedding net with NPE.
We applied ABC-SMC implemented in the Python package pyABC [ ]. For inference using single observations, we used an adaptively weighted Euclidean distance function with the root mean square deviation as the scale function. For inference using a set of observations, we used the squared Euclidean distance as our distance metric. We used 100 samples from the prior for initial calibration before the first round, and a maximum acceptance rate of either 10,000 or 100,000 for both single observations and observation sets (i.e.,10,000 single observations or 10,000 sets of 11 observations). For the acceptance rate of 10,000, we started inference with 100 samples, had a maximum of 1,000 accepted samples per round, and a maximum of 10 rounds. For the acceptance rate of 100,000, we started inference with 1,000 samples, had a maximum of 10,000 accepted samples per round, and a maximum of 10 rounds. The exact number of samples from the proposal distribution during each round of sampling were adaptively determined based on the shape of the current posterior distribution [ ]. For inference of the posterior for each observation, we performed multiple rounds of sampling until either we reached the acceptance threshold ε < = 0.002 or 10 rounds were performed.
We applied NPE implemented in the Python package sbi [ ] using a MAF [ ] or a NSF [ ] as a conditional density estimator that learns an amortized posterior density for single observations. We used either 10,000 or 100,000 simulations to train the network. To test the dependence of our results on the set of simulations used to learn the posterior, we trained 3 independent amortized networks with different sets of simulations generated from the prior and compared our resulting posterior distributions for each observation.

## Assessment of performance of each method with each model
To test each method, we simulated 5 populations for each combination of the following CNV formation rates and fitness effects: sC = 0.001 and δC = 10−5; sC = 0.1 and δC = 10−5; sC = 0.001 and δC = 10−7; sC = 0.1 and δC = 10−7, for both the Wright–Fisher model and the chemostat model, resulting in 40 total simulated observations. We independently inferred the CNV fitness effect and formation rate for each simulated observation 3 times.
We calculated the MAP estimate by first estimating a Gaussian kernel density estimate (KDE) using SciPy (scipy.stats.gaussian_kde) [ ] with at least 1,000 parameter combinations and their weights drawn from the posterior distribution. We then found the maximum of the KDE (using scipy.optimize.minimize with the Nelder–Mead solver). We calculated the 95% HDIs for the MAP estimate of each parameter using pyABC (pyabc.visualization.credible.compute_credible_interval) [ ].
We performed posterior predictive checks by simulating CNV dynamics using the MAP estimate as well as 50 parameter values sampled from the posterior distribution. We calculated RMSE and correlation to measure agreement of the 50 posterior predictions with the observation and report the mean and 95% confidence intervals for these measures. For inference on sets of observations, we calculated the RMSE and correlation coefficient between the posterior predictions and each of the 3 held out observations, and report the mean and 95% confidence intervals for these measures over all 3 held out observations.
We calculated AIC using the standard formula

 AIC=−2log(p(y|θ^))+2k,

where is the MAP estimate, k = 2 is the number of inferred parameters, y is the observed data, and p is the inferred posterior distribution. We calculated Watanabe-AIC or WAIC according to both commonly used formulas:

 WAIC1=−2∑i=1nlog(1S∑s=1Sp(yi|θs))+2∑i=1n(log(1S∑s=1Sp(yi|θs))−1S∑s=1Sp(yi|θs))

 WAIC2=−2∑i=1nlog(1S∑s=1Sp(yi|θs))+2∑i=1nVs=1S(logp(yi|θs)),

where S is the number of draws from the posterior distribution, θs is a sample from the posterior, and is the posterior sample variance.

## Pairwise competitions
We isolated CNV-containing clones from the populations on the basis of fluorescence and performed pairwise competitions between each clone and an unlabeled ancestral (FY4) strain. We also performed competitions between the ancestral GAP1 CNV reporter strain, with and without barcodes. To perform the competitions, we grew fluorescent GAP1 CNV clones and ancestral clones in glutamine-limited chemostats until they reached steady state [ ]. We then mixed the fluorescent strains with the unlabeled ancestor in a ratio of approximately 1:9 and performed competitions in the chemostats for 92 hours or about 16 generations, sampling approximately every 2 to 3 generations. For each time point, at least 100,000 cells were analyzed using an Accuri flow cytometer to determine the relative abundance of each genotype. Previously, we established that the ancestral GAP1 CNV reporter has no detectable fitness effect compared to the unlabeled ancestral strain [ ]. However, the GAP1 CNV reporter with barcodes does appear to have a slight fitness cost associated with it; therefore, we took slightly different approaches to determine the selection coefficient relative to the ancestral state depending on whether or not a GAP1 CNV containing clone was barcoded. If a clone was not barcoded, we determined relative fitness using linear regression of the log ratio of the frequency of the 2 genotypes against the number of elapsed hours. If a clone was barcoded, relative fitness was computed using linear regression of the log ratio of the frequencies of the barcoded GAP1 CNV-containing clone and the unlabeled ancestor, and the log ratio of the frequencies of the unevolved barcoded GAP1 CNV reporter ancestor to the unlabeled ancestor against the number of elapsed hours, adding an additional interaction term for the evolved versus ancestral state. We converted relative fitness from per hour to generation by dividing by the natural log of 2.

## Barcode sequencing
In our prior study, populations with lineage tracking barcodes and the GAP1 CNV reporter were evolved in glutamine-limited chemostats [ ], and whole population samples were periodically frozen in 15% glycerol. To extract DNA, we thawed pelleted cells using centrifugation and extracted genomic DNA using a modified Hoffman–Winston protocol, preceded by incubation with zymolyase at 37°C to enhance cell lysis [ ]. We measured DNA quantity using a fluorometer and used all DNA from each sample as input to a sequential PCR protocol to amplify DNA barcodes which were then purified using a Nucleospin PCR clean-up kit, as described previously[ , ].
We measured fragment size with an Agilent TapeStation 2200 and performed qPCR to determine the final library concentration. DNA libraries were sequenced using a paired-end 2 × 150 bp protocol on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 using an XP workflow. Standard metrics were used to assess data quality (Q30 and %PF). We used the Bartender algorithm with UMI handling to account for PCR duplicates and to cluster sequences with merging decisions based solely on distance except in cases of low coverage (<500 reads/barcode), for which the default cluster merging threshold was used [ ]. Clusters with a size less than 4 or with high entropy (>0.75 quality score) were discarded. We estimated the relative abundance of barcodes using the number of unique reads supporting a cluster compared to total library size. Raw sequencing data is available through the SRA, BioProject ID PRJNA767552.

## Detecting adaptive lineages in barcoded clonal populations
To detect spontaneous adaptive mutations in a barcoded clonal cell population that is evolved for over time, we used a Python-based pipeline (which can be found at https://github.com/FangfeiLi05/PyFitMut) based on a previously developed theoretical framework [ ]. The pipeline identifies adaptive lineages and infers their fitness effects and establishment time. In a barcoded population, a lineage refers to cells that share the same DNA barcode. For each lineage in the barcoded population, beneficial mutations continually occur at a total beneficial mutation rate Ub, with fitness effect s, which results in a certain spectrum of fitness effects of mutations μ(s). If a beneficial mutant survives random drift and becomes large enough to grow deterministically (exponentially), we say that the mutation carried by the mutant has established. Here, we use Wright fitness s, which is defined as average number of additional t offspring of a cell per generation, that is, n(t) = n(0)·(1 + s), with n(t) being the total number of cells at generation t (can be nonintegers). Briefly, for each lineage, assuming that the lineage is adaptive (i.e., a lineage with a beneficial mutation occurred and established), then estimates of the fitness effect and establishment time of each lineage are made by random initialization, and the expected trajectory of each lineage is estimated and compared to the measured trajectory. Fitness effect and establishment time estimates are iteratively adjusted to better fit the observed data until an optimum is reached. At the same time, the expected trajectory of the lineage is also estimated assuming that the lineage is neutral. Finally, Bayesian inference is used to determine whether the lineage is adaptive or neutral. An accurate estimation of the mean fitness is necessary to detect mutations and quantify their fitness effects, but the mean fitness is a quantity that cannot be measured directly from the evolution. Rather, it needs to be inferred through other variables. Previously, the mean fitness was estimated by monitoring the decline of neutral lineages [ ]. However, this method fails when there is an insufficient number of neutral lineages as a result of low sequencing read depth. Here, we instead estimate the mean fitness using an iterative method. Specifically, we first initialize the mean fitness of the population as zero at each sequencing time point, then we estimate the fitness effect and establishment time for adaptive mutations, then we recalculate the mean fitness with the optimized fitness and establishment time estimates, repeating the process for several iterations until the mean fitness converges.

## Supporting information
S1 Table

## Wall time to run one simulation.
Running time for a single WF simulation or a single chemostat simulation for each of the following parameter combinations on a 2019 MacBook Pro operating Mac OS Catalina 10.15.7 with a 2.6 GHz 6-Core Intel Core i7 processor. Code required to generate this table can be found at https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/E9D5X. WF, Wright–Fisher.
(CSV)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Table

## Kullback–Leibler divergence for Gamma distributions fit from single inferred selection coefficients versus the true underlying DFE, or for directly inferred Gamma distributions versus the true underlying DFE.
Code required to generate this table can be found at https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/E9D5X. DFE, distribution of fitness effects.
(CSV)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Fig

## Interpolation for bc01 and bc02.
Populations gln01-gln09 and bc01-bc02 have different time points—the gln populations have 25 time points in total, whereas the bc populations have 32 time points in total. Of these, 12 of the time points are the same in both populations. To match the time points in the gln populations, we interpolated from the 2 nearest time points in the bc populations (using pandas.DataFrame.interpolate(“values”)). This way, we can use the same data (same time points) for inference for all 11 populations so that we can use the same amortized NPE posterior to infer parameters for both gln populations and bc populations. Original bc data are shown as black dots, the matched data, with interpolated time points, is shown as red crosses. Data and code required to generate this figure can be found at https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/E9D5X. NPE, Neural Posterior Estimation.
(PNG)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Fig

## Performance assessment of NPE with MAF using single simulated synthetic observations.
These show the results of inference on 5 simulated synthetic observations generated using either the WF or chemostat (Chemo) model (and inference performed with the same model) per combination of fitness effect sC and formation rate δC. Here, we show the results of performing one training set with NPE with MAF using 100,000 simulations for training and using the same amortized network to infer a posterior for each replicate synthetic observation. (A) Percentage of true parameters within the 50% HDR. (B) Distribution of widths of the fitness effect sC 95% HDI calculated as the difference between the 97.5 percentile and 2.5 percentile, for each inferred posterior distribution. (C) Distribution of the number of orders of magnitude encompassed by the formation rate δC 95% HDI, calculated as difference of the base 10 logarithms of the 97.5 percentile and 2.5 percentile, for each inferred posterior distribution. (D) Log ratio MAP estimate as compared to true parameters for sC and δC. Note that each panel has a different y-axis. (E) Mean and 95% confidence interval for RMSE of 50 posterior predictions as compared to the synthetic observation for which inference was performed. (F) RMSE of posterior prediction generated with MAP parameters as compared to the synthetic observation for which inference was performed. (G) Mean and 95% confidence interval for correlation coefficient of 50 posterior predictions compared to the synthetic observation for which inference was performed. (H) Correlation coefficient of posterior prediction posterior prediction generated with MAP parameters compared to the synthetic observation for which inference was performed. Data and code required to generate this figure can be found at https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/E9D5X. HDI, highest density interval; HDR, highest density region; MAF, masked autoregressive flow; MAP, maximum a posteriori; NPE, Neural Posterior Estimation; RMSE, root mean square error; WF, Wright–Fisher.
(PNG)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Fig

## NPE with the WF model performs as well or better than other combinations of model and method.
Results of inference on 5 simulated single synthetic observations generated using either the WF or chemostat (Chemo) model (and inference performed with the same model) per combination of fitness effect sC and formation rate δC. Here, we show the results of performing training with NPE with NSF using 100,000 simulations for training and using the same amortized network to infer a posterior for each replicate synthetic observation, or ABC-SMC when the training budget was 10,000. (A) RMSE (lower is better) of posterior prediction generated with MAP parameters as compared to the synthetic observation on which inference was performed. (B) Correlation coefficient (higher is better) of posterior prediction generated with MAP parameters compared to the synthetic observation on which inference was performed. (C) Mean and 95% confidence interval for correlation coefficient (higher is better) of 50 posterior predictions (sampled from the posterior distribution) compared to the synthetic observation on which inference was performed. Data and code required to generate this figure can be found at https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/E9D5X. ABC-SMC, Approximate Bayesian Computation with Sequential Monte Carlo; MAP, maximum a posteriori; NPE, Neural Posterior Estimation; RMSE, root mean square error; WF, Wright–Fisher.
(PNG)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Fig

## NPE and WF have the lowest information criteria.
WAIC and AIC (lower is better) of models fitted on single synthetic observations using either the WF or chemostat (Chemo) model and either ABC-SMC or NPE for different combinations of fitness effect sC and formation rate δC with simulation budgets of 10,000 or 100,000 simulations per inference procedure (facets). We were unable to complete ABC-SMC with the chemostat model (red) when the training budget was 100,000 within a reasonable time frame. Data and code required to generate this figure can be found at https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/E9D5X. ABC-SMC, Approximate Bayesian Computation with Sequential Monte Carlo; AIC, Akaike information criterion; NPE, Neural Posterior Estimation; WAIC, widely applicable information criterion; WF, Wright–Fisher.
(PNG)
Click here for additional data file.
S5 Fig

## NPE performs similar to or better than ABC-SMC for 8 additional parameter combinations.
The figure shows the results of inference on 5 simulated synthetic observations using the WF model per combination of fitness effect sC and formation rate δC. Simulations and inference were performed using the same model. For NPE, each training set corresponds to an independently amortized posterior distribution trained on a different set of 100,000 simulations, with which each synthetic observation was evaluated to produce a separate posterior distribution. For ABC-SMC, each training set corresponds to independent inference procedures on each observation with a maximum of 100,000 total simulations accepted for each inference procedure and a stopping criteria of 10 iterations or ε < = 0.002, whichever occurs first. (A) The percent of true parameters within the 50% or 95% HDR of the inferred posterior distribution. The bar height shows the average of 3 training sets. (B, C) Distribution of widths of 95% HDI of the posterior distribution of the fitness effect sC (B) and CNV formation rate δC (C), calculated as the difference between the 97.5 percentile and 2.5 percentile, for each separately inferred posterior distribution. (D) Log ratio (relative error) of MAP estimate to true parameter for sC and δC. Note the different y-axis ranges. A perfectly accurate MAP estimate would have a log ratio of zero. (E) Mean and 95% confidence interval for RMSE of 50 posterior predictions as compared to the synthetic observation for which inference was performed. (F) RMSE of posterior prediction generated with MAP parameters as compared to the synthetic observation for which inference was performed. (G) Mean and 95% confidence interval for correlation coefficient of 50 posterior predictions compared to the synthetic observation for which inference was performed. (H) Correlation coefficient of posterior prediction posterior prediction generated with MAP parameters compared to the synthetic observation for which inference was performed. Data and code required to generate this figure can be found at https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/E9D5X. ABC-SMC, Approximate Bayesian Computation with Sequential Monte Carlo; HDI, highest density interval; HDR, highest density region; MAP, maximum a posteriori; NPE, Neural Posterior Estimation; RMSE, root mean square error; WF, Wright–Fisher.
(PNG)
Click here for additional data file.
S6 Fig

## Effect of simulation budget on relative error of MAP estimate and width of HDIs.
For NPE, amortized posteriors were estimated using either 10,000 or 100,000 simulations, with which each synthetic observation was evaluated to produce a separate posterior distribution. For ABC-SMC, a posterior was independently inferred for each observation with a maximum of 10,000 or 100,000 total simulations accepted and a stopping criteria of 10 iterations or ε < = 0.002, whichever occurs first. The gray lines in (A, D) indicates a relative error of zero (i.e., no difference between MAP parameters and true parameters). (D, E, F) We were unable to complete ABC-SMC with the chemostat model (red) when the training budget was 100,000 within a reasonable time frame. Data and code required to generate this figure can be found at https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/E9D5X. ABC-SMC, Approximate Bayesian Computation with Sequential Monte Carlo; MAP, maximum a posteriori; NPE, Neural Posterior Estimation.
(PNG)
Click here for additional data file.
S7 Fig

## The cumulative number of simulations needed to estimate posterior distributions for multiple observations.
The x-axis shows the number of replicate simulated synthetic observations for a combination of parameters, and the y-axis shows the cumulative number of simulations needed to infer posteriors for an increasing number of observations (see the “Overview of inference strategies” section for more details), for observations with different combinations of CNV selection coefficient sC and CNV formation rate δC
(A–D). Each facet represents a total simulation budget for NPE, or the maximum number of accepted simulations for ABC-SMC. Since NPE uses amortization, a single amortized network is trained with 10,000 or 100,000 simulations, and that network is then used to infer posteriors for each observation (note that a single amortized network was used to infer posteriors for all parameter combinations.) For ABC-SMC, each observation requires a separate inference procedure to be performed individually, and not all generated simulations are accepted for posterior estimation; therefore, the number of simulations used for a single observation may be more than the acceptance threshold, and the number of simulations needed increases with the number of observations for which a posterior is inferred. Data and code required to generate this figure can be found at https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/E9D5X. ABC-SMC, Approximate Bayesian Computation with Sequential Monte Carlo; CNV, copy number variant; NPE, Neural Posterior Estimation.
(PNG)
Click here for additional data file.
S8 Fig

## Results of inference on 5 simulated synthetic observations generated using either the WF or chemostat (Chemo) model per combination of fitness effect sC and formation rate δC.
We performed inference on each synthetic observation using both models. For NPE, each training set corresponds to an independent amortized posterior trained with 100,000 simulations, with which each synthetic observation was evaluated. (A) Percentage of true parameters within the 50% HDR. The bar height shows the average of 3 training sets. (B) Percentage of true parameters within the 95% HDR. The bar height shows the average of 3 training sets. Data and code required to generate this figure can be found at https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/E9D5X. HDR, highest density region; NPE, Neural Posterior Estimation; WF, Wright–Fisher.
(PNG)
Click here for additional data file.
S9 Fig

## A set of 11 simulated synthetic observations was generated from a WF model with CNV selection coefficients sampled from an Gamma distribution where α = 10 of fitness effects (DFE) (black curve).
The MAP DFEs (blue curves) were directly inferred using 3 different subsets of 8 out of 11 synthetic observations. We also inferred the selection coefficient for each observation in the set of 11 individually, and fit Gamma distributions to sets of 8 inferred selection coefficients (green curves). All inferences were performed with NPE using the same amortized network to infer a posterior for each set of 8 synthetic observations or each single observation. Data and code required to generate this figure can be found at https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/E9D5X. DFE, distribution of fitness effects; MAP, maximum a posteriori; NPE, Neural Posterior Estimation; WF, Wright–Fisher.
(PNG)
Click here for additional data file.
S10 FigOut-of-sample posterior predictive accuracy using RMSE (A) or correlation (B) using 3 held out observations when α and β are directly inferred from the other 8 observations, for α = 1 or α = 10 (facets). Data and code required to generate this figure can be found at https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/E9D5X. RMSE, root mean square error.
(PNG)
Click here for additional data file.
S11 FigProportion of the population with a GAP1 CNV in the experimental observations (black) and in posterior predictions using the MAP estimate shown in panels A and B with either the WF or chemostat (Chemo) model. Inference was performed with all data up to generation 267 (WF ppc 267, Chemo ppc 267), or excluding data after generation 116 (WF ppc 116, Chemo ppc 116). Formation rate and fitness effect of other beneficial mutations set to 10−5 and 10−3, respectively. Data and code required to generate this figure can be found at https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/E9D5X. MAP, maximum a posteriori; WF, Wright–Fisher.
(PNG)
Click here for additional data file.
S12 Fig

## MAP predictions have lower error when inference is performed using only up to generation 116 and are most accurate for the first 116 generations.
MAP posterior prediction RMSE when inference was performed excluding data after generation 116 (left) or using all data up to generation 267 (right). RMSE was calculated using either the first 116 generations or using up to generation 267 (x-axis). Data and code required to generate this figure can be found at https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/E9D5X. MAP, maximum a posteriori; RMSE, root mean square error.
(PNG)
Click here for additional data file.
S13 FigThe inferred MAP estimate and 95% HDIs for fitness effect sC and formation rate δC, using the (A) WF or (B) chemostat (Chemo) model and NPE for each experimental population from Lauer and colleagues (2018). Inference was either performed with data up to generation 116 or with all data, up to generation 267 (facets). Each training set corresponds to 3 independent amortized posterior distributions estimated with 100,000 simulations. Data and code required to generate this figure can be found at https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/E9D5X. HDI, highest density interval; MAP, maximum a posteriori; NPE, Neural Posterior Estimation; WF, Wright–Fisher.
(PNG)
Click here for additional data file.
S14 Fig

## Sensitivity analysis.
GAP1 CNV formation rate and selection coefficient inferred using NPE with the WF model does not change considerably when other beneficial mutations have different selection coefficients sB and formation rates δB, except when both sB and δB are high (purple). Data and code required to generate this figure can be found at https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/E9D5X. CNV, copy number variant; NPE, Neural Posterior Estimation; WF, Wright–Fisher.
(PNG)
Click here for additional data file.
S15 FigMean and 95% confidence interval for RMSE (A) and correlation (B) of 50 posterior predictions compared to empirical observations up to generation 116, using posterior distributions inferred when other beneficial mutations have different selection coefficients sB and formation rates δB. Data and code required to generate this figure can be found at https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/E9D5X. RMSE, root mean square error.
(PNG)
Click here for additional data file.

We thank Uri Obolski, Ilia Kohanovski, Mark Siegal, Molly Przeworski, and members of the Gresham and Ram labs for discussions and comments.

## Abbreviations:
ABCApproximate Bayesian Computation
ABC-SMCApproximate Bayesian Computation with Sequential Monte Carlo
AICAkaike information criterion
CNVcopy number variant
DFEdistribution of fitness effects
HDIhighest density interval
HDRhighest density region
KDEkernel density estimate
MAFmasked autoregressive flow
MAPmaximum a posteriori
NPENeural Posterior Estimation
NSFneural spline flow
RMSEroot mean square error
WAICwidely applicable information criterion
 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001633.r001Decision Letter 0
RobertsRoland GSenior Editor© 2022 Roland G Roberts2022Roland G Robertshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
11 Oct 2021

Dear David, 
Thank you for submitting your manuscript entitled "Simulation-based inference of evolutionary parameters from adaptation dynamics using neural networks" for consideration as a Research Article by PLOS Biology.
Your manuscript has now been evaluated by the PLOS Biology editorial staff, as well as by an academic editor with relevant expertise, and I'm writing to let you know that we would like to send your submission out for external peer review.
IMPORTANT: We note that although you submitted this paper as a regular Research Article, we think that it would much more appropriate to review it as a Methods and Resources paper. Please could you change the article type to "Methods and Resources" when you upload your additional metadata (see next paragraph)?
However, before we can send your manuscript to reviewers, we need you to complete your submission by providing the metadata that is required for full assessment. To this end, please login to Editorial Manager where you will find the paper in the 'Submissions Needing Revisions' folder on your homepage. Please click 'Revise Submission' from the Action Links and complete all additional questions in the submission questionnaire.
Once your full submission is complete, your paper will undergo a series of checks in preparation for peer review. Once your manuscript has passed the checks it will be sent out for review. 
If your manuscript has been previously reviewed at another journal, PLOS Biology is willing to work with those reviews in order to avoid re-starting the process. Submission of the previous reviews is entirely optional and our ability to use them effectively will depend on the willingness of the previous journal to confirm the content of the reports and share the reviewer identities. Please note that we reserve the right to invite additional reviewers if we consider that additional/independent reviewers are needed, although we aim to avoid this as far as possible. In our experience, working with previous reviews does save time. 
If you would like to send your previous reviewer reports to us, please specify this in the cover letter, mentioning the name of the previous journal and the manuscript ID the study was given, and include a point-by-point response to reviewers that details how you have or plan to address the reviewers' concerns. Please contact me at the email that can be found below my signature if you have questions. 
Please re-submit your manuscript within two working days, i.e. by Oct 13 2021 11:59PM.
Login to Editorial Manager here: https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology

During resubmission, you will be invited to opt-in to posting your pre-review manuscript as a bioRxiv preprint. Visit http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/preprints for full details. If you consent to posting your current manuscript as a preprint, please upload a single Preprint PDF when you re-submit. 
Given the disruptions resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, please expect delays in the editorial process. We apologise in advance for any inconvenience caused and will do our best to minimize impact as far as possible.
Feel free to email us at plosbiology@plos.org if you have any queries relating to your submission.
Kind regards,
Roli
Roland Roberts
Senior Editor
PLOS Biology

rroberts@plos.org

10.1371/journal.pbio.3001633.r002Decision Letter 1
RobertsRoland GSenior Editor© 2022 Roland G Roberts2022Roland G Robertshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
3 Dec 2021

Dear David,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript entitled "Simulation-based inference of evolutionary parameters from adaptation dynamics using neural networks" for review as a Methods and Resources paper by PLOS Biology. As with all papers reviewed by the journal, yours was assessed and discussed by the PLOS Biology editors, an academic editor with relevant expertise and in this case by three independent reviewers. Based on the reviews, I regret that we will not be pursuing this manuscript for publication in the journal.
You’ll see that while reviewer #2 seems positive, both reviewers #1 and #3 are concerned that the comparison between the two methods is problematical. Among other concerns, reviewer #1 thinks that your approach is unnecessarily complicated and rev #3 thinks that its usefulness is very limited. Both reviewers #1 and #3 suggested PLOS Comp Bio as a possible alternative venue for this study.
The reviews are attached and we hope they may help you, should you decide to revise the manuscript for submission elsewhere. I'm sorry that we can't be more positive on this occasion. 
While we cannot consider your manuscript for publication in PLOS Biology, we suggest that you consider transferring your manuscript to PLOS Computational Biology (two of the reviewers made this recommendation). The PLOS journals are editorially independent, so we cannot guarantee it will be reviewed there, and you would need to address the reviewers' concerns before consideration.
If you would like to submit your work to PLOS Computational Biology, which is editorially independent, please click the following link:
<DeepLinkData><DeepLinkTypeID>27</DeepLinkTypeID><peopleID>261898</peopleID><userSecurityID>78872ea5-2994-4669-9617-0c941690a8ae</userSecurityID><documentID>47479</documentID><revision>1</revision><manuscriptNumber>PBIOLOGY-D-21-02590</manuscriptNumber><docSecurityID>b7d4fabc-2c99-401d-93dd-abb58fce55de</docSecurityID></DeepLinkData>
If you do not wish to submit your work to PLOS Computational Biology, please click this link to decline: 
<DeepLinkData><DeepLinkTypeID>28</DeepLinkTypeID><peopleID>261898</peopleID><userSecurityID>78872ea5-2994-4669-9617-0c941690a8ae</userSecurityID><documentID>47479</documentID><revision>1</revision><manuscriptNumber>PBIOLOGY-D-21-02590</manuscriptNumber><docSecurityID>b7d4fabc-2c99-401d-93dd-abb58fce55de</docSecurityID></DeepLinkData>
Please note, you can log into the submission sites with the same login that you used to submit to this journal. 
Should you choose to transfer your submission, you will receive a confirmation email within 24-48 hours after accepting the transfer. If you have any questions, please feel free to contact the journal at plosbiology@plos.org.
I hope you have found this review process constructive and that you will consider publishing your work in PLOS in future. Thank you for your support of PLOS and of Open Access publishing.
Sincerely,
Roli
Roland Roberts
Senior Editor
PLOS Biology

rroberts@plos.org

------------------------------------------------------------------------
REVIEWERS' COMMENTS:
Reviewer #1:
The following review comments are based upon version R1 of the manuscript.
Avecilla et al compare the results of two methods for evolutionary inference, as applied to learning the rate of generation, and the selective advantage, of copy number variants in a population. A method of neural posterior estimation (NPE) outperforms a method of Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC). I have preliminary comments about the question addressed in this study, followed by comments about the manuscript itself.
Preliminary comments
P1: As I understand it, evolutionary inference involves fitting a model to data so as to estimate evolutionary parameters. This requires a choice of model e.g. Wright-Fisher, a distance function, which describes the closeness of the output of the model to the observed data, and a means via which the parameter space of the model can be explored.
P2: As I understand it, the difference between the ABC and NPE methods that are applied here is the manner in which they explore parameter space. The models used and the distance functions are the same in each case.
P3: The example problem given of inferring mutation rates and selection coefficients is relatively simple. The output from the model, describing the proportion of cells with GAP1 CNV, is one-dimensional, if time-dependent, while the space of inferred parameters is only two-dimensional, with a selection coefficient s_C, and a mutation rate \\delta_C.
P4: Given point P3, I would expect a very simple model to produce a decent solution to this problem. For example, taking each replicate in turn, I expect that it would be possible to propose initial values of {s_C, \\delta_C}, then iteratively change these values in the manner of a downhill optimisation (i.e. accepting new parameters that give smaller distances between the model and the data) so as to infer optimal parameters for each replicate.
Comments:
1. While I appreciate the value of ABC methods in cases where a likelihood function is intractable I am not convinced that this is true for a Wright-Fisher model. Where allele frequency data is collected from a population using genome sequencing of representative samples from a population, the output would be expected to approximate a binomial sample under perfect sequencing and sampling, or an overdispersed binomial sample given errors. Where short reads are collected from a large part of the genome that is subject to copy number variation, the number of reads from that region would be expected to approximate a Poisson distribution under perfect sampling, or in reality more likely an overdispersed Poisson model. The variances of distributions can be estimated via repeat sampling or variance from deterministic behaviour; under these circumstances, and given the desire to estimate a posterior distribution that reflects the extent of uncertainty in the data, is there an advantage to a likelihood-free approach?
2. The results section says that interpolation was used to match time points between experiments. I am concerned about the effect of this on the biological inferences made. When making estimates from these data (as opposed to testing on real data) could the methods be applied simply to the data?
3. I am concerned about what precisely can be learnt from the comparison of the two methods. While it is claimed that the NPE method outperforms the ABC method, and results are shown to demonstrate this, I don't understand why the ABC method does worse. Given the simplicity of the problem, what is going wrong? Could it be that:
i) The ABC method is equally as good, but is computationally less efficient? For example, running the ABC method for more iterations gave a better result. Is ABC bad at exploring parameter space, or just slow to converge?
ii) Both methods are equally good, but the specific implementation of the ABC method you are using is not a good one, for example in terms of not having been coded very well or in an efficient manner?
While I accept the results of the comparison, I am left unconvinced as to whether NPE is particularly good, or whether ABC is just extraordinarily bad. Further, while I am aware of the potential for neural networks in machine learning applications I am also unconvinced about whether this particular application is a case of using an overly-complicated technology to solve a very simple problem. Is there a reason why naive parameter optimisation would not work for these data?
Minor comments:
1. Where details are given about numbers of iterations and so forth, it would be valuable to have a measure of the actual time taken to run the optimisation i.e. how many minutes and on what sort of machine.
2. The abstract mentions yeast. Is this S. cerevisiae?
Reviewer #2:
This manuscript presents a thorough analysis of the use of likelihood-free methods to infer the formation rate and fitness effects of CNVs from adaptive evolution experiments in which a fluorescent reporter is used to quantify CNV dynamics. The authors show based on simulations that CNV formation rates and fitness effects can be determined accurately using likelihood-free inference on both Wright-Fisher and chemostat models, except if the CNV has a very low formation rate and selection coefficient. Neural posterior estimation (NPE) was found to outperform approximate Bayesian computation with sequential Monte Carlo (ABC-SMC) as a likelihood-free inference algorithm. Furthermore, the authors validate their approach on experimental data, showing that NPE inference under Wright-Fisher or chemostat models yields similar selection coefficient estimates as obtained through barcode-based lineage tracking and pairwise competition assays.
Overall, the study convincingly shows that NPE-based likelihood-free inference is well-suited to obtain CNV formation rates and fitness effects from chemostat adaptive evolution experiments using fluorescent reporters. These results also open perspectives for efficient determination of mutation rates and selection coefficients in other experimental evolution setups. In brief, the methodology outlined here may be very valuable to the experimental evolution community.
The setup of the study is well thought-out and the manuscript is well-written. I have no major comments on the analyses performed or their presentation, but I do have a couple of minor points I feel should be addressed:
- While performing inference on a set of observations, the authors conclude that estimating the DFE through inference of individual selection coefficients from each observation is superior to inference of the distribution from multiple observations. Any suggestions on why this might be ?
- While inferring the GAP1 CNV selection coefficient and formation rate from empirical data, the authors find that the inferred GAP1 CNV formation rate under the Wright-Fisher model is higher than under the chemostat model. It might be worth pointing out that this is consistent with the overprediction of formation rates under Wright-Fisher in the simulation results when selection coefficients are high. This does suggest that Wright-Fisher is not the best-suited model to use in all real-world cases, in particular if many beneficial CNVs would turn out to have strong selection coefficients. Maybe this should be mentioned more explicitly.
- Why was only bc01 used for lineage tracking and not bc02 ?
- Figure 6 : add labels for training sets
- 'The difference between any combination of model and method was less than 2 for δC=10-5 and sC=0.001' : 10-5 needs to be 10-7.
- reference to 'Figure 2C, Supplementary XX' and several references to 'Supplementary Files' need to be amended
- labels of Supp Fig 3 partially fall off page.
- '...as well or better than direct inference of the DFE from a set of observations for both α = 1 (an exponential distribution) and α = 10 (sum of ten exponentials) (Figure 5)' : refer to Supp Fig 6 here as well.
- Supp Fig 13 : I don't understand what μ(s) is exactly, how it was inferred from the data, and why this plot is a histogram rather than a dot plot.
- The formulas for the frequencies of different genotypes after mutation in the Evolutionary models section of the Methods contains some errors. δN in the first equation should be δB, xC in the second equation should be xB and xN in the third equation should be xC.
- It is unclear where the formula for estimating the effective population size in the chemostat comes from. There seems to be a factor 2 missing in front of var(p'|p) and the averaging likely applies to the entire fraction rather than only the denominator. Additionally, the harmonic mean may be preferable for averaging over generations rather than the arithmetic mean. 
- 'If a clone was barcoded, relative fitness using linear regression of the natural logarithm of the ratio of the barcoded GAP1 CNV containing clone to the unlabeled ancestor, and the natural logarithm of the ratio of the unevolved barcoded GAP1 CNV reporter ancestor to the unlabeled ancestor against the number of elapsed hours, adding an additional interaction term for the evolved versus ancestral state.' : something is missing in this sentence.
- 'For each lineage in the barcoded population, beneficial mutations continually occur at a total beneficial mutation rate Ub, with fitness effect s, with a certain spectrum of fitness effects of mutations —(s).' : something is off in this sentence.
Reviewer #3:
[identifies himself as Thomas Bataillon]
[see also the attached marked up version of the manuscript PDF]
General comments
The submitted ms focuses on a specific question within the field of the genetics of adaptation in (completely asexual ) populations: estimating the mutation rate and selective effect of mutation at a specific locus while treating the rest of the genome "separately". This is warranted especially if one knows in advance that most of the action can be traced back to the locus of interest. The methods developed here are heavily inspired by a specific "yeast settings" that looks promising to track evolution in real time but where it is difficult to see how the system can give broad insights and how the methods developed and tested here can generalize to other settings.
Major issues.
A. The element that I find most limiting currently is that the inference methods that are presented here only are estimating two parameters: the rate of mutation at a specific locus (here the gap1 CNV) and effect of a beneficial mutation at this locus. All inference is predicated on the assumption that all other important parameters are "known" independently . This includes at least three critical evolutionary parameters that are notoriously difficult to estimate from data:
- the genome wide mutation rates at other loci in the genome
- the distribution of fitness effects of these "other" mutations
- the effective size realized during the whole experiment.
This makes for a very idiosyncratic study where it is hard generalize / gain insights for to a broader range of situations in experimental evolution.
B. The methodology used for comparing inference methods (ABC versus NPE) and to appreciate how the different estimators are behaving is very difficult to follow ( scattered between an overview , a method and numerous figures and supplementary figure legends), but after reading through carefully a few points are really baffling me :
In short :
1. it is hard to see how the two methods ( SMS-ABC and NPE) are compared on equal foots (in term of amount of computation made available to ensure that methods return sensible approximate posterior distribution) (see numerous comments to the authors in the annotated PDF) . It seems that ABC-SMC typically needs at least 10^5 simulations to approximate sensibly posteriors but it seems that in the main figure ( figure3) only a tenth are allowed (if I understood the figure legend) .
2. It seems that the comparisons made are based on at best a handful (usually 5 max in some instance apparently 15 ) of truly independent datasets simulated on very specific scenarios. (see my numerous comments on Figure 3 and several suppl figures comparing the methods)
I think a disproportionate emphasis is put on claiming superiority of NPE relative to BAC-SMC . I really have no share on either method . I am open to the fact that NPE is potentially superior to ABC-SMC.. but I currently remain unconvinced (because of points 1 and 2 above).
C. Scoping of the method / state of the art
Overall, that there is too much space devoted to comparing these methods and what is best and the manuscript could benefit by placing the inference proposed here in a wider context of numerous similar studies inferring the DFE of beneficial mutations using different experimental settings (eg EMPIRIC or other yeast based method or a plethora of work on E coli and what we have learned about beneficial mutations using these systems).
I also think that the ms would be stronger if there is more space devoted to exploring how much the inference is robust to the strong assumptions that all three other nuisance parameters are known without error in advance .
I hope that the comments I am enclosing along directly on the PDF are also useful
Best regards
Thomas Bataillon
AttachmentSubmitted filename: PBIOLOGY-D-21-02590_R1_reviewer-1_comments.pdf
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pbio.3001633.r003Decision Letter 2
RobertsRoland GSenior Editor© 2022 Roland G Roberts2022Roland G Robertshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
21 Jan 2022

Dear David,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript "Simulation-based inference of evolutionary parameters from adaptation dynamics using neural networks" for consideration as a Methods and Resources paper at PLOS Biology. As mentioned in our previous communication, we have discussed the points that you raised in your Appeal with the Academic Editor, and they agree that you should be given a chance to address the concerns raised by the reviewers. Thank for your patience over the holiday period.
As mentioned previously, you’ll see that while reviewer #2 seems positive, both reviewers #1 and #3 are concerned that the comparison between the two methods is problematical. Among other concerns, reviewer #1 thinks that your approach is unnecessarily complicated and rev #3 thinks that its usefulness is very limited. We would be very interested to see your responses to these criticisms.
In light of the reviews (below), we will not be able to accept the current version of the manuscript, but we would welcome re-submission of a much-revised version that takes into account the reviewers' comments. We cannot make any decision about publication until we have seen the revised manuscript and your response to the reviewers' comments. Your revised manuscript is also likely to be sent for further evaluation by the reviewers.
We expect to receive your revised manuscript within 3 months. 
Please email us (plosbiology@plos.org) if you have any questions or concerns, or would like to request an extension. At this stage, your manuscript remains formally under active consideration at our journal; please notify us by email if you do not intend to submit a revision so that we may end consideration of the manuscript at PLOS Biology.
**IMPORTANT - SUBMITTING YOUR REVISION**
Your revisions should address the specific points made by each reviewer. Please submit the following files along with your revised manuscript:
1. A 'Response to Reviewers' file - this should detail your responses to the editorial requests, present a point-by-point response to all of the reviewers' comments, and indicate the changes made to the manuscript. 
*NOTE: In your point by point response to the reviewers, please provide the full context of each review. Do not selectively quote paragraphs or sentences to reply to. The entire set of reviewer comments should be present in full and each specific point should be responded to individually, point by point.
You should also cite any additional relevant literature that has been published since the original submission and mention any additional citations in your response. 
2. In addition to a clean copy of the manuscript, please also upload a 'track-changes' version of your manuscript that specifies the edits made. This should be uploaded as a "Related" file type. 
*Re-submission Checklist*
When you are ready to resubmit your revised manuscript, please refer to this re-submission checklist: https://plos.io/Biology_Checklist
To submit a revised version of your manuscript, please go to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/ and log in as an Author. Click the link labelled 'Submissions Needing Revision' where you will find your submission record. 
Please make sure to read the following important policies and guidelines while preparing your revision:
*Published Peer Review*
Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out. Please see here for more details:

https://blogs.plos.org/plos/2019/05/plos-journals-now-open-for-published-peer-review/

*PLOS Data Policy*
Please note that as a condition of publication PLOS' data policy (http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/data-availability) requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions arrived at in your manuscript. If you have not already done so, you must include any data used in your manuscript either in appropriate repositories, within the body of the manuscript, or as supporting information (N.B. this includes any numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.). For an example see here: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5

*Blot and Gel Data Policy*
We require the original, uncropped and minimally adjusted images supporting all blot and gel results reported in an article's figures or Supporting Information files. We will require these files before a manuscript can be accepted so please prepare them now, if you have not already uploaded them. Please carefully read our guidelines for how to prepare and upload this data: https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/figures#loc-blot-and-gel-reporting-requirements

*Protocols deposition*
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
Thank you again for your submission to our journal. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive thus far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Roli
Roland Roberts
Senior Editor
PLOS Biology

rroberts@plos.org

*****************************************************
REVIEWERS' COMMENTS:
Reviewer #1:
The following review comments are based upon version R1 of the manuscript.
Avecilla et al compare the results of two methods for evolutionary inference, as applied to learning the rate of generation, and the selective advantage, of copy number variants in a population. A method of neural posterior estimation (NPE) outperforms a method of Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC). I have preliminary comments about the question addressed in this study, followed by comments about the manuscript itself.
Preliminary comments
P1: As I understand it, evolutionary inference involves fitting a model to data so as to estimate evolutionary parameters. This requires a choice of model e.g. Wright-Fisher, a distance function, which describes the closeness of the output of the model to the observed data, and a means via which the parameter space of the model can be explored.
P2: As I understand it, the difference between the ABC and NPE methods that are applied here is the manner in which they explore parameter space. The models used and the distance functions are the same in each case.
P3: The example problem given of inferring mutation rates and selection coefficients is relatively simple. The output from the model, describing the proportion of cells with GAP1 CNV, is one-dimensional, if time-dependent, while the space of inferred parameters is only two-dimensional, with a selection coefficient s_C, and a mutation rate \\delta_C.
P4: Given point P3, I would expect a very simple model to produce a decent solution to this problem. For example, taking each replicate in turn, I expect that it would be possible to propose initial values of {s_C, \\delta_C}, then iteratively change these values in the manner of a downhill optimisation (i.e. accepting new parameters that give smaller distances between the model and the data) so as to infer optimal parameters for each replicate.
Comments:
1. While I appreciate the value of ABC methods in cases where a likelihood function is intractable I am not convinced that this is true for a Wright-Fisher model. Where allele frequency data is collected from a population using genome sequencing of representative samples from a population, the output would be expected to approximate a binomial sample under perfect sequencing and sampling, or an overdispersed binomial sample given errors. Where short reads are collected from a large part of the genome that is subject to copy number variation, the number of reads from that region would be expected to approximate a Poisson distribution under perfect sampling, or in reality more likely an overdispersed Poisson model. The variances of distributions can be estimated via repeat sampling or variance from deterministic behaviour; under these circumstances, and given the desire to estimate a posterior distribution that reflects the extent of uncertainty in the data, is there an advantage to a likelihood-free approach?
2. The results section says that interpolation was used to match time points between experiments. I am concerned about the effect of this on the biological inferences made. When making estimates from these data (as opposed to testing on real data) could the methods be applied simply to the data?
3. I am concerned about what precisely can be learnt from the comparison of the two methods. While it is claimed that the NPE method outperforms the ABC method, and results are shown to demonstrate this, I don't understand why the ABC method does worse. Given the simplicity of the problem, what is going wrong? Could it be that:
i) The ABC method is equally as good, but is computationally less efficient? For example, running the ABC method for more iterations gave a better result. Is ABC bad at exploring parameter space, or just slow to converge?
ii) Both methods are equally good, but the specific implementation of the ABC method you are using is not a good one, for example in terms of not having been coded very well or in an efficient manner?
While I accept the results of the comparison, I am left unconvinced as to whether NPE is particularly good, or whether ABC is just extraordinarily bad. Further, while I am aware of the potential for neural networks in machine learning applications I am also unconvinced about whether this particular application is a case of using an overly-complicated technology to solve a very simple problem. Is there a reason why naive parameter optimisation would not work for these data?
Minor comments:
1. Where details are given about numbers of iterations and so forth, it would be valuable to have a measure of the actual time taken to run the optimisation i.e. how many minutes and on what sort of machine.
2. The abstract mentions yeast. Is this S. cerevisiae?
Reviewer #2:
This manuscript presents a thorough analysis of the use of likelihood-free methods to infer the formation rate and fitness effects of CNVs from adaptive evolution experiments in which a fluorescent reporter is used to quantify CNV dynamics. The authors show based on simulations that CNV formation rates and fitness effects can be determined accurately using likelihood-free inference on both Wright-Fisher and chemostat models, except if the CNV has a very low formation rate and selection coefficient. Neural posterior estimation (NPE) was found to outperform approximate Bayesian computation with sequential Monte Carlo (ABC-SMC) as a likelihood-free inference algorithm. Furthermore, the authors validate their approach on experimental data, showing that NPE inference under Wright-Fisher or chemostat models yields similar selection coefficient estimates as obtained through barcode-based lineage tracking and pairwise competition assays.
Overall, the study convincingly shows that NPE-based likelihood-free inference is well-suited to obtain CNV formation rates and fitness effects from chemostat adaptive evolution experiments using fluorescent reporters. These results also open perspectives for efficient determination of mutation rates and selection coefficients in other experimental evolution setups. In brief, the methodology outlined here may be very valuable to the experimental evolution community.
The setup of the study is well thought-out and the manuscript is well-written. I have no major comments on the analyses performed or their presentation, but I do have a couple of minor points I feel should be addressed:
- While performing inference on a set of observations, the authors conclude that estimating the DFE through inference of individual selection coefficients from each observation is superior to inference of the distribution from multiple observations. Any suggestions on why this might be ?
- While inferring the GAP1 CNV selection coefficient and formation rate from empirical data, the authors find that the inferred GAP1 CNV formation rate under the Wright-Fisher model is higher than under the chemostat model. It might be worth pointing out that this is consistent with the overprediction of formation rates under Wright-Fisher in the simulation results when selection coefficients are high. This does suggest that Wright-Fisher is not the best-suited model to use in all real-world cases, in particular if many beneficial CNVs would turn out to have strong selection coefficients. Maybe this should be mentioned more explicitly.
- Why was only bc01 used for lineage tracking and not bc02 ?
- Figure 6 : add labels for training sets
- 'The difference between any combination of model and method was less than 2 for δC=10-5 and sC=0.001' : 10-5 needs to be 10-7.
- reference to 'Figure 2C, Supplementary XX' and several references to 'Supplementary Files' need to be amended
- labels of Supp Fig 3 partially fall off page.
- '...as well or better than direct inference of the DFE from a set of observations for both α = 1 (an exponential distribution) and α = 10 (sum of ten exponentials) (Figure 5)' : refer to Supp Fig 6 here as well.
- Supp Fig 13 : I don't understand what μ(s) is exactly, how it was inferred from the data, and why this plot is a histogram rather than a dot plot.
- The formulas for the frequencies of different genotypes after mutation in the Evolutionary models section of the Methods contains some errors. δN in the first equation should be δB, xC in the second equation should be xB and xN in the third equation should be xC.
- It is unclear where the formula for estimating the effective population size in the chemostat comes from. There seems to be a factor 2 missing in front of var(p'|p) and the averaging likely applies to the entire fraction rather than only the denominator. Additionally, the harmonic mean may be preferable for averaging over generations rather than the arithmetic mean.
- 'If a clone was barcoded, relative fitness using linear regression of the natural logarithm of the ratio of the barcoded GAP1 CNV containing clone to the unlabeled ancestor, and the natural logarithm of the ratio of the unevolved barcoded GAP1 CNV reporter ancestor to the unlabeled ancestor against the number of elapsed hours, adding an additional interaction term for the evolved versus ancestral state.' : something is missing in this sentence.
- 'For each lineage in the barcoded population, beneficial mutations continually occur at a total beneficial mutation rate Ub, with fitness effect s, with a certain spectrum of fitness effects of mutations —(s).' : something is off in this sentence.
Reviewer #3:
[identifies himself as Thomas Bataillon]
[see also the attached marked up version of the manuscript PDF]
General comments
The submitted ms focuses on a specific question within the field of the genetics of adaptation in (completely asexual ) populations: estimating the mutation rate and selective effect of mutation at a specific locus while treating the rest of the genome "separately". This is warranted especially if one knows in advance that most of the action can be traced back to the locus of interest. The methods developed here are heavily inspired by a specific "yeast settings" that looks promising to track evolution in real time but where it is difficult to see how the system can give broad insights and how the methods developed and tested here can generalize to other settings.
Major issues.
A. The element that I find most limiting currently is that the inference methods that are presented here only are estimating two parameters: the rate of mutation at a specific locus (here the gap1 CNV) and effect of a beneficial mutation at this locus. All inference is predicated on the assumption that all other important parameters are "known" independently . This includes at least three critical evolutionary parameters that are notoriously difficult to estimate from data:
- the genome wide mutation rates at other loci in the genome
- the distribution of fitness effects of these "other" mutations
- the effective size realized during the whole experiment.
This makes for a very idiosyncratic study where it is hard generalize / gain insights for to a broader range of situations in experimental evolution.
B. The methodology used for comparing inference methods (ABC versus NPE) and to appreciate how the different estimators are behaving is very difficult to follow ( scattered between an overview , a method and numerous figures and supplementary figure legends), but after reading through carefully a few points are really baffling me :
In short :
1. it is hard to see how the two methods ( SMS-ABC and NPE) are compared on equal foots (in term of amount of computation made available to ensure that methods return sensible approximate posterior distribution) (see numerous comments to the authors in the annotated PDF) . It seems that ABC-SMC typically needs at least 10^5 simulations to approximate sensibly posteriors but it seems that in the main figure ( figure3) only a tenth are allowed (if I understood the figure legend) .
2. It seems that the comparisons made are based on at best a handful (usually 5 max in some instance apparently 15 ) of truly independent datasets simulated on very specific scenarios. (see my numerous comments on Figure 3 and several suppl figures comparing the methods)
I think a disproportionate emphasis is put on claiming superiority of NPE relative to BAC-SMC . I really have no share on either method . I am open to the fact that NPE is potentially superior to ABC-SMC.. but I currently remain unconvinced (because of points 1 and 2 above).
C. Scoping of the method / state of the art
Overall, that there is too much space devoted to comparing these methods and what is best and the manuscript could benefit by placing the inference proposed here in a wider context of numerous similar studies inferring the DFE of beneficial mutations using different experimental settings (eg EMPIRIC or other yeast based method or a plethora of work on E coli and what we have learned about beneficial mutations using these systems).
I also think that the ms would be stronger if there is more space devoted to exploring how much the inference is robust to the strong assumptions that all three other nuisance parameters are known without error in advance .
I hope that the comments I am enclosing along directly on the PDF are also useful
Best regards
Thomas Bataillon
10.1371/journal.pbio.3001633.r004Author response to Decision Letter 2
Submission Version3
3 Mar 2022

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pbio.3001633.r005Decision Letter 3
RobertsRoland GSenior Editor© 2022 Roland G Roberts2022Roland G Robertshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version3
7 Apr 2022

Dear David,
Thank you for submitting your revised Methods and Resources paper entitled "Simulation-based inference of evolutionary parameters from adaptation dynamics using neural networks" for publication in PLOS Biology. I have now obtained advice from one of the original reviewers and have discussed their comments with the Academic Editor.
Unfortunately reviewer #3 was unable to re-review, but the Academic Editor has assessed your responses and revisions and is broadly satisfied. In addition, the Academic Editor also added a further comment (see foot of this email), which you should treat as optional.
Based on the reviews, we will probably accept this manuscript for publication, provided you satisfactorily address the remaining points raised by reviewer #1 and the Academic Editor. Please also make sure to address the following data and other policy-related requests.
IMPORTANT: Please attend to the following:
a) Please flip the title around to incorporate an active verb. We suggest: "Neural networks allow simulation-based inference of evolutionary parameters from adaptation dynamics."
b) Please attend to the requests from reviewer #1 and the Academic Editor (you should treat the latter as optional).
c) Please address my Data Policy requests below; specifically, we need you to supply the numerical values underlying Figs 1A, 3ABCDE, 4ABCD, 5ABCD, 6ABCD, 7ABC, S1, S2ABCDEFGHI, S3ABC, S4ABC, S5ABCDEFGH, S6ABCDEF, S7ABCD, S8AB, S9ABCD, S10AB, S11, S12, S13AB, S14, S15AB. My understanding is that all of the data and code required for the main Figs is in the Github deposition, but I’m not so sure about the Supplementary Figs; please clarify and/or rectify.
d) Please also cite the location of the data clearly in each relevant main and supplementary Fig legend, e.g. if, for example, the Figs can all be generated using the data and code in your Gthub deposition, you should write something like “Data and code required to generate this Figure can be found in https://github.com/graceave/cnv_sims_inference”.
As you address these items, please take this last chance to review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the cover letter that accompanies your revised manuscript.
We expect to receive your revised manuscript within two weeks. 
To submit your revision, please go to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/ and log in as an Author. Click the link labelled 'Submissions Needing Revision' to find your submission record. Your revised submission must include the following:
-  a cover letter that should detail your responses to any editorial requests, if applicable, and whether changes have been made to the reference list
-  a Response to Reviewers file that provides a detailed response to the reviewers' comments (if applicable)
-  a track-changes file indicating any changes that you have made to the manuscript. 
NOTE: If Supporting Information files are included with your article, note that these are not copyedited and will be published as they are submitted. Please ensure that these files are legible and of high quality (at least 300 dpi) in an easily accessible file format. For this reason, please be aware that any references listed in an SI file will not be indexed. For more information, see our Supporting Information guidelines:

https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/supporting-information  

*Published Peer Review History*
Please note that you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out. Please see here for more details:

https://blogs.plos.org/plos/2019/05/plos-journals-now-open-for-published-peer-review/

*Press*
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, please ensure you have opted out of Early Article Posting on the submission form. We ask that you notify us as soon as possible if you or your institution is planning to press release the article.
*Protocols deposition*
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
Please do not hesitate to contact me should you have any questions.
Sincerely,
Roli
Roland G Roberts, PhD,
Senior Editor,
rroberts@plos.org,
PLOS Biology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DATA POLICY:
You may be aware of the PLOS Data Policy, which requires that all data be made available without restriction: http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/data-availability. For more information, please also see this editorial: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1001797 
Note that we do not require all raw data. Rather, we ask that all individual quantitative observations that underlie the data summarized in the figures and results of your paper be made available in one of the following forms:
1) Supplementary files (e.g., excel). Please ensure that all data files are uploaded as 'Supporting Information' and are invariably referred to (in the manuscript, figure legends, and the Description field when uploading your files) using the following format verbatim: S1 Data, S2 Data, etc. Multiple panels of a single or even several figures can be included as multiple sheets in one excel file that is saved using exactly the following convention: S1_Data.xlsx (using an underscore).
2) Deposition in a publicly available repository. Please also provide the accession code or a reviewer link so that we may view your data before publication. 
Regardless of the method selected, please ensure that you provide the individual numerical values that underlie the summary data displayed in the following figure panels as they are essential for readers to assess your analysis and to reproduce it: Figs 1A, 3ABCDE, 4ABCD, 5ABCD, 6ABCD, 7ABC, S1, S2ABCDEFGHI, S3ABC, S4ABC, S5ABCDEFGH, S6ABCDEF, S7ABCD, S8AB, S9ABCD, S10AB, S11, S12, S13AB, S14, S15AB. NOTE: the numerical data provided should include all replicates AND the way in which the plotted mean and errors were derived (it should not present only the mean/average values).
IMPORTANT: Please also ensure that figure legends in your manuscript include information on where the underlying data can be found, and ensure your supplemental data file/s has a legend.
Please ensure that your Data Statement in the submission system accurately describes where your data can be found.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DATA NOT SHOWN?
- Please note that per journal policy, we do not allow the mention of "data not shown", "personal communication", "manuscript in preparation" or other references to data that is not publicly available or contained within this manuscript. Please either remove mention of these data or provide figures presenting the results and the data underlying the figure(s).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
REVIEWER'S COMMENTS:
Reviewer #1:
I thank the authors for their clarifications. I am happy that NPE performs better for the specific task in hand than does an ABC approach.
To clarify my thoughts on the simplicity or otherwise of the problem, I agree with what I think de Sousa et al are saying, that the general problem of inferring the distribution of adaptive mutations available to natural selection is a difficult task. In addressing this question, their work, alongside that of Hegreness et al., and Barrick et al., both provides some insight while having limitations. For example, Barrick et al use a model which aims to identify only the first mutation to arise within each population; this throws away part of the data, and is almost certainly biased towards identifying mutations of stronger effect.
What I am less convinced is a difficult task is the specific question of how to fit a two-parameter Wright-Fisher model to data describing the evolution of a system under the influence of a single adaptive variant. If the function being optimised is not too rugged, a variety of approaches should give a decent answer to this problem. I remain unconvinced that likelihood approaches are as bad as the reviewers suggest. For example, if the log of the likelihood were calculated, I would not expect zero likelihoods would be a huge problem. Likelihood-based methods do not prevent the calculation of measure of confidence; a likelihood function plotted over parameter space would look similar to the posterior distributions of Figure 2. Further, identifying an approximate likelihood model might not be an especially intractable problem; the likelihood of a copy number variant having a specific frequency within the population given an observation might not be strictly analytical, but seems far from impossible to model if we accept that any modelling process involves a degree of approximation.
The matter of the simplicity of the problem is a somewhat tangential critique of the work described in this manuscript. The revised manuscript is an improvement on the previous one, and I am happy that for this specific question the NPE algorithm provides a useful insight into the specific benefit of CNV formation in the GAP1 locus of yeast. However I am unclear about whether the specific problem chosen is the best one with which to demonstrate the potential of NPE to solve more difficult problems within evolutionary inference. I would want to see applications of NPE to problems with larger numbers of parameters involved before accepting more general claims of its value for evolutionary inference.
Minor comments:
I note the WF-ABC method (Foll 2015) as another example of using ABC methods to process data from evolutionary experiments.
COMMENTS FROM THE ACADEMIC EDITOR:
[identifies himself as Arjan de Visser]
In addition to the comments of reviewer #1, I would like to point the authors to recent work involving myself, where we used Wright-Fisher simulations together with machine learning methods to infer mutation rates and fitness effects of 3 major mutation classes (SNPs, indels and structural variants), that best explained the observed mean and variance of each the numbers of mutations of each type in 96 evolved genotypes (Schenk, Zwart et al. 2022 Nat Ecol Evol, early online). Our approach is an alternative to using marker trajectories, which they (and de Sousa et al., Hegreness et al. and Barrick et al.) use, which the authors may consider mentioning in the introduction.
10.1371/journal.pbio.3001633.r006Author response to Decision Letter 3
Submission Version4
13 Apr 2022

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to reviewers 2.pdf
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pbio.3001633.r007Decision Letter 4
RobertsRoland GSenior Editor© 2022 Roland G Roberts2022Roland G Robertshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version4
14 Apr 2022

Dear David,
On behalf of my colleagues and the Academic Editor, Arjan de Visser, I'm pleased to say that we can in principle accept your Methods and Resources "Neural networks allow simulation-based inference of evolutionary parameters from adaptation dynamics" for publication in PLOS Biology, provided you address any remaining formatting and reporting issues. These will be detailed in an email that will follow this letter and that you will usually receive within 2-3 business days, during which time no action is required from you. Please note that we will not be able to formally accept your manuscript and schedule it for publication until you have completed any requested changes.
Please take a minute to log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/, click the "Update My Information" link at the top of the page, and update your user information to ensure an efficient production process.
PRESS: We frequently collaborate with press offices. If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper at this point, to enable them to help maximise its impact. If the press office is planning to promote your findings, we would be grateful if they could coordinate with biologypress@plos.org. If you have previously opted in to the early version process, we ask that you notify us immediately of any press plans so that we may opt out on your behalf.
We also ask that you take this opportunity to read our Embargo Policy regarding the discussion, promotion and media coverage of work that is yet to be published by PLOS. As your manuscript is not yet published, it is bound by the conditions of our Embargo Policy. Please be aware that this policy is in place both to ensure that any press coverage of your article is fully substantiated and to provide a direct link between such coverage and the published work. For full details of our Embargo Policy, please visit http://www.plos.org/about/media-inquiries/embargo-policy/.
Thank you again for choosing PLOS Biology for publication and supporting Open Access publishing. We look forward to publishing your study. 
Best wishes,
Roli
Roland G Roberts, PhD 
Senior Editor 
PLOS Biology

rroberts@plos.org