pmcEnviron UrbanEnviron Urban3829phesage101085110EAUEnvironment and Urbanization0956-2478pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleSAGE - PMC COVID-19 CollectionPMC9947425PMC9947425.1994742599474253860343510.1177/0956247822114987610.1177_095624782211498761Addressing Urban Inequalities II: Discursive and Material Practices Through ScaleCOVID-19 vaccine rollout: data from informal settlements in Harare,
Kampala, Lilongwe and Mumbai
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7532-8308LinesKateDzimadziStanleyLubegaEdrisMudimu-MatsangaisePatienceRaoVinodkumarSebbanjaJunior AlvesZidanaHappinessMitlinDianaKate Lines (corresponding author) is research consultant and honorary
research fellow, Global Development Institute, University of Manchester,
working with the African Cities Research Consortium (ACRC).
Address: University of Manchester, Global Development Institute, Oxford,
Manchester, M13 9PL, UK; email:
katherine.lines@manchester.ac.uk
Stanley Dzimadzi is Community Data for Change Officer, Centre for Community
Organization and Development (CCODE), Malawi.
Email: stanley@ccodemalawi.org
Edris Loubega is data coordinator, National Slum Dwellers Federation of
Uganda (NSDFU).
Email: loubegaedriss@gmail.com
Patience Mudimu-Matsangaise is Director, Dialogue on Shelter for the Homeless
Trust, Zimbabwe.
Email: patiencemudimu@gmail.com
Vinodkumar Rao is Programme Manager, Society for the Promotion of Area
Resource Centres (SPARC), India.
Email: vinodkumar.rao@gmail.com
Junior Alves Sebbanja is Project Manager, ACTogether, Uganda.
Email: wamala3815@gmail.com
Happiness Zidana is Learning, Compliance and Quality Assurance Officer,
CCODE, Malawi.
Email: happiness@ccodemalawi.org
Diana Mitlin is Professor of Global Urbanism, Global Development Institute,
University of Manchester, UK and CEO of the African Cities Research
Consortium (ACRC).
Email: diana.mitlin@manchester.ac.uk
2122023420233514295634973210220232302202302032026© 2023 International Institute for Environment and Development
(IIED)2023International Institute for Environment and
Developmenthttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) which permits
any use, reproduction and distribution of the work without further
permission provided the original work is attributed as specified on the SAGE
and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).While the COVID-19 pandemic’s effect on the health of low-income urban
communities in the global South has not been insignificant, the results of state
responses carried out without full consideration of poverty consequences have
been very serious. Vaccination, which supports both health and economic
recovery, is one way people can reduce the risk of further exclusion. This field
note, drawing on surveys from informal settlements in Harare, Kampala, Lilongwe
and Mumbai between August and November 2021 by national affiliates of Slum
Dwellers International (SDI), provides a snapshot of how global vaccine
inequalities have played out across these cities. We find that access to local
vaccine programmes is influenced by both global supply and existing local-level
inequities; that a low or unreliable supply, among other factors, limits
political will to invest in reaching already underserved communities; and that
local context and the heterogeneity of communities are key to understanding low
vaccine uptake.

community dataCOVID-19 vaccinesHararehealth equityinformal settlementsKampalaLilongweMumbaipmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BYtypesetterts1 

## I. Introduction
The joint issues of unequal access and low uptake of COVID-19 vaccines are still very
much alive in low- and lower-middle income countries. This field note, drawing on a
study from Harare, Kampala, Lilongwe and Mumbai by Slum Dwellers International (SDI)
affiliates in each city, presents some grassroots perspectives on the COVID-19
vaccine rollout. By exploring how global vaccine inequalities have played out
locally in 21 informal settlements across these four cities, the findings help to
uncover key trends around vaccination rollout at a pivotal time. Descriptive
statistics, along with qualitative evidence from residents, capture a snapshot of
the situation between August and November 2021.( )

## II. The COVID-19 Vaccine Context in Each Country/City

## a. Harare, Zimbabwe
Zimbabwe was among only 15 African countries to meet the WHO target to fully
vaccinate( ) 10 per cent of its population by October 2021 ( ). By late August
2021, when our survey began, 10 per cent of Zimbabwe’s 15.1 million population
had completed a first, full vaccination protocol, 18 per cent by late November
2021, and 29 per cent by late June 2022, when this field note was
written.( )
 Zimbabwe’s strong relations with China have clearly contributed to its choice of
COVID-19 vaccines, which are almost exclusively Chinese-made.( ) Survey
respondents reported Sinovac and Sinopharm as the main types available in their
communities. Barring a few distribution hitches and surges in demand, vaccines
have continued to be available in Harare and ongoing government campaigns have
encouraged uptake.
Lockdowns and other control measures in Harare have been among the more
heavy-handed in the four study cities. Vaccinations are officially voluntary,
although not always experienced as such. Vaccine certificates were necessary for
state employees (including health workers), and those visiting government
offices, travelling on public buses, market trading, attending church and many
other areas of life.

## b. Kampala, Uganda
Uganda’s vaccination drive began in earnest only towards the end of our survey
window ( ). In
late August 2021, only one per cent of the country’s 47.1 million population had
been fully vaccinated, rising to three per cent in late November 2021 and 24 per
cent in June 2022. The late start was largely due to a lack of supply, even in
Kampala, the capital city. Uganda has been very reliant on COVAX,( ) receiving at
least six types of vaccine, some shipments arriving around the same time, which
generated some public confusion. Vaccines were publicly administered initially,
although as supply improved, private hospitals also began to be involved (from
around May 2022) in an effort to improve coverage.( )
Global connections are also evident in Uganda’s vaccine supply. Media reports
mention shipments of Sinovac from China, and plans to establish a Sinovac
vaccine manufacturing plant in Uganda.( )
When the survey began, Uganda was the only study country yet to announce
universal eligibility for adults, likely related to supply constraints. Groups
considered high-risk were still prioritized, including the military, health care
workers, over-50s and those with underlying health conditions. Country-wide
infection control measures have included two stringent lockdown periods and a
night-time curfew that lasted for two years. Survey respondents also reported
that vaccine certificates were at that time necessary for civil servants, public
school teachers and some market vendors.

## c. Lilongwe, Malawi
Like Uganda, Malawi’s heavy reliance on COVAX for vaccine supply hugely
constrained its rollout. There have been small, sporadic shipments, largely of
AstraZeneca, Johnson & Johnson and Pfizer vaccines. By late August 2021, two
per cent of Malawi’s 18.6 million population were fully vaccinated, three per
cent by late November 2021, and still only eight per cent by late June 2022
( ).
Lockdown measures in Malawi have been relatively limited, with early government
controls even temporarily blocked by the courts on the grounds of their lack of
social support for low-income and vulnerable groups. Community leaders in
Lilongwe reported only a few loosely enforced restrictions and vaccine mandates.
Cases and deaths have reportedly been relatively low, but, as in many low-income
cities, an accurate picture is constrained by limited health data collection or
testing. Consequently, people have not seen vaccination as a high priority, but
are more concerned with the severe associated economic crisis. Vaccine hesitancy
due to misinformation appears particularly prominent in Malawi, perhaps linked
to low supplies and perceived lower risks to health. Early in the vaccine
rollout, Malawi incinerated 20,000 expired doses to reassure the public that the
vaccines they would receive were safe.

## d. Mumbai, India
At times during the pandemic, Mumbai saw some of the highest case rates in the
world. India has also imposed some of the world’s strictest lockdown measures.
Mumbai is the only study city with available, reliable city-level vaccination
data, and has a vaccination picture very different from those of the other
cities and from India’s national rates ( ): by late August 2021, 67 per
cent of Mumbai’s adult( ) population were vaccinated, rising to 70 per cent by
late November. By April 2022, with all adults reported to be fully vaccinated,
rollout was extended to school-age children and booster programmes (i.e.
subsequent vaccinations after an initial full vaccination) began. At the height
of the rollout, there were over 400 vaccination centres (including those run by
the private sector), many in informal settlements. Three key factors underlie
Mumbai’s relative success. First, government commitment, particularly municipal,
to ensure universal vaccine availability; second, vocal, organized and
politically well-represented low-income communities; and third, as restrictions
eased, full vaccination was required to travel on suburban trains, a vital
transport mode for people to reach work cheaply and quickly.
Mumbai’s inclusion in the study makes possible comparison with a relatively
advanced, successful vaccine rollout in a context where half the population
lives in informal settlements. Yet it is distinct in many ways: the scale of the
challenge (a metropolitan population of over 20 million), strong political
representation for low-income communities, and the availability of vaccines
(with Indian manufacturers). Most doses from Indian manufacturers are centrally
allocated to states, but during our survey, privately administered vaccines were
also available for a capped fee of around US$ 9, a route open to even some
informal settlement residents – often paid for by their employers to get staff
quickly protected.

## III. Methodology

## a. Study locations
The survey cities, Harare, Kampala, Lilongwe and Mumbai, were selected in
consultation with SDI’s secretariat. The three main criteria were:
Major global South cities with large informal settlement populations, in
countries that had begun COVID-19 vaccine rollout
A diversity of geographical regions, city types and country income
classifications
City-based research partner organizations (all SDI country affiliates)
keen to take part, with access to trusted community leaders, who are
familiar with the research process
Each of the four research partners selected five or six informal settlements as
study areas (Figure S1 available online) in consultation with grassroot
leaders and federation members, who helped link research teams to the survey
respondents. In each area, there is a strong SDI federation presence or
relationship with the neighbourhood. The 21 settlements selected represent a
geographic spread within each city and a range of settlement types.

## b. Survey participants
With the support of federation leaders, research teams recruited around 15
residents from each settlement (300 over the entire study) who could participate
in all six fortnightly surveys. All respondents were identified as “community
leaders”, defined broadly to include traditional leaders, youth leaders,
community health care workers, religious leaders and SDI federation leaders –
male and female and across a range of ages. We did not aim for statistical
validity but rather identified a range of trusted local leaders who would have a
good sense of what was going on in their communities.

## c. Data collection
Data were collected concurrently in the four cities over three months, between 26
August and 29 November 2021, using six fortnightly semi-structured
questionnaires. In the fast-changing context of the pandemic, this allowed us to
track changes, for instance in vaccination policy or availability, every two
weeks. Data collection for each round took a week, or two (see below); the last
round, which contained additional questions, took longer. Survey respondents
were interviewed individually by local professionals or community-based
federation data collectors, using either paper questionnaires or handheld
devices. Final data entry was done online using the Qualtrics platform.
Between each round of data collection, city teams met to discuss process issues.
Occasional group calls captured the local teams’ observations about changes and
developments in local vaccine rollout efforts. This helped contextualize the
survey data, alongside a synthesis of other (emerging) studies and news
articles.

## d. Survey design
A draft questionnaire was circulated within partner organizations and to
federation leaders to ensure phrasing and terminology were locally appropriate
and objectives aligned with affiliates’ own. The Mumbai team translated the
questionnaire into Marathi; the others were in English. Open and closed
questions captured both qualitative and quantitative information. Respondents
were asked both about themselves and their communities. Questionnaire and
participant consent processes were tested by community leaders in each city,
leading to some adjustments.

## e. COVID-19 special circumstances and ethical considerations
Our data collection happened to take place in a relative lull between recorded
waves of infection in all four study countries ( ). Therefore, despite ongoing
COVID restrictions, all four research partners were able to conduct at least
some interviews face-to-face, observing local protocols such as social
distancing and mask wearing.( ) The teams considered that
this resulted in greater trust and higher quality data. Most researchers used
printed questionnaires within survey settlements, followed by online data entry
back in the office. It quickly became clear that the process was more
time-consuming than anticipated, and the window for each round was expanded from
10 days to two weeks.
 Given the fast-changing pandemic and vaccine context, we were prepared to add or
adjust the survey questions as data collection progressed. In the end it was
only necessary to add a few follow-up questions to the last survey
iteration.( ) Questions on longer term socioeconomic impacts were
only asked in surveys 1 and 6.( )

## f. Study limitations
A small study budget of under GBP 30,000 allowed only for a snapshot in a limited
time period within a volatile context. And, while we worked with well-informed,
diverse leaders, we recognize that not all interest groups will have been
adequately represented – for example people with disabilities. Further funding
has now been secured to improve our findings by: (1) presenting our data to
community groups for validation and analysis, and to local authority
stakeholders; and (2) further researching the application of other approaches
such as in-depth stakeholder interviews and focus group discussions, including
with vulnerable groups and residents who are not leaders.

## IV. What is the COVID-19 Health Context in the 21 Study Locations?

[We knew about a recent COVID-19 death in the settlement] from seeing
the deceased person not being allowed to be put in the house for a night
as is tradition. (Community leader, F, Hatcliffe Extension,
Harare, Survey round 1 [S1])
A lot of people [in our area] might have died of COVID, but the
numbers are not published. (Youth leader, M, Hopley, Harare,
S1)
People have slacked [precautions] with reduction in cases . . .
[saying] that during the hot weather COVID-19 is powerless.
(Religious leader, F, Chinsapo, Lilongwe, S6)

## a. Recent cases and deaths
Community leader respondents reported few COVID-19 cases and deaths in their
areas during the survey period (Figure S2 available online). Harare settlements had the highest
share of respondents who reported recent cases (on average 13 per cent of
respondents) and deaths (11 per cent). In Kampala and Mumbai, fewer than five
per cent of respondents reported recent cases or deaths in their area; in
Lilongwe only slightly more. In all cities, reports varied considerably across
settlements and survey iterations. Where the disease was known to be present,
numbers were low and varied by survey between one and 21 cases and one and five
deaths in a two-week period, across all 21 settlements. There are different
reasons for these generally low figures, including limited testing, lack of
reliable information, or an actually low disease rate. People in Harare and
Lilongwe were more likely not to know about the recent health burden or local
testing in their settlement; those in Kampala and Mumbai were more
confident.

## b. Recent testing
Lack of data from limited testing has been key to the lower recorded COVID-19
case and death rates in many low- and middle-income countries, obscuring our
understanding of how the disease burden differs in, for example, locations with
a younger demographic. Excess death studies estimate COVID-19 deaths to be
between nine and 16 times higher than official figures in the four study
countries.( ) Reliable information about cases and deaths would help
local authorities to prioritize resources and communities to understand the
risks they face, motivating people to take protective measures. For example,
Lilongwe respondents linked declining vaccine uptake during the survey window to
decreases in reported cases in their areas.
Limited testing, screening and treatment in informal settlements mean that
outbreaks are less likely to be detected at an early stage and can spread
rapidly. We found little testing in communities.( ) The highest rates were in
Harare, where a settlement average of 30 per cent of respondents said local
testing was taking place; the lowest in Lilongwe (five per cent). There were
fluctuations in all cities across survey iterations and between settlements.
Many areas reported no testing provision, despite having a local health centre.
Some Harare communities could have PCR tests at government clinics, and Mumbai
communities could be screened for symptoms at hospital or special camps run by
NGOs. Lilongwe and Kampala respondents mentioned a range of testing venues,
including hospitals, health centres, markets and mosques, usually run by
government health bodies, but had little information on the type of testing
available. Notwithstanding low rates of testing, all four countries appeared to
be in a relative lull between waves of infection during the survey window ( ).
Apart from test results, the main sources of information on cases and deaths
varied by community, and included community rumours, direct information from the
family of infected people (all cities), local leaders and community health
workers (Harare, Kampala and Lilongwe), and observing burial procedures that
differed from the norm (Harare, Lilongwe).

## V. What Pandemic Control Measures are Currently in Place? What have been the
Economic Consequences of these Measures?

[Curfew] has done more harm than good . . . it has caused a lot of
theft and poverty. (Community leader, M, Rubaga Division,
Kampala, S6)
My business challenges are far worse and right now that’s the only
urgent issue. I will go for vaccination later. (Self-employed
traditional leader, M, Mtandire, Lilongwe, S6)

State responses and shutdowns – often implemented without adequate consideration of
the poverty consequences – have had serious impacts in informal settlements, where
economic burdens piled upon the already substantial health burdens. Lockdowns halted
much economic activity almost overnight, leaving people suddenly without ways to
make a living. Lost income and employment, travel restrictions and the rising cost
of staples have been major immediate drivers of impoverishment,( ) and we now face
the need to understand the economic impacts on communities beyond early lockdowns.
There have been disproportionate effects for young people, women, migrants and
informal and self-employed workers.( )
In informal settlements, residents live and work in high-risk conditions, with high
densities and a lack of basic infrastructure. Communities with insecure land tenure
have been especially badly hit, being more likely to lack basic services and to pay
higher prices for these to informal suppliers.( ) In undocumented areas, it is
harder for authorities to establish impacts and plan responses, and communities
without legal tenure may be excluded from formal relief efforts and social safety
nets, where these exist.( ) Income loss or demolition can lead to eviction, worsening
COVID-19 transmission risks as households resort to sharing ever more cramped spaces
or migrants return to rural homes.( )

## a. Employment: formal and informal workers

[Many] informally employed people have been affected through
demolished workshops, food stalls and markets. (Vendor and
community health worker, F, Hopley, Harare, S1)
Those still working do not have as much work as they used
to. (Self-employed federation leader, F, Mtandire,
Lilongwe, S6)
Initial problems are now resolved, most are back at
work. (Casually employed community leader, F, Dharavi,
Mumbai, S6)

Figure S3 (available online) shows the dramatic loss in earning opportunities in
study areas for both formal and informal workers. While the situation varies,
informal workers have been hit harder in almost all settlements. This is not a
static situation: our findings show changes even over the short survey period.
For formal workers in Harare, Kampala and (to a lesser extent) Lilongwe, things
worsened between August and November; for informal workers, there was little
change to an already dire situation. Mumbai was strikingly different. Community
leaders reported that by late November almost everyone normally economically
active was back working, in parallel with high rates of vaccination and
relaxation of some restrictions for the fully vaccinated, notably local train
travel.

## b. Community leaders’ own experiences

[During the pandemic] I had access to opportunities, working to
support the health ministry. (Self-employed community
health care worker, M, Mgona, Lilongwe, S6)
I used to have two jobs, now I have one. (Self-employed
youth leader, M, Rubaga Division, Kampala, S1)
I am a vendor, but now I sell at my gate because my market stall
was demolished. (Self-employed religious leader, F, Hopley,
Harare, S1)

We asked the community leaders about their own occupations and their income over
the course of the pandemic (Figure S4 available online). A vast majority (87 per cent) said
their income had dropped. A smaller number, varying by city, said their income
had not changed or had gone up over the pandemic (Mumbai 21 per cent; Lilongwe
16 per cent; Kampala 6 per cent; Harare 5 per cent). Self-employed people – the
largest group (158 respondents) – were worst affected. Of these, 93 per cent
said their income had dropped, but this was even true for 69 per cent of
formally employed respondents.

## c. Savings

This year, my savings have gone down by over half. My business is
not working. My husband was retrenched [lost his employment]. The
little we get every day has to serve the family.
(Self-employed federation and religious leader, F, Chinsapo, Lilongwe,
S6)
Some of our members come from other areas [so] we could not save
together. (Self-employed federation leader, F, Mbare,
Harare, S1)

Networked neighbourhood women-led savings groups are a cornerstone of SDI
federations of the urban poor. Their savings can boost households’ ability to
meet basic needs while weathering crises. In the face of the pandemic,
federations across the global SDI network demonstrated the central role that
organized communities can play in responding to crises and ensuring help to
those in need( ) – usually in the absence of social protection.
Strengthened safety nets through networks of women-led savings groups have been
key to these efforts, alongside addressing basic sanitation needs, collecting
data to tailor responses, and raising awareness online and in neighbourhoods.
However, despite the savings safety net, many groups were badly affected by the
pandemic.
In the three African cities, most respondents were savings groups members. Across
all cities, nearly all savers reported that both their personal and group
savings had dropped. Many savings group members no longer had earnings to save
(Kampala, Lilongwe). Some were still saving, but less frequently, or drawing
down their savings for basic needs. Some groups had collapsed or had to recruit
members from other areas (Harare). Others could no longer lend money to their
members for business investments (Lilongwe) ( ).
 

## d. Measures and restrictions during the survey period

Many have [vaccination] because now people fear a third
lockdown. (Traditional and youth leader, F, Rubaga
Division, Kampala, S6)
There is an intense transport challenge in our settlement. People
[get transport] after 6 p.m. and get home [after curfew at] 8
p.m. (Community leader, F, Hopley, Harare, S1)
Informally employed people [cannot] observe precautions because
they sell in crowded areas. (Self-employed federation
leader, F, Hopley, Harare, S1)

Policy responses – like curfews, school/workplace closures and other measures
meant to limit public exposure to disease – restrict movement, posing particular
challenges to people whose livelihoods require work or travel outside “normal”
hours or for long hours, including food vendors, informal traders and domestic
workers. In Kampala, a curfew remained in place throughout the survey window, to
be lifted only in January 2022. All Harare respondents reported lockdowns and/or
curfews in August but by November these had been lifted in many settlements
(curfews were later reimposed but relaxed in June 2022). Control measures were
largely absent in Lilongwe and Mumbai during the survey window (Figure S5 available online).

## VI. What do the COVID-19 Vaccination Programmes Look Like from the Viewpoint of
Informal Settlement Communities?

## a. The rollout
In Harare and Mumbai, almost all community leaders said public vaccination
programmes were accessible to their communities (Figure S6 available online). However, some settlements in both
cities experienced short-term unavailability across one or more survey
iterations. In Kampala and Lilongwe in particular, reports varied by settlement
and by survey round, suggesting patchier vaccine distribution and/or sparser
public information. In Kampala, an average of 13 per cent of respondents said no
rollout was happening; a further five per cent that the existing rollout was
inaccessible to their communities, the latter group largely from one area
(Makindye Division). In Lilongwe, 29 per cent of respondents to the first survey
round said no rollout was happening in their city at all; this declined to an
average of six per cent across the remaining surveys.
As mentioned, Zimbabwe’s and India’s vaccine supplies have been relatively
consistent and abundant – albeit at times insufficient to meet demand – when
compared to Uganda and Malawi. Our findings are that a low or unreliable supply
negatively affects rollout and that, conversely, a reliable supply can encourage
the political will to invest resources or political capital in public
vaccination campaigns.

## b. Where are people getting vaccinated?

[We] need a vaccination centre in the settlement to . . . avoid
travelling long distances. (Community health care worker,
F, Stoneridge, Harare, S6)
With a centre within our locality coordinated by the local
leadership, most get it here. (Community health care
worker, M, Relocation Colonies, Mumbai, S3)
Soldiers and nurses from our neighbourhood are vaccinated at
their workplaces. (Federation leader, F, Stoneridge,
Harare, S4)
My neighbours do their businesses outside Mtandire and so prefer
to get vaccinated where they spend most of their time.
(Traditional and federation leader, F, Mtandire, Lilongwe, S3)

In general, types and diversity of vaccine venues point to different distribution
strategies ( ).
In Kampala and Mumbai, schools and churches, among other venues, were
transformed into government vaccination centres. Harare relied more on existing
health care sites, as did Lilongwe, where mobile vaccination vehicles were later
introduced in some informal and underserved areas.
 Even for informal settlements within the same city, there are big differences in
proximity to vaccine centres. In Lilongwe, for example, two settlements
(Chinsapo and Mtandire) are close to vaccinating public hospitals, while
residents in other areas had to travel often discouragingly long distances to be
vaccinated.
Many people were vaccinated at their workplace or for work-related reasons
(Harare, Kampala, Mumbai), or near their workplaces for convenience (Lilongwe).
Low local availability or long, off-putting queues at centres nearer home were
other reasons people went further afield in all cities (Figure S7 online).
Vaccination rollout was uneven in all cities. Centres in some settlements started
many months earlier than others, perhaps as low stocks limited early
distribution efforts. In Mumbai and Kampala, vaccination had not begun in/near
any survey settlements by March 2021, when severe second waves started. Uganda’s
rollout reached the surveyed Kampala settlements between July and September
2021, as supply began to improve and eligibility was extended.
Over the course of our survey, some city authorities appeared to start addressing
inaccessibility issues in parallel with wider improvements in national vaccine
supply, for example introducing more mobile clinics in Lilongwe and establishing
more centres nearer to communities in Kampala.

## c. Eligibility and accessibility

There are people who come to market at dawn to sell products and
sometimes end their day after 5pm. They do not have the time.
Business nowadays [is hard], so it is hard to leave
[early]. (Self-employed federation leader and local market
leader, F, Chinsapo, Lilongwe, S6)

By early September 2021, all adults in India, Malawi and Zimbabwe were eligible
for COVID vaccines. At the start of the survey, Uganda’s policy was less clear.
Some groups were still being prioritized, including the over-50s, the military,
health care workers and teachers. By the final survey, most said that all adults
were now eligible.
Many respondents said that disabled people and elderly people faced mobility
challenges in accessing clinics (Harare, Kampala and Lilongwe) which were
exacerbated if centres were not nearby ( ). Working people also struggled
to make time to go and get vaccinated in all cities – although in Mumbai with
the increase in centres this was no longer seen as a problem. Other limiting
factors included: peer pressure on those in anti-vaccine churches (Lilongwe);
being without national ID cards (Harare and Kampala); and women whose husbands
don’t want them vaccinated (Lilongwe).
 

## d. Vaccine types

The many vaccines have scared people about which one to
choose. (Federation and traditional leader, M, Kampala
Central Division, Kampala, S1)
People are looking for Sputnik. They believe it is very
strong. (Youth leader, F, Mbare, Harare, S3)

Data about available vaccine types (Figure S8 online) intersect with issues around (mis)information
and understanding. For example, tendencies to prefer or reject particular
vaccine types were evident in the Kampala and Lilongwe communities. Uganda and
Malawi, dependent on COVAX, had perhaps less influence on which vaccines they
received from the international community, at least in the early stages of
rollout. Malawi has received mostly AstraZeneca and Johnson & Johnson, both
for a time portrayed by Western media as especially controversial – contributing
to already high levels of vaccine mistrust and misinformation. Kampala
respondents spoke about the public confusion caused by the plethora of vaccine
types available at different times.

## e. Second doses

Some are willing; others have relaxed. I know people who are over
3 months after getting their first dose and have not gone for the
second. (Federation leader, F, Chinsapo, Lilongwe, S6)

In Mumbai, Harare and Kampala, second vaccines were largely available to
communities, although some Harare respondents mentioned instances where second
doses became unavailable in particular centres for a few weeks. In Lilongwe,
Johnson & Johnson (which requires only a single dose) was the most popular
and common vaccine type in use during the survey window.
Common practices for arranging second vaccines included: second dates set at
first vaccination and written on a card (Harare, Kampala, Lilongwe); flexibility
around (public) venue and/or both doses available at the same centres (all
cities); SMS reminders (Lilongwe); mobile clinic returns to the same settlement
timed with second-dose window (Lilongwe); and scheduled clinic days just for
second doses (Kampala). The time required between doses varied with vaccine
type, from two to three weeks in Harare for Sinovac and Sinopharm, to 12 weeks
in Mumbai for Covidshield. In Harare and Kampala respondents flagged the need to
bring ID, a potential barrier to those without it.
In general, community leaders reported that people in their areas who went for
the first were willing to get second vaccinations. In Mumbai, restrictions on
local train travel were only lifted with two-dose protection – a strong
motivation to get fully covered. In Lilongwe, many respondents said people were
getting “relaxed” and going back weeks later than the advised
time. Where second-dose uptake was reportedly low/declining, contributing
factors were thought to include publicly available statistics about low
infection levels (Harare, Lilongwe) and misinformation about second-dose side
effects (Lilongwe).

## f. Alternatives and cost to the individual

My daughter paid a private hospital to get vaccinated, trying to
avoid the long queues [at public centres]. (Community
leader, F, Hopley, Harare, S1)

In Harare, Kampala and Lilongwe, COVID-19 vaccines available to residents of the
surveyed areas were free. A small number of respondents in all cities said
vaccines were also available privately or illegally (Harare 5 per cent, Kampala
4 per cent, Lilongwe 2 per cent). In Harare, vaccines were available in private
hospitals for a capped fee of up to US$ 5, a new option intended to alleviate
crowding at public centres. Only a few respondents were aware of this option –
unsurprising since all study settlements are predominantly served by government
health care facilities. In Lilongwe, respondents reported that vaccine
certificates were widely available to the unvaccinated on the black market.
In Mumbai the situation was different. During the study, vaccines were widely
available privately for a capped cost of around INR 780 (US$ 9). Indian
manufacturers could sell up to 10 per cent of their product on the domestic
private market and the remainder at a reduced price to the federal government,
which then made allocations to states, which were widely seen as politically
motivated. Demand often outstripped supply, and in our survey there were many
complaints of long queues at public centres. Many respondents knew people who
had been vaccinated privately, usually paid for by employers (for example, care
workers). An emerging trend in Mumbai was for charitable donors, philanthropists
or companies fulfilling their state-mandated corporate social responsibility
responsibilities to purchase private market vaccines and donate them to local
government or NGOs, for free or discounted distribution in low-income areas.

## g. Uptake numbers are inconclusive

Our local centre gives about 200 doses every day.
(Traditional leader, M, Airport, Mumbai, S4)

Many respondents, including community health workers, could not estimate rates of
vaccination uptake in their communities (Figure S9 online). In Lilongwe, 76 per cent answered “I don’t
know” to the question, in Kampala 70 per cent, Mumbai 55 per cent, Harare 30 per
cent – revealing a clear lack of locally-specific and publicly available
statistics; although a few Mumbai respondents mentioned local vaccination
numbers posted at health centres. If we look just at settlements where over half
of respondents could estimate recent rates of uptake, numbers ranged widely
between and within settlements: 30–500 people in Harare, 350–3000 in Mumbai
(number of residents vaccinated in the past two weeks; median response per
settlement across all survey iterations). Given high levels of uncertainty among
respondents, the data were inadequate for tracking change over the course of the
study (but see below and online Figures S10a and S10b for a discussion of the qualitative
data on uptake during the survey window).

## h. Observed changes during the three-month survey window

More people are now willing to be vaccinated after seeing there’s
no side effects. (Traditional leader, M, Nakawa Division,
Kampala, S6)
First shortage, then more vaccines were available, now most are
vaccinated. (Women’s leader, F, Relocation Colonies,
Mumbai, S6)

People’s reflections on this front largely revolve around changes in uptake,
accessibility and availability (Figures S10a and S10b). Overall, uptake appeared to have
improved in all cities. Queues were shorter, where this was the biggest issue
(Harare, Mumbai), and more and nearer centres improved accessibility for
marginalized communities (Lilongwe, Kampala). However, many respondents also
observed declines in vaccination uptake as the COVID threat became a lower
priority with declining official case and death rates.
In Harare overall, availability appeared to have improved together with
accessibility. Queues were shorter and crowds smaller at centres, and more
centres were established. Uptake had correspondingly improved in four of the
five settlements; however, Hopley respondents said fewer people were getting
vaccinated and it was being taken less seriously.
In Kampala, the opening of more centres nearer to communities during the survey
window meant improved uptake in many areas, and community leaders said people
were less reluctant as they saw evidence the vaccine was safe. However, Kawempe
respondents said uptake had declined. Availability improvements were noted in
some areas; availability issues due to rising demand in others. There had also
been changes in the type of vaccines available.
In Lilongwe, three major trends dominated the survey window. More centres,
including mobile clinics, were accompanied by improved uptake. This may also
relate to the rollout of a new vaccine type, Johnson & Johnson, requiring
only one dose and preferred over AstraZeneca, which had more misinformation and
stigma attached to it. But many Lilongwe respondents also noticed vaccination
rates declining in their communities (especially Area 49 and Mgona), alongside
sharp declines in officially recorded COVID-19 cases and deaths.
Changes observed in Mumbai were in line with the data elsewhere. Crowds had
declined at vaccination centres, with improvements in availability and
reductions in the number unvaccinated.

## VII. Attitudes to Vaccines and the Level/Nature of Vaccine Hesitancy

Most people are going . . . in secret because of the conspiracy
theories. At the same time, they want to be protected.
(Federation leader, F, Mtandire, Lilongwe, S2)
It’s not that they don’t want it. They go to the centre and wait and
waste several hours in the queue and don’t get it. They get irritated
and then don’t want it. (Traditional leader, M, Airport,
Mumbai, S3)

In many low- and lower-middle income countries, initial issues with vaccine supply
have gradually improved, notably after late 2021, when India began to relax its
export ban and amid efforts to tackle underlying issues such as patent restrictions
and the need to diversify vaccine manufacture.( ) However, in many contexts this
happened without proportionate rises in vaccination rates ( ). Even countries less exposed to
global vaccine nationalism (e.g. because less reliant on COVAX), such as Zimbabwe,
have seen a levelling off in uptake.
While concerns around equitable vaccine access and country preparedness persist,
vaccine confidence is another key issue, requiring culturally informed,
context-specific understandings of vaccine hesitancy and misinformation.( ) Some factors,
although varying by context, are well documented, including under-resourced
government information campaigns and the influence of social media. Others tap into
underlying historical currents such as colonial-era medical abuses, or reflect local
responses to perceived global-level injustices and national political dynamics
around vaccine coverage.( )Many don’t trust the government hence even the vaccine provided by
it. (Traditional leader, M, Rubaga Division, Kampala, S2)

Most community leader respondents had overwhelmingly positive attitudes to vaccines
(Figure S11 online). Citywide, an average of over 85 per cent either
wanted a vaccine or were fully vaccinated; a further 5–10 per cent were somewhat
positive but still had concerns. More positive attitudes were articulated in terms
of personal safety (all cities) and confidence in how vaccine technology works to
strengthen the immune system. Social motivations included knowing people who had
died of COVID (Harare); wanting to protect the health of families and communities
(all cities); setting an example as a leader (Harare, Kampala, Lilongwe); and
speeding up reopening and to avoid further lockdowns (Kampala, Mumbai) – allowing
people to return to work, find jobs (Kampala, Lilongwe) or access areas of life
controlled by vaccine mandates (e.g. public transport in Mumbai; church in Harare).
A small number reflected on the influence of political leaders (Kampala) and the
general importance of following government advice (Harare, Kampala, Lilongwe).

There are many opportunities for vaccinated people. (Youth
leader, M, Mbare, Harare, S1)

There were also anxieties,( ) however ( ), around vaccine safety – adverse side effects in general
(Harare, Kampala) and for those with comorbidities (Harare, Kampala) and
breastfeeding or pregnant( ) (Kampala, Lilongwe); as well as belief in misinformation
often heard via social media or from religious leaders. There was a religious basis
to many people’s hesitancy (Lilongwe and Harare) ranging from personal belief that
the vaccine is “satanic” to membership of churches with an anti-vax position
(whether general or COVID-19-specific). Wider political dimensions of hesitancy were
connected to international conspiracy theories (Lilongwe, Kampala), general vaccine
scepticism (Lilongwe) and fundamental expressions of mistrust in government
(Kampala).
 
A friend of mine refused the vaccine because of his religious beliefs
. . . He was offered a chance to get vaccinated by his
employers. (Youth leader, M, Mbare, Harare, S2)
I am young and have a healthy body. I am not rushing to get something
I am still understanding. (Youth leader, F, Mtandire, Lilongwe,
S4)

In all cities, respondents’ attitudes towards vaccines became notably more positive
between the first and final surveys (Figure S11 online). This may reflect both the maturing vaccination
drives in their cities (Figures S10a and S10b online) and the effects of having their
attention drawn fortnightly to the issue. Mumbai respondents mentioned that many
initial misconceptions and hesitancies in their communities began to dissipate once
a critical mass of people had been vaccinated, providing first-hand evidence of the
(lack of) severity of side effects, and the (un)reality of many misconceptions.

There are some in the locality who are still scared of the side
effects . . . but they will eventually take as it makes movement
easier. (Youth leader, M, M East Ward, Mumbai, S3)

## a. Gender lens on vaccine uptake and anxieties

Many men have lost their jobs and are searching for employment.
So, they get vaccinated . . . for potential employers.
(Federation leader, F, Chinsapo, Lilongwe, S4)
Women are not so engaged in politics. Politics has hindered the
vaccination process. (Community leader, M, Rubaga Division,
Kampala, S1)

We asked survey respondents if they had “noticed any significant difference in
vaccine uptake between men and women” in their settlement (Figure S12 online). Further research could usefully build on
these findings by conducting additional intersectional data collection and
analysis, for example with women and men of different ages and work
profiles.
Most Mumbai respondents (88 per cent) said there was no difference in uptake by
gender, despite a gender gap (fewer women than men) in India’s national
vaccination data at the time of the study. Such data were not available for the
African countries in the study, although elsewhere South African data have shown
fewer men than women getting vaccinated.( ) Fewer respondents in the
African cities thought there was no difference (38–47 per cent) and more
respondents said more women were getting vaccinated (27–38 per cent) than those
who said more men (15–21 per cent).
The findings relate differences in men’s and women’s motivations to seek
vaccination to gender differences in livelihood strategies, among other factors.
In all contexts, men are more likely to be formally employed, with vaccination
required by existing or prospective employers. Men may travel further for work
(on trains in Mumbai) or to certain public places (Kampala motorcycle taxi
drivers) – both activities that require vaccine certificates. In Harare, women
were more likely to work as informal traders and vendors, facing high risks of
infection through contact with the public and the need to travel – and were
motivated both to protect their health and by reason of being subject to
occupation-related vaccine mandates. Women’s social roles were also seen to put
them at greater risk of infection as they move around the community and
participate in larger social gatherings (Harare, Kampala). Some respondents
thought that gendered responsibilities tend to make women more aware of the need
to protect their family’s health and their own (all cities), more likely to need
to access government or public facilities requiring a vaccine certificate
(Harare) and more familiar/comfortable in health care settings
(Lilongwe( )).
Respondents also discussed how opportunities to access vaccines reflect gender
differences – particularly as related to the proximity of vaccine centres to
where people live. Where vaccination is available in or near settlements,
women’s more “flexible” time was seen to mean more opportunity to go to centres,
even if there are queues (Lilongwe, Kampala). Men, more likely to work formally,
are less flexible and cannot access centres operating only during working hours.
They may find it easier, however, to travel further from home, for example when
vaccines are only available in major hospitals (Lilongwe).
Both men and women were seen to be put off by misinformation, but for sometimes
different reasons. Hesitancy was linked to men’s greater tendency to political
engagement where politicians were an influential source of vaccine
misinformation (Kampala). Women were thought to be concerned about side effects
for breastfeeding and pregnancy (Lilongwe), and both men and women were worried
by misinformation about the vaccines’ effect on fertility.

## VIII. Are People Getting the Information they Need?

People need to know when vaccines are/aren’t available so they can
plan. Sometimes they go to hospital twice and come back because there
are no vaccines. (Traditional leader, M, Mtandire, Lilongwe,
S6)
We disseminate information using megaphones, moving around the
village. (Community leader, F, Rubaga Division, Kampala,
S1)

Many community leaders in the African cities said COVID-19 vaccine/vaccination
information had recently been disseminated in their settlements (58 per cent Harare,
76 per cent Kampala, 86 per cent Lilongwe). Across cities and settlements, modes of
dissemination ranged from TV and social media to local radio, community gatherings
and in-settlement door-to-door campaigns and use of public address systems. Agents
included national and city governments, local and international NGOs, local leaders
and community health workers.( ) However, fewer survey respondents thought their
communities “had the information they needed” about vaccines and the rollout in
their area( )
(41 per cent in Harare, 66 per cent Kampala, 38 per cent in Lilongwe) ( ).
 Diverse communities living in urban informal settlements represent a range of
information needs. Studies have found vaccine uptake lower among marginalized groups
with less access to the technology needed for reliable information about
availability, venues, safety and side effects, or to book appointments.( ) Good, accessible
information on these fronts, lacking in many survey areas, can create trust and save
communities time, especially in contexts of low/unreliable national supply or
distribution challenges. Waiting in long queues or travelling long distances, only
to find vaccines unavailable, were intense sources of frustration (all cities),
especially for the self-employed and people working late/long hours. In Stoneridge,
Harare, with no nearby health centre, many respondents flagged the need for better
information (as well as nearer vaccinating centres). People also needed a better
understanding of the types of vaccine available (Harare, Kampala). And in Lilongwe,
where the gap was largest between provision of information and its perceived
adequacy, many respondents highlighted a need for information from (importantly)
sources trusted by communities, to counter specific disinformation and
misinformation.
In Mumbai, almost everyone thought communities had the information they needed: most
people were vaccinated, and good uptake was evidence of adequate information.
Communities shared experiences and information, centres displayed vaccine
availability and medical workers provided people with advice about side effects and
medicines to counter them.
Information dissemination and adequacy varied by settlement and changed over the
course of the survey window. In Harare, respondents in Epworth and Hopley largely
thought the public health information being provided was adequate, but those in
Hatcliffe Extension, Mbare and Stoneridge did not. In many Kampala settlements, NGOs
and village health teams were leading awareness-raising campaigns, sometimes
door-to-door; in others, respondents flagged the need to better involve local
leaders.
Local-level information sources were seen to be key in Kampala, particularly village
health teams, and in Lilongwe, where the Ministry of Health reaches out to
communities via local leaders. In Mumbai, dominant sources were municipal
authorities and primary health care workers, although local leaders played a key
role in early stages of the rollout. In Harare, community health workers and local
clinics also provided information.

## IX. Conclusions

People are struggling to make ends meet. While there is much talk
about vaccines, there should also be effort to help people be
[financially] resilient in the face of COVID-19. (Traditional
leader, M, Mtandire, Lilongwe, S6)

Since our data collection ended, global COVID-19 vaccine inequalities have
substantially lessened, although unequal access and low uptake are still concerns,
and lagging demand and persistent public hesitancy remain legacies of earlier
failures. Societies are still threatened by the possibility of new variants, which
are most likely to emerge where there are high rates of infection and low rates of
vaccination.
Informal settlement communities have been hit disproportionately hard, and existing
inequalities, for example in health care provision, can have a multiplier effect.
Different groups have been affected differently and access to vaccines is only one
among many necessary measures for health, social and economic recovery. Across many
contexts, older citizens and those with comorbidities are still very nervous about
COVID-19 outbreaks. And, while younger people may now be less worried by health
risks – focusing instead on the now-compounded socioeconomic challenges – all are
aware of the ongoing threat of further state responses and shutdowns implemented
without adequate consideration of poverty consequences, the results of which have
already been very serious.
Multiple lessons can be drawn for future pandemics from the findings, specifically
around vaccine rollout, and for pandemic responses more generally. A recognition of
the significance of the local context is all important.
To improve pandemic response and recovery strategies, governments need to understand
how vaccine campaigns can better reach underserved urban communities – not least
because dense informal settlements with poor provision of basic services pose an
ongoing infection risk. They also need to assess the effects of policy measures to
understand how low-income communities can best be supported to recover and build
resilience. State social protection measures could potentially be built around
existing community-level savings systems. Recognition must be given to the
penalizing effect of vaccine mandates for low-income and informal workers, who are
likely to live in areas with poorer access to vaccine centres and yet lack the time
and means to travel to get vaccinated further away – especially in situations where
national supply and local availability are limited. Attention must also be given to
improving the local availability of vaccines, especially important as a more
effective way to reach women.
There are also important roles for community leaders and settlement-level information
networks that must be recognized. Community-level health professionals should be
prioritized, with access to information and specialized training in pandemic
preparedness and post-pandemic realities. These local leaders and professionals are
best placed to understand local information needs and respond to the
context-specific nature of hesitancies and vaccine anxieties. Community data
collection, among other ways to capture community knowledge, is also critical to the
improved understandings that underpin good policy, and strengthens existing
community systems, such as SDI networks.

## Supplemental Material

## sj-pdf-1-eau-10.1177_09562478221149876 – Supplemental material for
COVID-19 vaccine rollout: data from informal settlements in Harare, Kampala,
Lilongwe and Mumbai
Click here for additional data file.
Supplemental material, sj-pdf-1-eau-10.1177_09562478221149876 for COVID-19
vaccine rollout: data from informal settlements in Harare, Kampala, Lilongwe and
Mumbai by Kate Lines, Stanley Dzimadzi, Edris Lubega, Patience
Mudimu-Matsangaise, Vinodkumar Rao, Junior Alves Sebbanja, Happiness Zidana and
Diana Mitlin in Environment & Urbanization

Our thanks to all the city-based researchers involved in the study, including among
others: George Masimba, Thomas Karakadzai, Anna Teurai Nyamangara, Sheila Muganyi,
Rudo Chikumbindi, Artwell Nyirenda and Sharmila Gimonkar. We are grateful to the
300+ community leader respondents, for their patience and willingness to share their
knowledge and answer our questions every fortnight. Our thanks to the leaders and
members of national slum dweller federations in each city, for linking the research
teams to the interviewees: Zimbabwe Homeless People’s Federation, National Slum
Dwellers Federation of Uganda, Malawian Federation of the Rural and Urban Poor, and
Mahila Milan and the Indian National Slum Dwellers Federation. Thanks also to Beth
Chitekwe-Biti at SDI for steering in the design stages of the study.
Funding: The study described in this field note was funded by the UK Foreign, Commonwealth
& Development Office (FCDO) as part of the University of Manchester’s
involvement in the Covid Collective research platform.
ORCID iD: Kate Lines https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7532-8308
Supplemental Material: Supplemental material for this article is available online.
1.For broader discussion of how we understand global and local COVID-19 vaccine
inequalities please refer to ; ; for a fuller report of the survey data findings, including
settlement-level disaggregation, see .
2.“Fully vaccinate” means a full course not including boosters.
3.All statistics from Our World in Data n.d., as at 23 August 2022.
4.These were first purchased, later received through COVAX.
5.COVID-19 Vaccines Global Access (COVAX) is the global mechanism for equitably
sharing COVID-19 vaccine doses. Administered by the World Health Organization,
it relied heavily on largely inadequate donations of funds and doses by rich
countries. Widespread vaccine nationalism also undermined COVAX’s global
solidarity efforts from the start. India’s mid-2021 decision to halt vaccine
exports for several months was a further setback, curtailing COVAX’s access to
the Indian manufacturers on which it was overly reliant.
6.See https://www.theeastafrican.co.ke/tea/science-health/uganda-allows-private-hospitals-to-charge-for-covid-vaccines-3814170.
7.See https://www.monitor.co.ug/uganda/news/national/museveni-meets-sinovac-vaccine-manufacturers-3826444;
Sinovac Biotech is a Chinese company authorized by the World Health Organization
to manufacture and distribute COVID-19 vaccines.
8.Note different unit of measurement to the country statistics above.
9.In the few instances face-to-face was not possible, interviews were done over the
phone.
10.See annex in .
11.How to read the data visualizations: each full-page data visualisation contains
the following information to help the reader: the survey questions to which the
data relates; the data analysed and how it is disaggregated; a legend. All
visualizations disaggregate by city and some by settlement and/or survey. For
visual simplicity, where survey dates are shown these are labelled with the
midpoint of each of the six survey iteration windows.
12.See https://www.economist.com/graphic-detail/coronavirus-excess-deaths-estimates
13.We only asked respondents about the availability of nearby testing.
14. .
15. .
16. .
17. .
18. .
19. .
20. .
21. ; .
22. .
23.For this analysis, we drew on the Institute of Development Studies’ vaccine
anxieties framework described in , which places
“vaccine anxieties” on a spectrum from positive perspectives (confidence, desire
to get vaccinated) to negative (hesitancy, concern) and encompasses three
dimensions: bodily vaccine anxieties; social dimensions; and wider political
experiences.
24.Safety concerns are not necessarily related to consumption of misinformation.
Initially, many countries only recommended COVID vaccination for pregnant women
who were “clinically vulnerable”. At the time our study took place, scientific
evidence and official advice on safety for pregnant and breastfeeding women were
still evolving.
25. .
26.This has also been observed in research in South Africa.
27.For a fuller picture of city-level landscapes of information dissemination (kinds
of information, modes and agents), see the Figure 27 data visualisations in
 .
28.Only asked in survey 6.
29. .