pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLoS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC9584412PMC9584412.1958441295844123626486010.1371/journal.pone.0276478PONE-D-21-054561Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesNutritionMedicine and Health SciencesNutritionBiology and Life SciencesNutritionDietFoodMedicine and Health SciencesNutritionDietFoodBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaPlantsGrassesRiceResearch and Analysis MethodsAnimal StudiesExperimental Organism SystemsPlant and Algal ModelsRiceResearch and Analysis MethodsResearch DesignMedicine and Health SciencesEpidemiologyMedical Risk FactorsBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyDecision MakingBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyDecision MakingSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyDecision MakingBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitionDecision MakingMedicine and Health SciencesPharmacologyDrug Research and DevelopmentMedicine and Health SciencesPharmaceuticsDrug TherapyDrug AdministrationStakeholder engagement in a hypertension and diabetes prevention research program: Description and lessons learned
Stakeholder engagementhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-4741-090XShresthaArchanaConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionProject administrationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing TamrakarDipeshConceptualizationFunding acquisitionProject administrationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4398-9173ShresthaBhawanaData curationFormal analysisWriting – review & editing KarmacharyaBiraj ManFormal analysisWriting – review & editing ShresthaAbhaFormal analysisWriting – review & editing PyakurelPrajjwalFormal analysisWriting – review & editing SpiegelmanDonnaConceptualizationFunding acquisitionSupervisionValidationWriting – review & editing 1
Department of Public Health, Kathmandu University School of Medical Sciences, Dhulikhel, Nepal2
Center of Methods for Implementation and Prevention Science, Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, Connecticut, United States of America3
Institute for Implementation Science and Health, Kathmandu, Nepal4
School of Public Health and Community Medicine, BP Koirala Institute of Health Sciences, Dharan, Nepal5
Department of Biostatistics, Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, Connecticut, United States of AmericaAngkurawaranonChaisiriEditor files.

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the paper and its files.

## Introduction
New scientific evidences on healthcare are generated in great volume [ ]. However, much of this evidence has been difficult to implement in practice in real settings [ ]. Stakeholder engagement can help to address this need by improving the relevance of research by increasing its transparency and accelerating the adoption into real world setting [ ]. Stakeholder engagement is also important to generate knowledge, increase ownership, reduce conflict, encourage partnership, facilitate an inclusive decision making and promote equity [ ].
Stakeholder engagement is promoted by health research funding organizations as well as researchers to achieve the desired goal [ ]. Stakeholders can be engaged across stages of research including identifying topics, choosing hypotheses, analyzing data, and disseminating findings [ , ]. The levels of involvement range from consultation, to collaboration in bi-directional partnerships and to leading research projects [ ].
Despite considerable attention to stakeholder engagement, there is limited information on how stakeholders are engaged. Some reviews describe the engagement in published literature and report impacts of engagement [ – ]. However, there is lack of reporting on how an engagement is implemented. It has been recommended that researchers systematically document and report information about engagement and its impact on individual projects [ , ]. Therefore, there is the need for demonstrating approaches that have been used to stakeholder engagement and opportunities to learn more about engagement in individual research projects. The purpose of this paper is to describe the process of stakeholder engagement and the lessons learned from this process while designing, implementing, and monitoring a study on diabetes and hypertension prevention in workplace settings in Nepal.

## Materials and methods

## Study setting
Nepal Pioneer Worksite Intervention Study [ ] started in 2016 at Dhulikhel Hospital-Kathmandu University Hospital in central Nepal with a goal to prevent diabetes and hypertension among the employees of Dhulikhel Hospital. Dhulikhel Hospital is an independently owned, not-for-profit institution which was conceived and supported by the Dhulikhel community. This study was registered on clincaltrials.gov (Identification Member:NCT03447340; Registration date: 27th February 2018). The study was planned and executed in three phases:

## Phase-1: Formative study
We conducted a formative study to gather data that is useful to develop and implement an intervention program to promote healthy eating at the worksite. The major aim of the formative study was appropriateness to culture and geography to develop meaningful interventions at individual and organizational level. The objective was to define and assess attributes of the study participants, understand the context, tailor intervention at local context, and build relationship between researcher, study populations and other stakeholders.

## Phase-2: Develop culturally appropriate intervention and define research attributes
In the second phase, we used the information from the formative study to develop a culturally appropriate environmental level intervention to promote healthy eating in the cafeteria of the workplace. We further used this information to define study attributes such as primary outcomes, study design, implementation and monitoring strategies, and analysis plan.

## Phase-3: Test the effectiveness of the intervention
In the third phase, we tested the effectiveness of the environmental level intervention using a two-step intervention study. In the first step, we assessed the effectiveness of a 6-month cafeteria intervention on cardio-metabolic risk using a pre-post design. In the second step, we conducted a 6-month, open-masked, two-arm randomized trial by allocating half of the participants to an individual behavioral intervention for the prevention of cardio-metabolic risk in order to estimate the additional effect of an individual level intervention. The design of the study has been published elsewhere [ ].

## Stakeholder engagement

## Stakeholder definition
We defined stakeholder as an individual or group affected by or who can influence the environmental intervention to promote healthy eating in the workplace.

## Engagement objectives
Our objectives of stakeholder engagement were (a) to identify the specific research needs in their worksite for promoting healthy eating, (b) to develop culturally appropriate healthy eating intervention; (c) to increase stakeholders’ participation in study process such as determining study objectives and methods, describing study intervention, recruiting participants, implementing and monitoring the healthy eating intervention; (d) interpreting study results; and (e) enhancing sustainability.

## Identification of stakeholders
We adopted the 7Ps framework [ ] that identifies key groups to consider for engagement. The first, patients and the public, represented the current and potential consumers of patient-centered health care and population-focused public health. The second were providers, including individuals and organizations that provide care to patients and populations. Purchasers, the individuals, and entities responsible for underwriting the costs of health care, such as employers, made up the third group. The fourth group consisted of payers who were responsible for reimbursement of medical care, such as insurers. The fifth composed of public policy makers and policy advocates working in the non-governmental sector. Product makers, representing drug and device manufacturers, comprised the sixth group, and principal investigators, or other researchers, made up the seventh. Since this was not a typical patient focus study, but rather a community-based prevention trial in an institutional setting, we modified the definition of the 7Ps according to our context ( ).
 

## Stakeholder engagement methods
We involved stakeholders in all three phases.

## At formative study phase

## Formation of study team
After mapping out the stakeholder for the study, individuals representing each stakeholder category working in nutrition related research were purposively approached in-person and the study team was formed. We selected adult aged 18 years or older, employee of the hospital, who provided informed consent as stakeholder in each category. None of the stakeholders whom we approached declined to participate in the study. The stakeholders were represented as co-investigators and advisors.

## Focus Group Discussions (FGDs)
We conducted four focus group discussions with 33 employees of the hospital to explore the current healthy eating environment, understand drivers and barriers for eating healthy, and to obtain their recommendations on improving environment to promote healthy eating at the hospital cafeteria.
The focus groups were conducted within the workplace setting in a private room to ensure confidentiality and open sharing of opinion. The FGDs were conducted in Nepali and audio taped after obtaining informed consent from the participants. The investigators, AS, or DT, moderated all FGDs in Nepali language and were assisted by a note-taker. In each session, a brief introduction of the study and ethical considerations about maintaining confidentiality of the participants, were explained. The moderator asked open-ended questions and probed for detail information. We used iterative process by discussing each FGD immediately after completion and suggesting necessary detail probing in emerging themes from finding.

## In-depth interviews
We conducted 9 in-depth interviews with purposively selected hospital employees including a finance manager, a cafeteria manager, an administrative manager and 6 cafeteria operators after receiving informed consent. The investigators DT or AS conducted semi-structured in-depth interviews in Nepali language using a pretested interview guide in a private room of the hospital. We used the iterative process for data collection. After each interview, we discussed each interview and identified the topics to be deeply explored into themes emerging in earlier interviews. All FGDs and interviews were transcribed verbatim into Nepali by trained research assistants. We used thematic analysis approach [ ] to analyze the data.

## At development of research design and intervention phase

## Workshops
We conducted three iterative workshops with the representation of hospital administration, cafeteria managers, cafeteria staff, nutrition department, employee, and researchers. The aims of the workshops were to consensually decide changes in cafeteria, clarify roles of each stakeholder and develop monitoring strategies. Each workshop was facilitated by DT, a co-investigator, and an employee, using a workshop schedule and discussion guideline. The workshops took 3 hours. In the first hour, the facilitator explained the link between healthy eating and cardiometabolic risks. In the second hour, the findings from the formative study were shared in an interactive session, and in the third hour a guided discussion with the participants was conducted. The themes of the guided discussion were: components of the healthy eating interventions, mode of intervention delivery, mode of implementation and monitoring, and method of evaluation, that enabled us to plan the study better. The stakeholders’ in workshops provided inputs in decision making. We presented the initial findings to the stakeholders and collected their feedback.

## Food taste experiments
A major theme that emerged in focus group discussions, in-depth interviews and workshop included acceptability of introducing whole grains in the cafeteria, especially brown rice. Therefore, the research team decided and conducted a brown rice tasting experiment with 40 employees of the hospital. After tasting brown rice, the participants perception on brown rice changed positively [ ].

## Individual consultation
The results of the formative study with further action plan were discussed individually with the hospital administrator, cafeteria manager, cafeteria chefs, nutritionist of the hospital and few employees of the hospital to get further feedback.

## At testing of intervention phase

## Meeting of study team
The study team met online every week for 30 to 60 minutes to discuss on a predetermined agenda and all decisions were taken jointly and recorded in written.

## Information sessions
A 20-minute information session was conducted in all departments of the hospital to provide information regarding the study and collecting feedback. About 22 sessions were conducted with participation of 4 to 20 employees in each session. In the first five minutes, the study design was explained, the next 5 minutes were dedicated for the call for participation and explanations regarding expectations from the participants, and 10 minutes for discussion and feedback.

## Formation of cafeteria intervention committee
A canteen intervention committee was formed comprising the representations of hospital administrator, human resource department, finance department, hygiene monitoring department, non-communicable disease prevention and management department, nutrition department, canteen managers, employee, and researchers. This committee steered the development, implementation and monitoring of the cafeteria intervention. The committee made the plans for the cafeteria intervention, implementation, and monitoring. It meets once a month to discuss the progress, problems, and solutions.

## Ethical consideration
We received approval from the institutional review board of Kathmandu University School of Medical Sciences, under Nepal Health Research Council (Reference number: 70/16) for the human subject contacts and obtained written informed consent from the participants before collecting data for research purpose.

## Results

## Stakeholder identification
Based on the 7P framework, the identified stakeholders are presented in . The identified stakeholders were: customers or employees (patient and the public; purchasers); cafeteria managers, chef and staff (providers); hospital administration and finance department (payers; policy makers); human resource department (policy maker); cafeteria employee, bakery and rice mills (product maker); and research team members (principal investigators).

## Outcome of stakeholder engagement
 presents the stakeholder engagement in different activities within different study phases.
 

## During formative study phase

## Formation of study team
We formed a study team representing stakeholders from each category as investigator or an advisor. Investigators directly participated in the day-to-day implementation of the study while advisors provided suggestion and guidance when required [ ]. Four employees consisting of a medical doctor, a laboratory personnel, a pharmacist, and a community programs expert jointed the team as co-investigators. They brought their scientific expertise and unique perspective as a customer of cafeteria. The hospital administrator, a cafeteria manager and a nutritionist joined as advisor.

## Focus group discussions
Majority of participants considered that the foods that were available in the hospital cafeteria were healthy. However, items such as confectionaries like cream donut, oily curry and meat, soda drinks, instant noodles etc. were considered unhealthy food. They emphasized that the foods were hygienically prepared and cheaper compared to hotels outside. Participants highlighted that the changes to improve food quality will be well received positively because most of them are health professionals. The most reported factors that would facilitate healthy eating were: (a) addition of healthy food options, (b) replacement of unhealthy foods with healthy options, and (c) appealing presentation of healthy foods. Active involvement of canteen management and administrator in the process of change was highly emphasized. The participants suggested to advertise healthy food options and educate both cafeteria operators and consumers on healthy eating. The major barriers to healthy eating were: (a) unavailability of healthy options, (b) lack of human resources to prepare healthy food, and (c) high price of healthy food and (d) food preferences. They suggested to add the healthy items which will demand less time and resources like adding the automated machines such as roti makers. The support staff commented that they might not be consuming the fruits even if they are added because of the high cost. However, health professionals expressed their willingness to pay more for access to healthy food. The participants were concerned that it would be difficult to change food preferences as the consumers prefer spicy and oily foods. Some of the unhealthy foods are greatly loved such as instant noodles, samosas, cream donuts, soda drinks etc., and changing food habit is challenging.

## In-depth interviews
Cafeteria operator commented that the higher-level authorities should be involved in making healthy changes, deciding the menu, and fixing the price. One of the canteen managers highlighted the need of a committee to involve the canteen operator, administrative staff, medical doctors, and nutritionist to decide on the change in food menu, price, and to monitor the availability of healthy options in canteen. The canteen operators mentioned that the hospital cafeteria provides food in subsidized price and does not intend to make profit. The operators were concerned about the lack of knowledge on healthy eating among the cafeteria staff and pointed that providing health education to them could facilitate making changes. They mentioned that the cafeteria staff receive training on hygiene occasionally but have never received training on healthy eating and healthy cooking. The major barrier for healthy eating reported by canteen operator were: (a) lack of adequate human resource to add food options; (b) lack of knowledge on the healthy cooking among cafeteria staff, (c) unavailability of healthy food options in the cafeteria and (d) no food supply for healthy foods such as brown rice, brown bread, organic vegetables etc. The canteen operator reported that they are not well-staffed to provide healthy foods such as whole wheat pan bread (roti), fruits and salad as their preparation is labor intensive. The human resource manager thought that increasing efficiency of the available staff was more important than adding staff. The stakeholders contributed to the interpretation of qualitative data and contextualize the findings. The details of the FGD and Interview results are available elsewhere [ ]. In Brief, four focus group discussions of 33 participants and nine in-depth interviews among six canteen operators and three managers identified the availability of affordable healthy food options in the cafeterias, a commitment to such promotion by the cafeteria manager, operators, staff and hospital administration and the level of education of the employees, as the factors to promote healthy eating. In addition, the unavailability of healthy options, including the lack of food supply from local market, the higher cost of healthy foods, individual food preferences and limited human resources in the cafeteria were identified as barriers for healthy eating [ ].

## During development of research design and intervention phase

## Workshops
The discussions in the workshop were very interactive and productive. The cafeteria managers and cafeteria staffs emphasized the need for active involvement of the departments of finance and administration because these departments had major role deciding the menu and price of the food served in the cafeteria. This led to formation of canteen intervention committee with chairmanship of the hospital administrator and representatives from finance, human resource, nutrition, employee, and researchers. There was univocal agreement on the need of adding healthy food items. However, lack of human resource in the cafeteria was a major challenge. In response, automated roti (whole wheat pan bread) maker was suggested. The details on which food to add and which to remove were discussed and finalized in the workshop. In addition, the pre-post design was suggested in contrast to randomized trial to test the effectiveness of the changes in cafeteria on cardiometabolic risk because it would be unethical to provide healthy food items in some cafeterias only. Additionally, the risk of contamination was emphasized as customers do not exclusively go to one cafeteria. Consumers and chefs raised the concern on acceptability of brown rice in place of white rice. Hence, a brown rice tasting experiment was suggested.

## Individual consultation
Based on the findings of the FGDs, in-depth interviews and workshops, the study team prepared the description of the cafeteria intervention and proposed study design to test the effectiveness of the intervention on cardiometabolic risks. The proposal was described and discussed in-person with the stakeholders. Lack of comparison group was indicated as a weakness of the study in the initial pre-post design. As a result, six months of control period was added before intervention was implemented to be able to compare outcome measures with and without the intervention.

## During testing of intervention phase

## Meeting of study team
In the weekly meeting of the study team, the implementation strategies were discussed and finalized in detail. This included details on disseminating information on study, call for participation, informed consent administration, data collection from the participants, enrolment planning, and intervention start dates. The internal insights of employees in the study team members guided the decision making. When the effectiveness study started, the progress on enrollment, problems and strategies were discussed weekly. For example, when there was slow blood sample collection, the representative from the laboratory suggested to provide breakfast voucher to the participants. Adding breakfast voucher worth 70 cents in subsequent blood draw appointment speeded up the sample collection. Similarly, it was difficult to enroll the nurses who had night duties. The doctor in the study team suggested to consider nurse’s duty roster and contact nurses immediately after completion of duty hours in the morning. This strategy helped to increase the participation of the nurses in the study.

## Information sessions
The information session helped to reach and interact with wider employee group. The department head provided date and venue for the information session. During the information session, feedback was obtained on the design of the study and participant recruitment. A major issue that came up was the involvement of supervisors in participants’ recruitment. The employees commented that presence of supervisors during the information session might be perceived as encouragement from them to participate. To make the participation voluntary, we conducted the sessions in absence of higher-level staff in each department, the identifiers of the participants were collected separately and were not disclosed to anyone.

## Formation of cafeteria intervention committee
The cafeteria intervention committee had key decisive role in designing, implementing, monitoring, and evaluating the cafeteria intervention. Each component of the intervention was discussed and decided by the intervention committee after weighing their benefits, financial implications, and perceived acceptance by the employee. The committee developed a monitoring sheet that the nutritionist and a research team member filled every week to measure the adherence to the defined intervention in all four cafeterias. The monitoring team also interacted with the chefs, cafeteria staffs and customers informally and collected their concerns. The monitoring data were assessed, and concerns were presented to the committee every month. The committee discussed the problems and strategies to address them. For example, in the initial week, there was problem of supply of whole grains such as brown rice and brown bread. The committee approached the local mill and a local bakery and ordered brown rice and brown bread for the cafeteria. After adding fruits on the menu, the sales of fruits in the first two months were low. The committee decided to launch a week-long campaign to promote fruits in each cafeteria which boosted their sales.

## Benefits and challenges of stakeholder engagement
We are confident that our project, the project goals, methods, and intervention have evolved positively based on our collaborations with stakeholders. Most importantly, their input was necessary in determining and describing cafeteria intervention. Their continuous involvement in monitoring helped in solving problems promptly and enhanced adherence to intervention. In addition, their input shaped methods, plans and processes for recruiting participants and data collection.
While we had a positive experience of involving stakeholder, it was not devoid of challenges. A major challenge was time availability of stakeholders as they were busy in their respective works. To address this, we scheduled meetings according to the availability of the stakeholders. We had to conduct multiple workshops and information sessions to accommodate the time of cafeteria staff and hospital staff. This was time and resource consuming. It was also important to allow time for stakeholders to get acquainted with their new roles associated with the intervention. Their knowledge of a healthy diet was dominated by the cultural norms and there was some misconception. So, we invested time and resources in training them on healthy eating. This also led to initiation of positive changes in cafeterias during the control period before the predetermined intervention date. We also felt that research priorities do not necessarily meet the priorities of the stakeholders. For example, the cafeteria staff emphasized more on the changes in physical structures such as adding culinary. There was language barrier, as researchers were comfortable using scientific jargons such as ‘epidemiology’ ‘control’ ‘confounding’, ‘subjects’ etc. making the stakeholders confused at times. It was difficult to translate or interpret these works well in local language. Additionally, the food beliefs of researchers and stakeholders were different. Stakeholders strongly believe in eating warm ‘white rice’ twice a day. In addition, fruits were not considered appropriate to take during lunch. Knowledge sessions on healthy diets addressed these deep rooted beliefs to some extent but changing food belief system takes longer time and more effort [ , ].

## Discussion
We identified employees, cafeteria managers, workplace administrators, finance manager, human resource manager, cafeteria staff and researchers as major stakeholders in the Nepal pioneer worksite intervention study to prevent cardiometabolic risks. The stakeholders were included in the study team, and they brought their expertise in the subject matter as well as insights as employees and customers of the cafeteria. The exploration of the facilitators and barriers to healthy eating at their worksite provided a base for defining the intervention and study attributes. Interactive workshops provided opportunity and mandate for the stakeholders to participate in decision making and strengthened the investigator-stakeholder relationship. Individual consultations helped get stronger buy-in and commitment from the higher authorities and employees. Regular meeting of the study team and canteen intervention committee guaranteed continuous engagement in problem solving and decision making. It reinforced ownership and enhanced project sustainability. The major challenges were the time-consuming nature of the process, language barriers, and differences in health and food beliefs between researchers and stakeholders.
We mapped and engaged 7 different types of stakeholders in our study. Patient-centered outcome research projects have reported engaging clinicians, caregivers, advocacy organizations and health system representatives; but only few engaged payers and policy makers [ , ]. We incorporated the views of multiple types of stakeholders into our study during formative phase, development of intervention and study and execution of the study. For example, we formed cafeteria intervention committee based on the suggestion of cafeteria manager in in-depth interview. Brown-rice tasting experiment was also conducted to solve the concern of the participants of workshops (consumers and chefs) on the acceptability of brown rice. Engagement has most frequently been reported in developing research questions [ ]. This study described the effort, attention, resources and flexibility for concerted engagement emphasizing on meaningful and continuous collaboration, shared leadership and decision-making power, and adaptation to the needs of stakeholders. Other researchers have highlighted the importance of sharing power for successful research engagement [ ].
The input from different stakeholder influenced our study goals, intervention, methods, and materials. This enhanced the appropriateness and relevance in the local context. Similar experience was reported by other investigators [ ]. Making research more beneficiaries-centric, culturally relevant and accessible to potential research participants have been reported to refine proposals, recruitment materials, and participant compensation [ ]. In our project, the stakeholders contributed to the interpretation of qualitative data and the findings, similar to the study by Boote J et al [ ]. This is consistent with the available evidence on positive impacts of engaged research [ , ].
The stakeholder engagement has contributed positively in our study from formative phase to execution phase. Various levels of stakeholder involvement, such as consultation, collaboration or user-control has been proposed [ ]. However, caution has been recommended against assuming that higher levels of involvement is always better [ ]. Some researchers in a national survey from UK claimed that decisions about the appropriateness of consumer involvement in research should be made on a case-by-case basis [ ].
The major challenges that we faced were the time-consuming nature of the process, language barriers, and differences in health and food beliefs between researchers and stakeholders. Similar challenges have been reported in other studies [ , ]. Lack of time—both for stakeholders and researchers—was the most frequently noted challenge and was identified as a top barrier to engagement in a recent survey of investigators [ ]. Thus, it is crucial to develop strategies that maximize stakeholder input with minimum time and resources [ ].
The generalizability of our findings is limited because of the unique setting where the research was conducted. Because it was a university hospital, we had an advantage of including the employees with specific research expertise as co-investigators. The stakeholders had more interest in and experience with the health interventions and research. Thus, their knowledge and attitude about engagement may be more positive.

## Conclusion
It was possible to engage and benefit from stakeholder’s engagement on the design, implementation and monitoring of a workplace-based hypertension and diabetes management research program in Nepal. We recommend ongoing program development and implementation by stakeholder input. In future, we plan to evaluate the influence of stakeholders on the research project and assess the engagement and effectiveness through their perspective, as well as longer term outcomes on health decision making beyond the conduction of research.

## Supporting information
S1 Dataset(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.

We would like to acknowledge the Dhulikhel Hospital—Kathmandu University Hospital for their permission and cooperation to conduct this study. We appreciate the contribution of all the study participants.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0276478.r001Decision Letter 0
AngkurawaranonChaisiriAcademic Editor© 2022 Chaisiri Angkurawaranon2022Chaisiri Angkurawaranonhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
27 Apr 2021

PONE-D-21-05456
Stakeholder engagement in a hypertension and diabetes prevention research program – Description and Lessons learned
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Shrestha,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jun 11 2021 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:

A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Chaisiri Angkurawaranon
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. When reporting the results of qualitative research, we suggest consulting the COREQ guidelines: http://intqhc.oxfordjournals.org/content/19/6/349
In this case, please consider including more information on the number of interviewers, their training and characteristics; how participants were selected; if a pilot study was tested; how data was coded; if bias issues were considered.
Moreover, please provide the interview guide used as a Supplementary file.
3. Please ensure you have included the registration number for the clinical trial referenced in the manuscript.
4. We note that you have indicated that data from this study are available upon request. PLOS only allows data to be available upon request if there are legal or ethical restrictions on sharing data publicly. For information on unacceptable data access restrictions, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions.
In your revised cover letter, please address the following prompts:
a) If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially identifying or sensitive patient information) and who has imposed them (e.g., an ethics committee). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent.
b) If there are no restrictions, please upload the minimal anonymized data set necessary to replicate your study findings as either Supporting Information files or to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. Please see http://www.bmj.com/content/340/bmj.c181.long for guidelines on how to de-identify and prepare clinical data for publication. For a list of acceptable repositories, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-recommended-repositories.
We will update your Data Availability statement on your behalf to reflect the information you provide.
5. PLOS requires an ORCID iD for the corresponding author in Editorial Manager on papers submitted after December 6th, 2016. Please ensure that you have an ORCID iD and that it is validated in Editorial Manager. To do this, go to ‘Update my Information’ (in the upper left-hand corner of the main menu), and click on the Fetch/Validate link next to the ORCID field. This will take you to the ORCID site and allow you to create a new iD or authenticate a pre-existing iD in Editorial Manager. Please see the following video for instructions on linking an ORCID iD to your Editorial Manager account: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_xcclfuvtxQ
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: N/A
Reviewer #2: N/A
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: This manuscript describes stakeholder engagement activities and lessons learned in a diabetes and hypertension prevention study in workplace settings in Nepal. The authors describe stakeholder engagement activities during the formative, intervention development, and study conduct phases of this project. In general, this paper could benefit from grammatical review as there are several errors throughout. Additionally, the literature review should be updated to reflect current gaps, as there are several existing articles to date that offer engagement implementation examples, which was stated as a gap and strength of current paper. The impact of stakeholder engagement on research activities and translation is an area for further contribution and an opportunity where this manuscript could offer insight. Areas of stakeholder impact should be more clearly identified in the paper. In addition to above, consider the following to strengthen this manuscript:
-Consider re-designing Table 1 into a Figure and move to first presentation of stakeholders using 7P Framework in Methods section (not in Results section as current placement).
-Although it was stated that results from qualitative work is under consideration for publication elsewhere, this section could benefit from including more specifics regarding questions asked during focus group sessions/in-depth interviews with stakeholders and/or qualitative supporting quotes from discussions, since these informed intervention. Who came up with interview questions? How did the research team decide which feedback to implement?
-Consider creating a new Table 1 in Results that includes stakeholder type and the actual activities that the stakeholders were engaged in (i.e. formative and then subheading for which activity i.e. focus group). It was not clear within text the myriad of stakeholders who participated in the various study processes. This table could also include a column "Impact" to highlight how stakeholder contributions informed the study and in what way(s).
Reviewer #2: Thank you for the opportunity to review this manuscript. Herewith my comments
Overall
An important work in the area stakeholder engagement. Generally, well written but needs some language editing and improvement in flow in some sections.
Abstract
Lines 39-41. What is described does not include interpreting the results and results dissemination.
Lines 47: I am not sure increased trust in research and confidence with the researchers is a result or what can be inferred (or assumed) given the processes and outcomes. What evidence do you have for this allusion?
Line 54: The manuscript has not reported on engaging the stakeholders in the evaluation may be monitoring.
Introduction
Line 62: Give reference
See comment on line 67
Materials and methods
-Line 88: Aim would be more appropriate than “theme”
-Sub-titles e.g., Phase 1 Formative study would be better be presented as Phase 1: Formative study
-Lines 106 to lines 202: Flow in stakeholder engagement needs to be improved for easier reading. I suggest a main sub-title “Stakeholder engagement” and smaller sub-titles as follows: stakeholder definition, engagement objectives, stakeholder identification and stakeholder methods of engagement.
-Not sure it is necessary to number the phases e.g., line 134
-Lines 135-137. What criteria did you use to identify/include the individuals from each stakeholder category after conducting the mapping?. This also applies to those included in focus groups discussion (FDGs).
-Purposive selection for interviews- what specific information did you expect that these participants could be having unlike others
-I think its important to mention qualitative methods were used for FDGs and the in depth interviews- as the methods holds specific benefits and give support from literature on the choice of method
-Line 172: I think topic rather than theme will be more appropriate
-What was the stakeholders’ role in the workshops?
Results
-Line 211: What informed/guided the inclusion to a certain category (investigator vs. advisor). Any evidence from literature?
-As a reader, I was expecting more details of the FDGs and interviews, but I saw at the end the statement that the results are under consideration for publication elsewhere. Just wondering, the implication of this given that data needs to be availed by authors.
-Lines 231-232: They suggested to add the healthy items which will demand less time and resources like adding the automated machines such as roti makers. Rephrase I don’t think automated machines needs less resource (may be human but not financial)
-Interchange order of sentences on lines 218-219 and lines 219-221 for better flow.
-What was the outcome of the food testing and how did it inform the intervention?
-Rephrase lines 356-358 for clarity
-Lines 392-394: There is nowhere that is reported how the stakeholders were involved in interpreting the data.
Discussion
Lines 379 to 387: It would be useful if the authors could highlight on how they incorporated the views of the stakeholders in each step, probably in a Table format. For example; What was the final goal and what stakeholder input lead to that outcome.
I think it is important for the reader to know where the project is at the moment- is still being implemented and prospect of sustainability given that its one of the objective of involving stakeholders.
*There is some restriction to the data. Wondering about the qualitative data that is to be published elsewhere and part is included in the current manuscript.
Some comments are in the manuscript itself
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes: Jane W Muchiri
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: PONE-D-21-05456_reviewer-1.pdf
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0276478.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
8 Jun 2022

Subject: Re-submission of an original research article to PLOS ONE journal addressing the reviewer's comment
Dear sir/madam,
It is our pleasure to re-submit to you and the editorial teams our manuscript entitled “Stakeholder Engagement in a Hypertension and Diabetes Prevention Research Program – Description and Lessons Learned”. The paper aims to describe the stakeholder engagement process and the lessons learned from this process while designing, implementing and monitoring a study on diabetes and hypertension prevention in workplace settings in Nepal. It provides important insights for future researchers that aim to engage stakeholders in national-level preventive programs in health.
We would like to thank all the reviewers for their constructive comments. The responses to the reviewer’s comments are addressed individually below:
Reviewer 1
This manuscript describes stakeholder engagement activities and lessons learned in diabetes and hypertension prevention study in workplace settings in Nepal. The authors describe stakeholder engagement activities during the formative, intervention development, and study conduct phases of this project. In general, this paper could benefit from a grammatical review as there are several errors throughout. Additionally, the literature review should be updated to reflect current gaps, as there are several existing articles to date that offer engagement implementation examples, which was stated as a gap and strength of current paper. The impact of stakeholder engagement on research activities and translation is an area for further contribution and an opportunity where this manuscript could offer insight. Areas of stakeholder impact should be more clearly identified in the paper. In addition to above, consider the following to strengthen this manuscript:
-Consider re-designing Table 1 into a Figure and move to first presentation of stakeholders using 7P Framework in Methods section (not in Results section as current placement).
>> The Table 1 is converted to figure and shifted to methods section
-Although it was stated that results from qualitative work is under consideration for publication elsewhere, this section could benefit from including more specifics regarding questions asked during focus group sessions/in-depth interviews with stakeholders and/or qualitative supporting quotes from discussions, since these informed intervention. Who came up with interview questions? How did the research team decide which feedback to implement?
>> The result and methods are available in detailed in the paper below and it is now cited.
Tamrakar D, Shrestha A, Rai A, Karmacharya BM, Malik V, Mattei J, et al. Drivers of healthy eating in a workplace in Nepal: a qualitative study. BMJ Open. 2020;10: e031404. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2019-031404
-Consider creating a new Table 1 in Results that includes stakeholder type and the actual activities that the stakeholders were engaged in (i.e. formative and then subheading for which activity i.e. focus group). It was not clear within text the myriad of stakeholders who participated in the various study processes. This table could also include a column "Impact" to highlight how stakeholder contributions informed the study and in what way(s).
>>Table is generated as per your suggestions
Reviewer 2
An important work in the area stakeholder engagement. Generally, well written but needs some language editing and improvement in flow in some sections.
Abstract
Lines 39-41. What is described does not include interpreting the results and results dissemination.
>> It is revised as per your suggestion
Lines 47: I am not sure increased trust in research and confidence with the researchers is a result or what can be inferred (or assumed) given the processes and outcomes. What evidence do you have for this allusion?
>> It is revised as per your suggestion
Line 54: The manuscript has not reported on engaging the stakeholders in the evaluation may be monitoring.
>>The comment is addressed 
Introduction
Line 62: Give reference
>> Reference is added
See comment on line 67
>> comment addressed
Materials and methods
-Line 88: Aim would be more appropriate than “theme”
>> “theme” is changed to “aim”
-Sub-titles e.g., Phase 1 Formative study would be better be presented as Phase 1: Formative study
-Lines 106 to lines 202: Flow in stakeholder engagement needs to be improved for easier reading. I suggest a main sub-title “Stakeholder engagement” and smaller sub-titles as follows: stakeholder definition, engagement objectives, stakeholder identification, and stakeholder methods of engagement.
>> Its flow is changed according to the suggestion provided.
-Not sure it is necessary to number the phases e.g., line 134
>>The phrases are now un-numbered
-Lines 135-137. What criteria did you use to identify/include the individuals from each stakeholder category after conducting the mapping?. This also applies to those included in focus groups discussion (FDGs).
>> Added to the manuscript. We selected adults aged 18 years or older, employee of the hospital, who provided informed consent in each stakeholder category. 
-Purposive selection for interviews- what specific information did you expect that these participants could be having unlike others
>> They had unique experience of making first hand decisions and implementation at the cafeteria and other wellness programs for the employees. These interviewees brought their perspectives on the decision making system, how it affected healthy food choices in the cafeteria and other administrative decisions regarding employee’s health. This would provide insights into the facilitators and barriers to healthy eating in the workplace environment.
-I think its important to mention qualitative methods were used for FDGs and the in-depth interviews- as the methods hold specific benefits and give support from the literature on the choice of method
>> >> The result and methods for FGDs and in depth interviews are available in detailed in the paper below and it is now cited.
Tamrakar D, Shrestha A, Rai A, Karmacharya BM, Malik V, Mattei J, et al. Drivers of healthy eating in a workplace in Nepal: a qualitative study. BMJ Open. 2020;10: e031404. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2019-031404
-Line 172: I think topic rather than theme will be more appropriate
>> The word theme is replaced by the topic
-What was the stakeholders’ role in the workshops?
>>The stakeholders provided their inputs in decision making. We presented the initial findings with the stakeholders and collected their feedback in the interpretation of the results.
Results
-Line 211: What informed/guided the inclusion to a certain category (investigator vs. advisor). Any evidence from literature?
>> Investigator were those who directly participated in the day-to-day implementation of the study, compared to advisors who provided their suggestions and guidances when asked for.
-As a reader, I was expecting more details of the FDGs and interviews, but I saw at the end the statement that the results are under consideration for publication elsewhere. Just wondering, the implication of this given that data needs to be availed by authors.
>>>> The result and methods are available in detailed in the paper below and it is now cited.
Tamrakar D, Shrestha A, Rai A, Karmacharya BM, Malik V, Mattei J, et al. Drivers of healthy eating in a workplace in Nepal: a qualitative study. BMJ Open. 2020;10: e031404. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2019-031404
-Lines 231-232: They suggested to add the healthy items which will demand less time and resources like adding the automated machines such as roti makers. Rephrase I don’t think automated machines needs less resource (may be human but not financial)
>> The sentence is rephrased as “They suggested to add the healthy items which will demand less time and human resources like adding the automated machines such as roti makers.”
-Interchange order of sentences on lines 218-219 and lines 219-221 for better flow.
>> The sentences are interchanged
-What was the outcome of the food testing and how did it inform the intervention?
>> Added to the manuscript. Participant’s perspectives on brown rice was found to be changed after tasting. Participants were willing to switch to brown rice as they found that brown rice had higher quality.[17]
-Rephrase lines 356-358 for clarity
>>The line is rephrased for clarity
-Lines 392-394: There is nowhere that is reported how the stakeholders were involved in interpreting the data.
>> The comment is addressed in the manuscript.
Discussion
Lines 379 to 387: It would be useful if the authors could highlight on how they incorporated the views of the stakeholders in each step, probably in a Table format. For example; What was the final goal and what stakeholder input lead to that outcome.
>> We added some ways that we used to incorporate views of stakeholders. (. For example, we formed cafeteria intervention committee based on the suggestion of cafeteria manager in in-depth interview. Brown-rice tasting experiment was also conducted to solve the concern of consumers and chefs on the acceptability of brown rice in workshop.)
Other comments 
1. Please ensure you have included the registration number for the clinical trial referenced in the manuscript.
The registration number is added in the manuscript. This study was registered on clincaltrials.gov (Identification Member:NCT03447340; Registration date: 27th February, 2018).
2. To help ensure that the wording of your manuscript is suitable for publication, would you please also add this statement at the beginning of the Methods section of your manuscript file.
The ethical statement is added in the publication. 
Ethical consideration: We received approval from the institutional review board of Kathmandu University School of Medical Sciences and Nepal Health Research Council for the human subject contacts and obtained written informed consent from the participants before collecting data for research purpose.
3. Data availability statement. 
The dataset is uploaded is OSF. The link to dataset is https://osf.io/bqsrd/
I think it is important for the reader to know where the project is at the moment- is still being implemented and prospect of sustainability given that its one of the objective of involving stakeholders
We look forward to your comments and remain with best regards;
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0276478.r003Decision Letter 1
AngkurawaranonChaisiriAcademic Editor© 2022 Chaisiri Angkurawaranon2022Chaisiri Angkurawaranonhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
15 Jul 2022

PONE-D-21-05456R1Stakeholder engagement in a hypertension and diabetes prevention research program – Description and Lessons learnedPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Shrestha,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process. Please submit your revised manuscript by Aug 29 2022 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Chaisiri Angkurawaranon
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #2: Partly
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #2: N/A
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #2: 1. General
� An important topic that will contribute to stakeholder engagement in interventions knowledge base. But unless, I have not understood the title “It is description & lessons learnt” As a reader I don’t think I still can clearly pinpoint the lessons learnt unless in the manuscript it is equivalent to benefits & challenges. Wonder if the title should not be Description & experiences?
� Generally well written. However, the manuscript can benefit from some editing e.g. Line 143 word interview should not be started with upper case. Line 144: Add “a” between guide and in private room. More information on specific places to correct are given in comments on the manuscript itself.
� I see some of the work mentioned in the manuscript has been published, for example the FDGs & in-depth interviews. I think it is important that the reader understands from the word go, that details are reported somewhere. For example, I had a question on the number of participants per FDG, and wondering about the participants quotes, but I see these details are in reference 19.
� I think what would important is to highlight what informed the authors decisions- for example to form a study committee, use focus groups/workshops and not any methods for engagement, in case a reader would want to conduct a similar stakeholder engagement but still briefly report how these activities were done. I believe you were guided by literature.
2 Introduction: The statement “New scientific evidence” appears incomplete without saying what kind of evidence. For example, is it health promotion/medical intervention effectiveness?
3 Methods
Lines 122- 126: The formation of the study team is unclear. I would believe some stakeholder categories had more than one person. How did you decide which representative(s) to approach? Are there people who declined to take part, since you have said those who provided informed consent? The last part “The stakeholders represented as co-investigators and advisors” need to be rephrased for clarity. [Probably referring to your published work could help as well].
I think its important to mention the rationale for the constituents of study team in the methods section.
Workshops: As a reader I will be interested to know the aim of the workshop.
It may be good to give the ethics approval number
The authors should detail how stakeholders were involved in the interpretation of the results.
Line 352- put a reference as this is documented in the literature.
I believe the first part of the discussion i.e 356 to 367, there would be literature documenting these strategies in other studies. If not the authors should indicate there is no other studies identified that have used the same strategies as the current study.
Conclusion does not include any comment on lessons learnt.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: PONE-D-21-05456_R1_A.pdf
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0276478.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
22 Aug 2022

Response to Reviewers
08/22/2022
To
Editors and team
PLOS ONE journal
Subject: Re-submission of an original research article to PLOS ONE journal addressing the reviewer's comment
Dear sir/madam,
It is our pleasure to re-submit our manuscript entitled “Stakeholder Engagement in a Hypertension and Diabetes Prevention Research Program” to the editorial teams. The paper aims to describe the stakeholder engagement process and the lessons learned from this process while designing, implementing and monitoring a study on diabetes and hypertension prevention in workplace settings in Nepal. It provides important insights for future researchers that aim to engage stakeholders in national-level preventive programs in health.
We would like to thank all the reviewers for their constructive comments. The responses to the reviewer’s comments are addressed individually below:
 Reviewer 2
General:
An important topic that will contribute to stakeholder engagement in interventions knowledge base. But unless, I have not understood the title “It is description & lessons learnt” As a reader I don’t think I still can clearly pinpoint the lessons learnt unless in the manuscript it is equivalent to benefits & challenges. Wonder if the title should not be Description & experiences?
>> Based on your suggestions we removed Description & experiences from title.
Generally, well written. However, the manuscript can benefit from some editing e.g. Line 143: word interview should not be started with upper case. Line 144: Add “a” between guide and in private room. More information on specific places to correct are given in comments on the manuscript itself.
>>Edited based on your comments
I see some of the work mentioned in the manuscript has been published, for example the FDGs & in-depth interviews. I think it is important that the reader understands from the word go, that details are reported somewhere. For example, I had a question on the number of participants per FDG, and wondering about the participant’s quotes, but I see these details are in reference 19.
>> We have added brief of the methods and results 
I think what would important is to highlight what informed the authors decisions- for example to form a study committee, use focus groups/workshops and not any methods for engagement, in case a reader would want to conduct a similar stakeholder engagement but still briefly report how these activities were done. I believe you were guided by literature.
>> It is mentioned in under Engagement objectives heading.
2 Introduction: The statement “New scientific evidence” appears incomplete without saying what kind of evidence. For example, is it health promotion/medical intervention effectiveness?
>> Addressed
Methods:
Lines 122- 126: The formation of the study team is unclear. I would believe some stakeholder categories had more than one person. How did you decide which representative(s) to approach? Are there people who declined to take part, since you have said those who provided informed consent? The last part “The stakeholders represented as co-investigators and advisors” need to be rephrased for clarity. [Probably referring to your published work could help as well]. I think its important to mention the rationale for the constituents of study team in the methods section
>> The formation of the study team is now rephrased and edited to make more clear statement
Workshops: As a reader I will be interested to know the aim of the workshop. It may be good to give the ethics approval number The authors should detail how stakeholders were involved in the interpretation of the results.
>>Aim of workshop and approval number are added in the manuscript
Line 352- put a reference as this is documented in the literature. I believe the first part of the discussion i.e. 356 to 367, there would be literature documenting these strategies in other studies. If not the authors should indicate there is no other studies identified that have used the same strategies as the current study.
>>Reference is added to the line 352.
Conclusion does not include any comment on lessons learnt.
>> We removed lesson learnt from title. And hence lesson learnt is not placed in the conclusion section.
We look forward to your comments and remain with best regards;
Yours sincerely,
 Dr. Archana Shrestha
Department of Public Health
Kathmandu University School of Medical Sciences
Dhulikhel, Nepal
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0276478.r005Decision Letter 2
AngkurawaranonChaisiriAcademic Editor© 2022 Chaisiri Angkurawaranon2022Chaisiri Angkurawaranonhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
15 Sep 2022

PONE-D-21-05456R2Stakeholder engagement in a hypertension and diabetes prevention research programPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Shrestha,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process. The reviewer had some minor revisions request.  If you can attend to theses, I will make a decision without the need for further re-review.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Oct 30 2022 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Chaisiri Angkurawaranon
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Additional Editor Comments:
The reviewer had some minor revisions request (attached file).  If you can attend to theses, I will make a decision without the need for further re-review.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #2: N/A
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #2: Thank you for addressing the concerns. However, there are still some sentences which are still not clear as indicated in my comments in the draft manuscript attached which are important to address to improve your manuscript. My thoughts regarding the title: though appropriate to address the concern raised previously, it may no be as catchy to the audience as the previous one. All the best with your manuscript and further work in this field!
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: PONE-D-21-05456_R2.pdf-JM-06.pdf
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0276478.r006Author response to Decision Letter 2
Submission Version3
29 Sep 2022

We would like to thank all the reviewers for their constructive comments. All comments are addressed and the track-changed files along with the clean manuscript files are submitted to the journal.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0276478.r007Decision Letter 3
AngkurawaranonChaisiriAcademic Editor© 2022 Chaisiri Angkurawaranon2022Chaisiri Angkurawaranonhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version3
10 Oct 2022

Stakeholder engagement in a hypertension and diabetes prevention research program: description and lessons learned
PONE-D-21-05456R3
Dear Dr. Shrestha,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Chaisiri Angkurawaranon
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0276478.r008Acceptance letter
AngkurawaranonChaisiriAcademic Editor© 2022 Chaisiri Angkurawaranon2022Chaisiri Angkurawaranonhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
12 Oct 2022

PONE-D-21-05456R3 
Stakeholder engagement in a hypertension and diabetes prevention research program: description and lessons learned 
Dear Dr. Shrestha:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Chaisiri Angkurawaranon 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE