3829phesageMobile Media & CommunicationMob Media CommunPMC9548495954849595484953860333210.1177/20501579221119585(Im)mobility and performance of emotions: Chinese international
students’ difficult journeys to home during the COVID-19
pandemic
HeGuanqin ZhangYijia 1Graduate Gender Programme, Department of Media
and Culture Studies, Utrecht University, The Netherlands2Department of Sociology, University of British
Columbia, Canada✉Yijia Zhang, Department of Sociology,
University of British Columbia, 6303 NW Marine Drive, Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T
1Z1. Email: yijia.zhang19@gmail.com
6102022112248248–27011102022© The Author(s) 2022This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) which permits
any use, reproduction and distribution of the work without further
permission provided the original work is attributed as specified on the SAGE
and Open Access page (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).

## Abstract
This article examines mediated performances of emotions by Chinese international
students in their transnational journeys returning to China during the COVID-19
pandemic with a focus on the role of mobile media in helping students cope with
their cross-border (im)mobility and symbolic immobility. By thematically
analyzing 36 self-representational videos produced by returning Chinese students
on a burgeoning mobile media platform Douyin, we identify 5 overarching themes
of emotional performance: fear, pride, gratitude, shame, and solidarity. We
propose that mobile media has the potential to create a hybrid space that
witnesses and elicits empathy for the hardship experienced by marginalized
mobile groups during the global pandemic. Mobile media, by enabling simultaneous
communication, amplifies the sensation of belonging in times of isolation and
ambiguity and offers dialogic venues for disparate groups across geographical
and socioemotional distances. Our findings suggest the vulnerability of mobile
communities in the event of a global pandemic, and the affordances of mobile
media in confronting and resolving such precarity. We call attention to the
intersections of mobile communities and mobile media amid the global pandemic,
particularlyon the experiences and performances of emotions in hybrid
spaces.
Keywords: Mobile media, emotion, (im)mobility, international student, Douyin, COVID-19

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoIssue date 2023 May.

## Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic, which caused regional lockdowns across the globe, has greatly
impacted everyday mobility around the world. Among the mobile groups depending on
transnational mobility infrastructures, international students, who were described
as possessing “unlimited global mobility” ( , p. 46), have experienced a
variety of immobilities in the continuing global pandemic. International students
are forced to remain in host countries when transnational cross-border mobility
infrastructures, such as transportation, regulatory frameworks, institutional
coordination, and commercial intermediaries, come to a halt ( ). Stranded
in the COVID-19 pandemic, international students experience the unprecedented
challenges of remote learning, homelessness, financial hardship ( ),
discrimination and racism ( ), and lack of or contradictory information, while
suffering from negative emotions such as loneliness, anxiety, frustration, and
isolation ( ). In this article, we focus on Chinese international students who
managed to return to China during the global pandemic. Once valorized as a
privileged class with significant geographical and social mobility, these students
have become a minoritized group, in both their hostlands and homeland, trapped in
transnational (im)mobility ( ) and symbolic immobility ( ).
To begin with, these students experience immense anxiety over the coronavirus.
International students, like everyone else, struggle with the virus ( ).
But it is important to recognize that the channels where students obtain information
about the fatality, transmission, and prevention of the virus might be different or
diversified. Research has found that Chinese international students adopt a
polymedia approach and stay connected with families, friends, and both homeland and
hostland news through Chinese social media ( ). As China was one of the first
epicenters of COVID-19, with Wuhan witnessing an unimaginable loss, Chinese students
were panicked by the herd immunity policy ( ) and the less rigorous
preventative measures adopted in their host countries, especially compared to the
“cruel but effective” countermeasures in China ( ). 
In addition to living through the pandemic in a foreign country where the confirmed
cases of coronavirus spiked while anti-mask rallies gathered publicly to protest the
enforcement of preventative measures, Chinese international students have suffered
from high rates of racist attacks since the outbreak of COVID-19 that further
exclude them from the host society ( ; ).
Coronavirus outbreaks in popular destination countries for international students,
such as the United States, the United Kingdom, and Australia, have witnessed surging
cases of anti-Asian racism and Sinophobia ( ; ). For instance, according to The
Asian Pacific Policy and Planning Council and Chinese for Affirmative Action, more
than 2,100 cases of prejudice and racism against Asians were reported in the first
four months of the pandemic ( ), when Chinese international students were already
experiencing high levels of anxiety and insecurity.
Returning home seemed to be a wise choice for many Chinese international students,
against the less effective pandemic control and rampant anti-Asian racism in the
host countries, especially when they are urged to do so by their families ( ; ).
Students, however, face structural barriers obstructing their return journeys and
consequently many are stranded in the host countries. To minimize imported cases of
COVID-19, the Chinese government encouraged Chinese international students to stay
in their host countries and avoid unnecessary international travel ( ; ). With
international flights severely cut under the “Five One” policy,
 
 students intending to return have to cope with limited flights and expensive
airfares. Even worse, their flights may be cancelled at any time. As the number of
direct flights decreases, students often have to go through one or more
international transfers in their journeys back to China. To board the plane,
students need to complete stringent COVID-19 nucleic acid testing (both polymerase
chain reaction [PCR] and antibody IgM must be negative) and tedious document
preparation. When they finally arrive in China, they have to spend at least 14 days
at randomly assigned quarantine hotels (see as of June 28, 2022, summarized by
authors). What complicates students’ return journeys is that the policies keep
changing and differ from place to place.
 In addition to the ruptures of physical mobility, returning Chinese students have to
contend with symbolic immobility ( ). As indicated in one of the
most popular discourses around students’ return journeys during COVID-19, 万里投毒 or
“travelling thousands of miles to poison [one’s own motherland]”,
 
 Chinese domestic netizens accuse students of being “irresponsible
disseminators of the virus” and “troubles for China’s anti-epidemic workers.”
Subject to harsh remarks and hateful speech on the Internet, students are vulnerable
to cyber hunting ( ) and consequent cyber violence. In a WeChat report based on stories
told by returning Chinese students ( ), students refer to themselves
as “Covid-19 refugees”, in light of the months- or years-long ordeal that the group
had to endure for their homecoming journeys.
The homecoming of international students has been a heated topic for the general
public in China, as well as among Chinese students abroad. Since the first wave of
returning students around March 2020, self-representational short-video posts have
emerged on the mobile media platform Douyin describing students’ perilous journeys
back to their homeland, among other genres of storytelling of the stranded Chinese
international students on various platforms ( ). Mediated by Douyin,
students’ physical and symbolic (im)mobility is embodied, performed, and shared to
affective communities that may or may not identify with them ( ). Situated
at the intersections between mobility and mobile media, these students make and
share their experiences on the move, as their mobile emotions transmit, reproduce,
and evolve, telling stories of “belonging, identity, and home” ( , p. 74). To date, most research on the role of mobile media during
COVID-19 has focused on the circulation of information, disinformation, and
misinformation online. Studies examining the pandemic-related emotions reported on
mobile media tended to concentrate on the immobility associated with lockdowns,
social distancing, and mask policies. Our study on the
international-student-generated content on Douyin and how students perform their
affective returning journeys while navigating divergent expectations for emotional
performance adds to this body of literature. In this paper, we introduce emotion as
a productive lens to connect migration literature and mobile media scholarship,
illustrating how, during the COVID-19 pandemic, Chinese international students use
Douyin to create an online space where their experiences and emotions can be
witnessed and empathized.
As we will argue, through mediating emotions, mobile media has the potential to
create affective publics ( ) where the emotional lives of minoritized mobile
communities during the pandemic, such as stranded Chinese international students,
can be witnessed and empathized. To do so, first, we revisit the migration
scholarship and mobile media literature with an emphasis on emotion. Second, we
summarize and elaborate five distinct emotional themes accentuated in students’
self-representations of their transnational homecoming journeys during the pandemic.
Third, we discuss how mobile media helps students to negotiate with transnational
(im)mobility and symbolic immobility, supporting our claim that mobile media can
document, express, and transmit emotions, bridging the emotional distances between
groups at distinct social situations and transforming the emotional environment
where such affective performances take place.

## Theoretical framework

## Emotions on the move
There has been a continuing debate about the nature of emotion, and how it should
be distinguished from related terms, in particular, affect ( ). For scholars like , affect is automatic
and bodily, divorced from the social, while emotion is embedded in social
interactions and milieus. Yet recently, interdisciplinary investigations of
emotion and affect have witnessed numerous revisits to such distinction. Many
scholars discuss emotion as physiological and biological while studying the
social causes and consequences of affect. In this paper, we would use affect and
emotion interchangeably and follow scholars who define emotion as “not simply
‘within’ or ‘without’” ( , p. 25) but as a crucial link between the embodied
individual experience and the embedded social participation, connecting the
private and the public, the micro and the macro, and agency and structure ( ; ; ; ).
Emotion is an integral aspect of human mobility ( ; ; ). On the
one hand, as people move from one location to another, emotions become entangled
in the process and are constantly negotiated with unfamiliar settings, life
circumstances, and points of reference ( ). On the
other hand, “emotions colour, initiate, direct and can stop movement” ( , p. 628). Scholars identified a series of emotions associated
with different stages of migration. , for example, associated
desire and disappointment with the past, anxiety, and anger in relation to the
present, and hope and attachment towards the future. In addition, studies
examined nostalgia and longing for the homeland, guilt over the left-behind, and
estrangement, alienation, frustration, and regret in the process of adapting to
the hostland. Recent scholarship on the affective journeys of refugees zoomed in
on the prolonged process in-between the home and the ultimate destination of
their migration and pointed out that in this process “hope and despair” are felt
simultaneously ( ). The ambivalence brought by the mix of
seemingly contradictory emotions led to refugees feeling stuck, on hold, and in
limbo navigating the promise of good life that migratory regimes offered, but
inhibited, obstructed, and postponing the means to achieve ( ).
The main body of research on migration and emotion deals with migration as a
process that “disassociates individuals from their family and friendship
networks, as well as from other socially significant referents that have strong
emotional connotations” ( , p. 236). Yet as points out, in addition
to departures and arrivals, “journeys … homecomings and the paradoxes of the
migration existence itself” are also key aspects of transnational mobility (p.
241). Chinese international students who managed to return to their motherland
during COVID-19, whose digital accounts we study in this paper, serve as a
specific case of homecoming, which is an understudied type of affective mobile
experience. In this case, students depart from their hostlands where they suffer
from exposure to the coronavirus, anti-Asian racism, and everyday stresses of
living alone, abroad, and through the pandemic. Yet their destination is not a
foreign country where they hope to enjoy better economic prospects or political
stability, but their homeland, where rigorous public health measures are
forcefully implemented to achieve zero COVID-19 cases and where they are
protected from the epidemic, but also stigmatized as selfish overseas nationals
who, by returning, bring health risks and socioeconomic burden to the domestic
community. Examining the ways students experience, represent, and manage
emotions in this reverse direction of migration could contribute to this
understudied dimension of affective mobility.

## Emotional turn in mobile media studies
Emotion is a practice. As argues, emotions are “a practical engagement with the
world” (p. 193). And there are two ways to interpret this practical approach to
emotions. One, emotions do things ( , p. 26). Two, emotions are
a cultural practice—people do, rather than have, emotions ( ; ). On the one hand, being our first point of contact with the world,
emotions bind us in relation to space, place, and otherness ( ). They are our responses to the worlds of others. They align
individuals with collectives, depending on the “intensity of their attachments”
to their respective communities ( , p. 26). On the other hand,
emotions are “situational, contextual, and relational” performances in
discursively constructed cultural contexts where they form “communities of
practice” ( , p. 2). Instead of having emotions, people feel, display, and
manage emotions in relation to intersubjective emotion norms ( ), which distinguish communities from one another ( ).
Defining emotion as a practice productively converges with the affordance
approach that conceptualizes media as an “environment of affordances” ( , p. 170). The “emotional affordances” of mobile media refers to
its capabilities to “enable, prompt and restrict the enactment of particular
emotional experiences unfolding in-between the media technology and an actor’s
practical sense for its use” ( , p. 15). The tension
between agency and structure makes emotion-as-practice a productive framework
when studying emotional mobile lives, which are increasingly penetrated by
advanced mobile technologies.
Mobile media and communication enables individuals to weave the flows of
connectedness into everyday moments and movements ( ; ). It makes
the networks of belonging portable in the age of transnational mobility ( ; ). One aspect that stands out is that mobile media facilitates
online co-existence ( ; ) and has the potential to build digital interactions
between geographically scattered agents. Through digital mediation,
geographically distant family members, friends, and even strangers can cohabit
at the same time or location, fostering a sense of warmth and belonging ( ) and
creating a sense of digital togetherness ( ) among those in specific
cases of (im)mobility. Witnessing narratives mediated by mobile platforms, for
example, are found to help minoritized and stigmatized communities to confront
and even transform the physical and symbolic immobility that hampers their
everyday life ( ). The mediated co-presence, however, not only brings the
displaced migrants together where they are embraced by an intensified
we-feelings ( ). It is equally likely to bring disaligned communities and
witness the affective tensions between connected groups and the clash of their
respective emotion norms. Özer and Aşcı ( ), for instance, examine how
emotions such as fear, anxiety, anger, and contempt are performed in the
right-wing populist discourse against refugees circulated on social media.
Mobile media technologies, therefore, offer intricate modes of communicating
emotions ( ), and create new sites where “previously privately
shared emotions” are contested and negotiated publicly ( , p. 2). The
emotional practices of Chinese international students to document and share
their experiences on Douyin and to overcome immobilityto return to their home
country could be one of these sites to make interesting observations. The viral
algorithm, as a key aspect of the communication infrastructure of Douyin,
enables emotional content to travel fast and wide, reaching an audience who may
or may not share the authors’ identity. Mediated by such a hybrid, mobile
platform that connects heterogeneous communities, how are students’ emotions
practiced, performed, and shared? How do students navigate the affective and
discursive norms in China that they are stigmatized as burden and threat? What
role does the platform play in enabling a co-presence of the minoritized and the
normative? Additionally, while studies have documented diverse emotions
expressed on mobile media platforms during COVID-19 ( ), most of them
focused on people’s experiences in lockdowns or the general sentiment change
over the course of the global pandemic. Encountering multiple layers of
exclusion, mobile populations like migrant workers and international students
are incredibly precarious ( ; ). This article examines
the emotional practices of one such group, Chinese international students, who
use Douyin, among a myriad of mobile media technologies, to perform and share
their affective experiences in the prolonged process of homecoming by overcoming
the immobilities brought by COVID-19. By studying their self-representational
videos documenting their return journeys, we explore the interplay between
mobile media, (im)mobility, and emotions, with a specific emphasis on how mobile
media produces witnesses and elicits empathy.

## Methodology
Drawing upon thematic analysis of the short-video posts produced by Chinese
international students, this study maps out the themes, issues, and arguments
through digitally narrated experiences and discussions regarding their transnational
homecoming journeys during the global pandemic. As one of the most popular and
successful short-video platforms in China ( ), Douyin’s daily active
users have reached 600 million ( ). We manually searched for self-representational videos
of Chinese international students returning home on Douyin, using the search terms
in Chinese: 留学生回国 (International students returning home),
疫情 (COVID-19), and 留学生 (International
students). Given the abundance of videos, we obtained data through purposeful
sampling ( )
on the basis of Douyin’s algorithm recommendation. In total, we gathered 36
self-representational videos of 28 accounts (see ) and the comments these videos
received in August 2021. All the names we collected and used throughout the paper
are pseudonymized. The sampled short-video posts were uploaded from March 2020 to
July 2021, which includes the outbreak of the first wave of COVID-19 worldwide, and
the quick spread of the second wave of Delta variants, leading to a massive shutdown
of international flights. The short videos dynamically chronicle their transnational
journeys, including footages at transient places, pictures of themselves and
surroundings, and screenshots of documents and border technology interfaces. To
better understand how the COVID-19 situation of the host country is variously
implicated in students’ mobile recordings of their desires and strategies of return,
we deliberately collected geographically diverse data. In our sample, students’ host
countries include, but are not limited to, the United Kingdom, the United States,
Malaysia, and Japan.
 Considering the multimedia nature of user-generated content on Douyin, we adopted a
comprehensive, intuitive approach to visual data analysis. In addition to the verbal
portion of the video, it is equally important to consider non-verbal performances
through visuals and background music, among other components ( ). We first transcribed the
videos’ voiceovers and conversations and then coded both verbal and non-verbal
elements for thematic analysis. Thematic analysis, as an independent qualitative
description technique, is primarily used to identify, analyze, organize,
characterize, and report patterns/themes in data corpus ( ). We follow the
six-phase linear process for thematic analysis: familiarizing ourselves with the
data; generating initial codes; searching for themes; reviewing themes; defining and
naming themes; and producing the report ( ; ). In
the following discussion, we extract five distinct emotional themes from students’
videos, to demonstrate, by sharing their affective journeys on Douyin, how Chinese
international students create an online dialogic space where their experiences and
feelings can be witnessed and empathized with in response to symbolic (im)mobility
during the pandemic.

## Mediated performance of emotions

## Fear
Many students use the hashtag #跑毒 in their video descriptions. Literally
translating to “flee from the virus”, this hashtag describes the nature of these
international travels succinctly. As journeys to take flight from an
unprecedented outbreak of the coronavirus in their host countries, these unusual
trips are characterized by several kinds of fears.
Students are afraid of staying in the host countries. To start with, the local
number of confirmed cases is spiking and appalling, especially compared to the
number in China. Fei, for example, cited the six-digit cumulative case total for
New York State to show her dangerous situation. Filming empty streets, Fei
stated in the video: “New York is just a large-sized Wuhan” (see ). She further
expressed her deep despair with an enlarged emoji picturing a little girl
helplessly crying (see also ). In addition, students are scared by the ramifications of
local citizens constantly refusing to use protective equipment. A student, for
example, cited a local anti-mask rally to suggest the public health hazards
brought by such in-person gatherings, which they had to live through as stranded
Chinese students.
 Fear is also a consistent theme as students prepare for their returning journeys.
One of the challenges for students to return is to obtain a flight ticket under
the “Five One” policy. Yet even obtaining an overpriced flight ticket does not
guarantee a successful return. Many expressed anxieties about their flights
getting cancelled even when they arrived at the airports. Naming the trip “an
adventure,” Chuchu managed to return eventually after purchasing nine flight
tickets via different routes and couriers.
Once the airplane takes off, students can get back to China, which is seen as a
safe place where COVID-19 has been under effective control. Fear, nevertheless,
still haunts them. Judy, for instance, included a shot of herself clad in a
protective suit, mask, and goggles and warned her potential audience that “any
inch of your skin should not be exposed in the air” (see ). In addition to wearing proper
protection equipment, Judy suggested that future travellers should refrain from
eating, drinking, going to the toilet, or talking during the entire flight. The
return journey ranges from a few hours to a few days, and the various kinds of
fears experienced and performed by the returning students persist throughout
their homecoming journeys.
 

## Pride
Another key emotion from the videos is pride. Students are proud of the
effectiveness of China’s public health efforts against COVID-19, are reassured
by the orderly quarantine procedures after arrival, and hold a strong patriotic
feeling for their national identity.
Students’ determination to return, to a great extent, builds on their pride in
the effectiveness of China’s public health measures against COVID-19, which
students believe are not well controlled in their respective host countries. As
Mandy commented in her video: “There won’t be any country like China, which is
able to systematically fight COVID-19 with the resources of the entire
country.”
The sense of security based on students’ national pride emerges as a remarkable
emotion in the videos. The returnees expressed their exhilaration upon their
return journeys in a myriad of ways. For example, Raven almost “burst into
tears” when she realized she was finally sitting on the plane back to China.
Landi added smile emoji stickers to pictures of her flight ticket and videos of
herself boarding on the plane. Tuni spent one-third of the video on footage of
the plane taking off from Amsterdam, accompanied by upbeat music indicating her
excitement. Another shared affective tactic to indicate students’ fulfillment of
return is the use of the term “finally”—“I am finally on board the plane heading
to Beijing”; “I am finally at home”; “[I am] finally back to the arms of the
motherland.” “Finally”, despite all uncertainties and immobilities, they were
back.
Associated with the excitement of homecoming, Qiu indicated that she felt “a
strong sense of safety after getting back to China.” Fei stressed that she was
“moved and felt secure” because of China’s preventive measures against COVID-19,
following which she expressed her national pride: “A big thanks to the efforts
of our motherland. It’s good to be home.” Students are proud of the effective
operation of the public health system and the collective efforts of selfless
frontline medical workers, whose diligence and dedication were cited by students
to explain why they felt secure in China.
A sense of belonging is inextricably intertwined with this sense of security in
students' patriotic performances. From the welcome and warmth of the motherland,
students found a strong sense of belonging. Louis confessed in his video that he
felt at home once the plane landed, as the stewardess greeted him with “Welcome
home” in Mandarin the moment he stepped out of the cabin.
In addition to verbal expressions, students used the Chinese flag emojis,
grateful signs like heart emojis (see ), and celebratory music in
their patriotic performances. Some used the song “I Love You China” to signal
their attachment to their motherland. Two students even used the same climactic
line from this song, “I love you China, [my] dear mother.” Students repeatedly
referred to China as “motherland” and “home” to whose arms they were eventually
returning, and in this way demonstrated their sense of national belonging and
patriotic love.
 

## Gratitude
The third emotional theme is gratitude. Many of the sampled Douyin videos ended
with an expression of gratitude to frontline medical workers. Returning students
described the frontline workers as patient, diligent, and friendly, emphasizing
the selfless care behind their commitment. As Louis interpreted: “Behind the
raspy voice was tenderness.” Students showed their appreciation also by
suggesting that future travellers should treat these frontline workers with
cooperation, respect, and gratitude. Such indebtedness to the frontline efforts
is shared among students. Another returning student, Nick, captured a
heart-warming scene on the bus transporting returning travellers to their
quarantine hotels around 2 a.m. When Nick and his fellow travellers expressed
gratitude to a middle-aged frontline worker for her hard work, she stopped,
smiled, and said: “No [worries]. You have also worked hard to return home. But
seeing you folks appreciate [our hard work], we don’t feel [it is] hard at
all.”
Although students may have been aware of the risks that workers confront when
receiving them from abroad, the embodied experience of wearing protective gear
during the entire flight deepens their compassion for these workers. Pengpeng,
for example, spoke to the camera with a selfie shot of himself covered in
protective equipment: “Now I just really respect those medical staff working at
the frontline in Wuhan who have to wear protective suits every day. It is too
difficult. I feel I am about to suffocate.”
This indebtedness to frontline workers is frequently abstracted to, or coincides
with, students’ thankfulness to China as their “motherland.” For example, when
Louis praised the frontline workers, he added that “[u]nder their protective
goggles, there were five-pointed stars in their eyes.” Typically, “five-pointed
stars” refers to the stars on the Chinese national flag. Here, by connecting
individual workers to a national symbol, Louis depicts frontline workers as
representatives of the motherland, taking care of returning students fleeing
from zones of epidemic outbreak.

## Shame
The fourth emotion is shame. As a feeling, it is not as explicit as fear, pride,
and gratitude. Nonetheless, it is hard to ignore the guilt and shame returning
students bear throughout their homecoming journeys during COVID-19. On the one
hand, many international students internalize the stigmatizing discourse. They
described themselves as “burdens” to their motherland and their return journeys
as causing trouble to the frontline workers. For instance, Pengpeng titled his
video “40 Hours of Flight and Transit: How to Protect Yourself and Avoid Being a
Burden to the Motherland” (see ). Echoing this sentiment, Vincent titled his Douyin post,
“After A Careful Consideration, I Still Decided to Be a Burden to the Homeland.”
He framed his quarantine experience in a positive light, displayed how he led a
healthy and productive lifestyle during hotel quarantine by keeping fit and
studying, and explained that he spared no effort to avoid adding further trouble
for the motherland.
 In addition to being performed as internalized guilt, shame is explicitly
displayed in the comment section, where returning students are subject to
hostile heckling and attacks: “[You] brought back the virus”; “Why did you leave
the motherland and now return as if you were fleeing?”; and “Finally we don’t
have to wear masks. Why are you coming back?” Such criticism and accusations are
liked by many on Douyin, which further stigmatizes the returning students.

## Solidarity
Shame is associated with an affective response of solidarity ( ). People
feel solidarity with the communities they align with. Returning students, in
general, are united by a shared identity—Chinese international students. While
most of them were complete strangers, students supported each other through
mobile media platforms like Douyin. Confronting such stigmatization, some
commenters stood up for the poster, as well as for each other, attempting to
invalidate the stigma. A commenter of Dina, for instance, pointed out that “the
worst scenario is that you take all the pains to come back only to find that
here you are discriminated against by your compatriots.” In addition to claiming
the rights of Chinese nationals abroad to return to their motherland in times of
crisis, commenters rebutted the logic of the stigmatizing discourse that
returning students are burden to the motherland. As a commenter of Maison
contended: “It is reasonable for international students to come home. They are
not burdening anyone. They are not supposed to shoulder the country [by not
returning]. Raising this issue to a macro level is to put a heavy hat on the
student’s head.”
Solidarity among returning students is also revealed through information sharing.
For example, one commenter of Qiu's post asked if one can pass the security
check with a protective suit. Another commenter of Landi's post asked where to
find the “Health Declaration QR code” and the “Registration Form of Returning
Travellers” mentioned in the video (see ). It is worth noting that the
details and procedures that commenters inquire about are often not readily
available from official channels. In turn, the authentic and comparable
experiences of the returning students shared in the videos and the comment
sections function as a united venue for information exchange and
supplementation.
 

## From witness to empathy
Emotions experienced during or as a result of migration and the associated
(im)mobility can be shared ( ). Mobile media, as a communicative structure deeply
embedded in the everyday experience, transforms and multiplies the ways in which
these emotional mobile lives are shared. On the one hand, mobile technologies
produce an “always-on” hybrid reality that redefines the difference between here and
there, then and now, online and offline ( ; ),
where mobile emotions can be communicated with numerous audiences scattered across
different times and heterogeneous locations. On the other hand, given the corporeal
nature of emotions, affective performances on mobile media platforms hold a promise
to connect unsituated audiences to feel mediated emotions, thereby fostering empathy
between previously unaligned social groups. In the case of Chinese international
students who return to their homeland during the pandemic, the students rely on
Douyin’s affective affordance ( ), produce accounts of witness to their physical
and symbolic vulnerability, and reconstruct the emotional environment of their
return journeys through collective efforts. 

## Witnessing
Existing research finds that witnessing narratives produced by vulnerable
populations, such as forced migrants in alternative digital spaces may serve to
confront and transform the immobility imposed upon them: physical segregation,
socio-political exclusion, and discursive stigmatization ( ). Aptly naming
themselves “Covid-19 refugees”, the Chinese international students striving to
return to China during the global pandemic experience a similar matrix of
immobility brought by their transnational movement, which is perceived as a
burden and threat in the populist discourse ( ). Building on
the existing scholarship on the affordance of digital witnessing accounts of
marginalized groups, we outline four layers of witnessing that Douyin, as a
mobile media platform, affords in the context of crises and stigmas.
First, students are the most direct witnesses of the immobility Chinese
international students suffer in their journeys to return to China during the
COVID-19 pandemic, and mobile media crystalizes their witnesses in a digital
format that is retrievable and accessible whenever, wherever, and by whomever.
Students participate in the entire process of their own returns and have
first-hand knowledge of the various “then and there” that constitute the
challenging task of return. In addition to experiencing the journeys on their
own, students record the various processes of the journeys with footages,
pictures, and screenshots, among other media formats. These archived
experiences, emotions, and crystalized moments are then assembled, edited, and
curated at a slightly retrospective point to produce a Douyin short-video post
witnessing what they hashtag as “returning home during Covid-19” and “flee from
the virus.”
Second, these individual accounts of immobility connect returning students, who
bear a collective witness to their shared experiences. The return videos on
Douyin serve as a bridge between students returning to China from different
countries, via different airlines, landing at different cities and on different
dates. These videos collectively produce a co-existence of students as witnesses
of the shared stasis and stigma, enabling the constitution and maintenance of
emotional bonds across time and space. The multiplicity of these unique but
connected videos amplifies the shared experience and emotions of the returning
students.
Third, by watching the mediated witnesses of students, the audience are
transformed into co-witnesses of students’ immobility. By co-witness, we mean
not only that they can obtain knowledge about the returning students’ difficult
journeys shared on Douyin, but that the audience may also see, hear, and feel in
the shoes of the students through the embodied performances of fear, pride,
gratitude, and shame. In this way, those who did not travel from foreign
countries back to China during COVID-19 become witnesses of students’ despair
with local public health measures in their host countries, their anxieties about
the possibility of flight cancellation, their fears of potential exposure to
coronavirus, and their pride in the effective control of COVID-19 in China.
These emotions shared by returning students do not contradict the emotion norms
inside China at all. Although domestic netizens may rationalize the shame
imposed on students, the comment sections of these Douyin videos provide an
opportunity for the audience to bear witness to students’ symbolic immobility.
Douyin, in this sense, acts as a hybrid emotional environment affording the
possibilities of co-witnessing, co-existing, and co-experiencing.
Fourth, as media artifacts recording historical moments ( ), these Douyin
short-video posts, including the comments they have attracted, are witnesses to
the vulnerability of groups immobilized during the global pandemic. Epidemic
crises are frequently followed by stigmatization and the freezing of mobility of
specific groups, some of which are already marginalized ( ). The videos and
comments showcase how such immobility unfolds in the life of the immobilized
group members and the ways the minoritized react to such immobility. They draw
necessary attention to both the students’ stigmatized identity and the discourse
that stigmatizes them. These video posts serve as numerous platforms where
students and netizens negotiate their misaligned communities of emotional
practices, expectations, and aspirations.

## Empathy elicitation
To witness is more than acquiring insider knowledge. Instead, emotion is an
essential part of the production and communication of witnessing accounts. In
the case of social media-assisted witnesses, emotion plays an even more vital
role since social media platforms place a premium on emotion and affect ( ). Not only do witnesses’ recollections combine with intense affect,
but social media users have to curate emotions when producing witnessing
content, keeping in mind the audience at whom they are aiming for shares, likes,
and comments. Examining the performance of emotions in Chinese students’ return
videos, we argue that mobile media platforms like Douyin create opportunities to
bridge the emotional distance between the stigmatized community and the broader
audience, as well as to foster digital solidarity within the marginalized
group.
As discussed earlier, partly owing to the contrast of COVID-19 situations in
their home and host countries, Chinese students returning to China experience a
change of status from the privileged flexible citizens of high physical and
social mobility to a marginalized group whose physical mobility is frozen and
whose social identity is stigmatized. In the same process, returning students
become the Other in their home country within the populist discourse, where they
are the irresponsible virus disseminator and burdens to their motherland. It is
within this context that the returning students’ performances of emotions
matter, inviting identification from fellow students and broader audiences, as
well as undermining the discourse that marginalizes them. Although students’
short-video creations bear witness to their one-of-a-kind experience of coming
home during COVID-19, most emotions performed—fear, pride, and gratitude—are not
exclusive to returning students’ experiences. Rather, they can all be easily
empathized with by the domestic audience. The fear that students experience in
face of the spiking number of cases, the slack measures of protection, and the
dangers of long-distance flight, resonates with the domestic audience’s anxiety
about COVID-19. The pride in China’s counter-coronavirus strategies, the sense
of security and belonging upon arrival, and, more broadly, the patriotic love
for the motherland echo the collectivist sentiments of the domestic citizens.
The gratitude that students express towards the frontline workers is comparable
to that of the domestic residents. By resorting to these identifiable feelings,
returning students raise the visibility of the emotions that they share with the
majority of Chinese netizens, whom they strive to persuade and get included as
one of “us”, instead of threatening “them.”
Intertwined but differentiated emotions of shame and solidarity exhibit how these
performances of emotions on Douyin assemble and sustain online communities into
“networked publics” ( ), where the returning students foster a sense of
digital togetherness ( ) in a way comparable to that of refugees encountering
stigmatizing discourses upon their arrival in Europe. An imagined community with
a shared identity is constructed ( ), giving rise to
emotional responses such as friendliness, identification, understanding, and
empathy. In contrast to bridging the emotional gap between groups characterized
by difference and hostility through appropriation and compromise, the mediated
solidarity validates students’ feelings, as well as their desires to return.
Performances of solidarity, therefore, offer students a source of strength to
confront the hostile environment in which they are situated. Additionally, such
solidary performances impress the broader audience with the emotionally charged
display of a sense of belonging ( ) among students along with
empathic alignment ( ) that may not be prominent in “normal”
times but is activated in times of crises such as when students encounter
multiple layers of exclusion, minoritization, and immobility.
Mobile media grants greater agency to individual users. Provided with an advanced
toolkit of emotional performance, mobile media users like the returning Chinese
students are not only creators of their own biographies, as in the case of
verbal or textual testimonio ( ), but curators of the
digital display of their affective experience, engaging in dialogue with
audiences located at different time-spaces as well as social positions. Emotions
are our first point of contact with the world ( ).
Through their synthesis of the body and the place ( ), emotions shape the
formation of interpersonal and intergroup relationships. By framing their
first-hand witnesses with the fear, pride, and gratitude shared by the domestic
audience, students bypass the justice debate of their return and resort directly
to the intuitive faculties of their audience, decreasing the emotional distance
between them and the domestic netizens to such an extent that they may no longer
be excluded as threatening “them.” Furthermore, mobile media connects
geographically scattered students who otherwise would have been experiencing
their immobility solitarily at various corners of the world. And from this
togetherness develops solidarity practiced by and empowering the mobile students
who are vulnerable to the structural and discursive immobility, as part of the
societal reaction to the pandemic.

## Conclusion
The paper explores how Chinese international students cope with their cross-border
(im)mobility and symbolic immobility through mediated performances of emotions
during COVID-19. Standing at the intersection of emotion, mobile media, and
(im)mobility, we zoom in on the most challenging issue confronting Chinese
international students during the pandemic: their transnational journeys home. We
shed light on how students take the initiative and respond to their pandemic-related
(im)mobility, how they document their experiences and emotions through mobile media,
and how they construct a dialogic space for their digital solidarity in response to
stigmatizing discourse that further marginalizes them.
Building on the scholarship on the digital practices of marginalized groups ( ), our
research demonstrates that affective performances on mobile media raise the voice
and visibility of groups minoritized during health and social crises. Enabling
constant connectedness across geographical locations ( ), mobile media
energizes a sense of togetherness in times of isolation and ambivalence ( ). Its
affordances in communicating emotions ( ; )
and eliciting empathy hold promises to form consensus among groups situated in
different social-emotional contexts. Connecting to the literature on migration and
emotion, we find the returning students share emotions with precarious migrants
taking refuge in a foreign country ( ; ), although, compared to refugees, they are moving in an opposite
direction to what they call “motherland.” More broadly, we highlight the
vulnerability of mobile groups during the worldwide pandemic and the affordances of
mobile media to confront and address such vulnerability.
Although we focus on Chinese international students engaging in digital storytelling,
connectivity, and solidarity-building within stigmatized contexts, we acknowledge
the heterogeneity of the mobile community and especially politics of mobility during
COVID-19. The shrinking of the transnational mobility that privileged international
students once enjoyed is not comparable to the complete stasis that migrant workers
and other historically marginalized groups are trapped in. What we would like to
point out is that the mediated performances of returning students on Douyin create
opportunities for their experiences to be known, their anxieties to be shared, their
indebtedness to be empathized, at a time when domestic institutions and the
mainstream discourse aim to contain their mobility—a dire situation faced by most
mobile groups including Chinese migrant workers. Taking the Douyin videos posted by
returning students as an entry point, we advocate attention to the challenges faced
by global mobile communities, their emotional trajectories, and the affordances of
bottom-up digital practices.
Last but not least, our analysis is based on self-representational videos produced by
Chinese international students who have already managed to return to their homeland.
Thus it leaves unexplored students’ motivations, emotional trajectories, and
practical challenges hidden behind their creative witnesses. For instance, the
returning students internalized themselves as “burdens” in the videos, but we do not
know whether they truly consider themselves as burdens or whether this is part of
the performative compromise they make in the face of the stigmatizing discourse at
home. In this light, in-depth interviews are needed in the future to investigate the
individual practices of documenting transnational trips marked by friction and
stigma, as well as the heterogeneity within the group of international students
along lines of gender, class, and location.

## Acknowledgments
We would like to express our sincere gratitude to the anonymous reviewers for their
critical engagement with earlier versions of this article. We are grateful to Dr.
Adriana de Souza e Silva, Dr. Mai Nou Xiong-Gum, and the editorial board for their
valuable feedback and support of this project.Special thanks to Sandra Ponzanesi,
Koen Leurs, and Saskia Witteborn for their constructive suggestions and support.

## Author Biographies
Guanqin He is a PhD candidate at the Institute of Cultural Inquiry ICON,
Department of Media and Cultural Studies, Utrecht University. She is currently
conducting her CSC-funded project Digital Crossroads in China: Chinese Women
Negotiating Migration, Urbanization, and Digitization, focusing on the intersection
of gig workers, gender, migration, and digital media. Her research interests include
gender, social media, migration, and cultural studies.
Yijia Zhang is a PhD candidate of the Department of Sociology at the
University of British Columbia (UBC). She is also a fellow of the Institute of Asian
Research at UBC. Yijia Zhang explores how ethnic media users perceive, appropriate
and create translational or local media and platforms.

1.On March 26, 2020, the Civil Aviation Administration of China implemented a
new flight restriction policy enforcing that each (one) country is limited
to sending one flight from one carrier over one route once a week, thus
“Five One”.
2.All Chinese texts, including phrases, hashtags, captions, and voiceovers,
have been translated to English by the authors.

## Footnotes
The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding: The authors received no financial support for the research and authorship of this
article. This open access publication of this article is enabled through the
University of British Columbia's participation in the CRKN-SAGE Publishing
Agreement.
ORCID iDs: Guanqin He https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4169-3080
Zhang https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0351-5950

## Contributor Information
Guanqin He, Graduate Gender Programme, Department of Media
and Culture Studies, Utrecht University, The Netherlands.
Yijia Zhang, Department of Sociology, University of British
Columbia, Canada.

## References