pmcPLoS Comput BiolPLoS Comput Biol328ploscomp101238922plosPLoS Computational Biology1553-734X1553-7358PLOSPMC9584436PMC9584436.1958443695844363621532510.1371/journal.pcbi.1010594PCOMPBIOL-D-22-001861Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsNeuronsBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCellular NeuroscienceNeuronsResearch and Analysis MethodsImaging TechniquesNeuroimagingBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceNeuroimagingComputer and Information SciencesNeural NetworksBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceNeural NetworksResearch and Analysis MethodsAnimal StudiesExperimental Organism SystemsModel OrganismsCaenorhabditis ElegansResearch and Analysis MethodsModel OrganismsCaenorhabditis ElegansResearch and Analysis MethodsAnimal StudiesExperimental Organism SystemsAnimal ModelsCaenorhabditis ElegansBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaAnimalsInvertebratesNematodaCaenorhabditisCaenorhabditis ElegansBiology and Life SciencesZoologyAnimalsInvertebratesNematodaCaenorhabditisCaenorhabditis ElegansResearch and Analysis MethodsImaging TechniquesFluorescence ImagingPhysical SciencesMathematicsApplied MathematicsAlgorithmsResearch and Analysis MethodsSimulation and ModelingAlgorithmsComputer and Information SciencesArtificial IntelligenceArtificial Neural NetworksBiology and Life SciencesComputational BiologyComputational NeuroscienceArtificial Neural NetworksBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceComputational NeuroscienceArtificial Neural NetworksComputer and Information SciencesDigital ImagingRapid detection and recognition of whole brain activity in a freely behaving Caenorhabditis elegans
CeNDeR: C. elegans neuron detection and recognitionhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-1156-6718WuYuxiangConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologySoftwareValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing WuShangData curationInvestigationValidation WangXinInvestigationMethodology https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6396-1963LangChengtianInvestigation ZhangQuanshiFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodology https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0268-8403WenQuanConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9817-7597XuTianqiConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSoftwareSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 
1
Chinese Academy of Sciences Key Laboratory of Brain Function and Diseases, Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China

2
Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, Center for Integrative Imaging, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China

3
John Hopcroft Center for Computer Science, School of electronic information and electrical engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China

4
Department of Electronic Engineering and Information Science, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
RichardsBlake AEditor – ], opening the door to an exploration of brain dynamics and naturalistic behavior at multiple spatiotemporal scales.
Over time, constant deformation of a nematode brain, which causes large displacement and distortion of neurons, has been a major hindrance to rapid and accurate characterization of neural activity patterns. Furthermore, highly similar textures and shapes between neurons within an animal, as well as highly variable distributions of neurons across animals, make detection and identification of neurons an extraordinarily challenging problem.
Extracting whole-brain activity from an unrestrained C. elegans requires answering two questions: where are the neurons and who are they? Conventional image processing methods and deep-learning-based methods have been proposed to solve both problems [ – ]. To answer the first question, traditional methods use explicit computational models to localize neuronal regions, for example, by computing the 3D Hessian matrix in the pixel space [ ] and by implementing the watershed algorithm for regional segmentation [ , ]. Deep-learning-based methods, such as 3D-UNet [ , ], train feed-forward neural network models to find candidate neuronal regions. With a sufficient number of human-annotated supervised examples, a neural network can effectively and accurately perform the neuron detection task.
Sequence-dependent and sequence-independent methods have been proposed to address the second question, namely to assign a digital identity to each neuron in every imaging volume. For example, the recently developed 3DeeCellTracker [ ] is a sequence-dependent method, by which a tracking or registration algorithm maps the correspondence between two sets of neurons in adjacent volumes. 3DeeCellTracker would work well for semi-immobilized animals, when cell displacements are relatively small and spatiotemporal continuity of imaging volumes approximately holds; but it is prone to error accumulation when cell displacements are large, rapid and not easily predictable. By adapting the single-particle-tracking framework, Lagache et al. [ ] proposed a method called Elastic Motion Correction and Concatenation (EMC2) to deal with the tracking gap: neurons may appear and disappear in consecutive time frames depending on whether calcium florescent signals can be detected. EMC2 was successfully applied to extract neural activity in the highly deformable Hydra.
Sequence-independent methods allocate neuron identities by ignoring the temporal order of imaging volumes. In an earlier work, Nguyen et al. [ ] carefully built a 300-dimensional cluster vector for each neuron in every volume by mapping its correspondence to a point set in each of the 300 reference volumes, and then allocated digital identities all at once by a hierarchical clustering algorithm. In a different approach, an algorithm aims to find optimal neuron assignment by maximizing the intrinsic similarity between a point-set in a testing volume and that in a different imaging volume. The intrinsic similarity could be cast in a deep neural network model, called fDNC [ ]. In fDNC, large synthetic point clouds across spacetime, which mimic the movements of C. elegans head neurons, were used to train a transformer neural network. During inference, the transformer rapidly encodes each neuron’s feature vector, computes pairwise similarity with those in a reference volume, and allocates each neuron’s digital identity.
Cell matching can also be carried out between an imaging volume and a standard annotated atlas (e.g., OpenWorm [ ] or NeuroPAL [ ]) with known cell-type identities (see Digital ID, cell-type ID, and human annotation for a definition). Neurons or muscle cells in fixed and straightened worms can be recognized and mapped to the atlas using registration methods [ ] and more recently, probabilistic models that take into account variability of cell positions [ – ] and take advantage of color information [ ] to improve the recognition accuracy [ , ]. In this paper, we restrict ourselves to matching neuronal digital identities within an animal; matching cell-type identities across animals is beyond the scope of the present work.
With recent development in machine vision and deep learning, we are asking for fast, efficient, and user-friendly algorithms that take, with minimum human supervision and correction, raw volumetric imaging data as inputs and extract neural activity traces from all recorded neurons. Unlike in immobilized animals where cell positions are invariant and spatiotemporal segmentation could be implemented at once [ – ], 3D neuron detection and segmentation in freely behaving C. elegans is carried out in every imaging volume independently and has become the speed bottleneck [ , ]. For example, 3DeeCellTracker requires specialized processing steps such as straightening a worm [ , ] to facilitate neuron mapping and error corrections. This procedure, together with 3D registration and segmentation, is the most time-consuming step. To identify neurons across volumes, both fDNC and 3DeeCellTracker [ , ] require enormous training samples (e.g., large computer-generated synthetic datasets). It remains to be evaluated whether neural networks trained by data augmentation possess sufficient generalization power when the algorithms are applied to datasets collected from a different transgenic animal and by a different imaging system.
Here, we propose a streamlined approach, called CeNDeR (C. elegans
Neuron Detection and Recognition), to extract whole brain neural activity in a freely behaving C. elegans. As in previous works [ , ], we combine a spinning disk confocal microscope and a customized tracking system to record neural activity in the head ganglion while the animal is moving. We use nuclei-localized red fluorescent protein (mNeptune) as a reference channel to localize and recognize neurons. The CeNDeR system processes an imaging volume in the following 4 steps. 1) An automatic pre-processing procedure segments the head region and builds a C. elegans coordinate system. 2) A multi-field detection (MFD) neural network finds, with high confidence, a set of neuronal regions in each frame. 3) By treating regional alignment across adjacent frames as a maximum bipartite matching problem, we use the Hungarian method to merge candidate regions into a neuron. 4) A multi-class recognition neural network assigns a digital ID to every neuron in a random volume using two input feature vectors, designed to extract neuronal density and relative positional information surrounding a neuron. When taking into account speed-accuracy trade-off, our approach complements recent methods such as 3DeeCellTracker and fDNC. With a small number (∼ 30) of human-annotated training examples, CeNDeR can process each volume in less than a second and achieve an accuracy of 88.25% when tracking head ganglion neurons within an animal.

## Methods
The CeNDeR pipeline ( ) takes a volume of size W × H × Z as an input ( ), and outputs neuron objects including each neuron’s digital identity, location, and shape. Our approach comprises the following four steps. First, we use a combination of image processing algorithms to extract head and body regions and build the C. elegans coordinate system for every volume ( ). Second, we identify local pixel intensity maxima in a frame, which will be used as anchor points to build multi-field inputs. A trained neural network takes the inputs and predicts the score of each region as well as its position and shape. By removing overlaps between regions, the algorithm then finds a list of neuronal regions in every frame {R1, R2, R3, …} ( ). Third, {Rk} are appropriately merged into a set of neuron objects by the XNeuroAlignment algorithm ( ). Finally, we engineer two feature vectors to characterize each neuron’s relationship with its surroundings. The concatenated features are transformed by a multi-class feed-forward recognition network, trained by a specific loss function, into a set of digital identities i, i ∈ {1, …, N}, where N is the total number of neuron IDs to be recognized and unified across imaging volumes ( ).
 

## Stage 1: Pre-processing
We designed an Automatic Pre-Processing (APP) algorithm to extract a head region and use it to build a C. elegans coordinate system ( ). We take the maximum intensity projection image IMIP of each volume ( ), denoise the image with median blur ( ), and perform the morphological closing operation—dilation followed by erosion—to find connected regions. To better construct a fully connected head region, we let the size of the dilation filter be slightly bigger than the erosion filter. IMIP is converted into a binary image using the dynamic threshold algorithm ( ), and the contour tracing algorithm [ ] is conducted to find contour points {Chead} of the head, namely the region with the maximal area ( ). To build the C. elegans coordinate system, we calculate the anterior–posterior axis and ventral–dorsal axis intrinsic to a worm (see Algorithm 1). Later, all neuronal positions will be transformed into their intrinsic coordinates (see Section Stage 4: Neuron recognition). Note that Algorithm 1 relies on the observation that C. elegans crawls on its side, and it would fail to build an accurate coordinate system in extreme scenarios: (1) the head is twisting itself; (2) the head and body are touching each other during an Ω turn. These hard examples require more sophisticated algorithms and human corrections, and are beyond the scope of the current paper.
 Algorithm 1 An algorithm to build the C. elegans coordinate system
Require: the head region Ihead in the maximum intensity projection image IMIP. Contour of the head {Chead}, the largest connected component in a binary image.
Ensure: center of mass O, anterior endpoint Pa, posterior endpoint Pp, ventral endpoint Pv and dorsal endpoint Pd.
1: We define a point of interest whose pixel value , namely the sum of standard deviation and mean of Ihead. These selected points are used to compute moments and O.
2: M00 = ∑x,y
Ihead(x, y)
3: M10 = ∑x,y
x ⋅ Ihead(x, y), M01 = ∑x,y
y ⋅ Ihead(x, y)
4: 
5: O is the origin. The longest line segment passing O and intersecting {Chead} at (Pa, Pp) defines the anterior–posterior axis.
6: The line segment perpendicular to the anterior–posterior axis defines the ventral–dorsal axis. It passes O and intersects {Chead} at (Pv, Pd).
7: The ventral–dorsal axis divides the head into two regions; the region containing a greater number of points of interest defines the anterior direction.
8: The anterior–posterior axis divides the head into two regions; the region containing a greater number of points of interest defines the ventral direction.

## Stage 2: Neuronal region detection
In the second stage, we apply a deep learning algorithm to detect, frame by frame, all regions {Rk} that belong to neurons. Each neuronal region is a rectangular bounding box, represented by a quintuple: Rk = (x, y, w, h, z), where x and y are upper left coordinates of the rectangle; z is the frame index of a single volume; w and h are width and height of the rectangle respectively.
Instead of examining each pixel in a frame, the APP algorithm from stage 1 has reduced the searching area to the head region ( ), much smaller than the size of an entire image. To accelerate neuronal detection, we first identify local pixel intensity maxima in the head region ( ). These local peaks {Pk} likely belong to potential neuronal regions. The center and the size of a candidate region, however, remain unknown. Next, a trained Artificial Neural Network (ANN) is used to obtain these information. Details of the training, validation and test set are provided in the ANN training section. Inputs to the ANN include multiple rectangles centered at {Pk}, called anchor boxes ( ) and represented by A = (xA, yA, wA, hA, zA), where xA and yA are upper left coordinates of an box; wA and hA are width and height respectively; zA is the frame index. Multiple boxes of different sizes are used to cover neurons of various shapes. Multi-field images ( Up), which are concentric with the anchor box, provide additional local and context information to the neural network. The ANN predicts a score S for each region, as well as the regional position and size, formulated as corrections, , to the anchor box parameters, see . Finally, a non-maximum suppression algorithm ranks the score S of each potential region, removes regional overlaps ( Bottom), and generates a set of neuronal regions {Rk} ( ).
 

## Stage 3: 3D merging
In the third stage, we introduce XNeuroAlignment ( ) to merge that belong to the same neuron. We introduce superscript z ∈ {1…Z} to denote the frame index of a neuronal region. The continuous and sometimes irregular movements of a worm could lead to considerable shifts of ( ), a major challenge for achieving accurate alignment. In general, stage 3 could be viewed as a maximum weight matching problem in a graph: each is represented by a vertex; vertices belonging to the same neuron are connected by an edge whose weight is determined by the overlap between the two neuronal regions, see . This computationally intensive problem is significantly simplified by the following two observations.
Exclusion Principle: each neuron appears at most once in a frame. All vertices representing with identical z are disconnected.
Continuum Principle: each neuron appears in only one frame or in consecutive frames. Other scenarios are forbidden. When a neuron appears in adjacent frames, an edge E is defined to connect two neuronal regions: , where Mz is the number of neuronal regions in the zth frame.
 Therefore, the combinatorial optimization problem is reduced to finding a set of edges {E} that maximize the total weights in a chain of bipartite graphs:
 argmax{E}W=∑z=1Z-1argmax{Ez,z+1}Wz,z+1,
(1)
where are total weights and edges in a bipartite graph connecting vertices from adjacent frames. Because each neuronal region belongs to only one neuron, is subject to the constraint that {Ez,z+1} should not share a common vertex. In other words, the entire graph is a linked list ( ), not a tree.
We now define the weight of an edge using the Intersection over Union (abbr. IoU),
 w(Rmz,Rnz+1)=Rmz∩Rnz+1Rmz∪Rnz+1,
(2)
which quantifies the regional overlap. Eqs and can be solved by the Hungarian algorithm ( ). Note that all are set to 0, where τ = 0.05 is a predefined IoU threshold.
The Hungarian algorithm will accidentally merge two neighboring neurons along the Z axis. We design a partition method to resolve this problem. First, we compute the mean pixel intensity I of every neuronal region in a neuron . Second, if the intensity profile I(z) has a local minimum at z0, we will split at z0th frame ( ).
Our partition algorithm relies on the observation that the displacement of the neuronal region Rk is dominated by worm motion in the X-Y plane. In our experiments, C. elegans was sandwiched between a flat agar pad and a coverslip, thereby restraining head movements in the Z direction. Nevertheless, large up and down movements could lead to incorrect partition of a single neuron and unification of multiple neurons. One way to amend this problem is to impose an upper and lower bound on the longitudinal neuronal size. We notice that there is a strong correlation between the cell nucleus size in the X-Y direction and in the Z direction, suggesting that size information can be directly learned from data.

## Stage 4: Neuron recognition
In the final stage, we propose a few-shot learning method to recognize the digital identity of each neuron. First of all, we will discuss how to extract meaningful features that can help distinguish neurons. Second, we will introduce a deep recognition neural network for rapid inference of digital ID across imaging volumes of a single animal.
In the spirit of few-shot learning, we aim to carefully design neuronal features to facilitate machine learning when only a small number of human-annotated training examples is present. Here, we face two major challenges. First, a typical neuron in our imaging volume does not possess a distinct texture or shape, and the disparity in the appearances of the same neuron across volumes can be even bigger than those between different neurons ( ). Second, the location of a neuron is changing. What remains to be invariant and distinct across imaging volumes of an animal is a neuron’s position relative to its surroundings ( ). We therefore propose two discriminable features based on density distribution surrounding a neuron and each neuron’s K-nearest neighbors.
 

## Neuronal density feature
Let us provide a formal definition of the neuronal density function at a position x = [x, y, z] using the Dirac δ function
 gi(x)=∑{Rj}Rj∉Niδ(x-xRj),
(3)
where is the location of a neuronal region Rj in our imaging volume, and the origin [0, 0, 0] is the centroid of neuron i. Here and below, we ignore the size of a neuronal region by treating it as a point in 3 dimensions, and utilize the C. elegans coordinate system (see Stage 1: Pre-processing) to compute each neuron’s relationship with its surrounding.
We can understand the physical meaning of g(x) by integrating over a small volume d3x at a separation x from the origin, which is identical to counting the number of neuronal regions in that small volume. gi(x) is also called pair correlation function in statistical physics. We introduce the subscript i to emphasize that gi(x) is a different function when a different neuron is centered at the origin of the C. elegans coordinate system.
In practice, directly discretizing generates a very sparse feature vector that is difficult for a neural network to learn (see below). We also need to take into account the observation that neuronal distribution is anisotropic: cells are extensively distributed in the X-Y plane but are confined in a narrow axial range. To extract meaningful statistics from data, we find it advantageous to design the feature vector in the cylindrical coordinate [ρ, ϕ, z], and to integrate gi(ρ, ϕ, z) over a larger volume. We therefore count the number of neuronal regions in between two concentric cylinders, whose depth and radius are given by , and respectively ( ). To capture density variations in the azimuth and depth directions, we further divide the volume of integration into 4 territories, anatomically corresponding to ventral-dorsal and left-right sides. Such a division is empirical, reflecting the information coding and sparsity trade-off in the density feature engineering.
 Mathematically, let us define as the set of points in a volume with a ≤ ρ ≤ b; c ≤ ϕ ≤ d; e ≤ z ≤ f. Let us also define neuronal regions as a point set . Counting the neuronal regions in a given volume, for example, can be defined as
 X∩C(0,l;−π/2,π/2;0,z)≡∫0zdz∫0lρdρ∫−π/2π/2dϕgi(ρ,ϕ,z)
(4)
Counting the number of neuronal regions in the aforementioned 4 territories is thus given by
 nil,z+,V=X∩C0,l;−π2,π2;0,z2∖C0,l−Δl;−π2,π2;0,z−Δz2nil,z−,V=X∩C0,l;−π2,π2;−z2,0∖C0,l−Δl;−π2,π2;−z−Δz2,0nil,z+,D=X∩C0,l;π2,3π2;0,z2∖C0,l−Δl;π2,3π2;0,z−Δz2nil,z−,D=X∩C0,l;π2,3π2;−z2,0∖C0,l−Δl;π2,3π2;−z−Δz2,0
(5)
On the left hand side of , V/D indicates ventral/dorsal, and / indicates left/right side of a worm respectively. The neuron density feature is a vector , where lq and are discretized quantities for l and .
Note that when applying the algorithm to datasets that do not possess neuronal region information, and include only the centroid coordinates of 3D neuron objects, we can straightforwardly modify into:
 gi(x)=∑{Nj}j≠iδ(x-xj),
(6)
where we substitute by the location of a 3D neuronal object xj.

## K-nearest neighbors feature
The cylindrical coordinates [ρ, ϕ, z] of K-nearest neurons surrounding are used to build the K-nearest neighbor feature vector (see ): . The K neuron objects are arranged in an ascending order based on their distance from the origin.

## Recognition neural network, training, and loss function
Next, a trained deep recognition neural network is used to predict each neuron’s digital identity. The inputs to the recognition network is each neuron’s feature vector, built by concatenating neuronal density feature and K-nearest neighbors feature from a given volume ( ). Below, we discuss model details.
In the final layer of our recognition neural network, an embedding feature vector c ( ) for neuron is linearly transformed into an output y ( ), and the probability of a given digital identity is computed using the softmax operation ( ):
 y=WTc,W∈Rd×N
(7)
 pj=eyj∑jeyj
(8)
The corresponding cross-entropy loss Li for neuron is given by:
 Li=-loge|wξ||c|cosθξe|wξ||c|cosθξ+∑j≠ξe|wj||c|cosθj
(9)
where is the jth column vector of the weight matrix W; ξ is the human-annotated label identity for ; θj is the angle between wj and c; θξ is the angle between wξ and c.
The softmax loss function, however, is not optimized for intra-class similarity, namely the same neuron across volumes, and inter-class diversity, namely different neurons across volumes. An example in left shows how the spatial distribution of embedding feature vectors could lead to incorrect classifications. To improve the discriminability of the recognition model, we introduce several modifications in [ – ]. First, motivated by the hard examples in (left panel), we normalize c and wj so that the loss function is exclusively computing the cosine similarity between a feature vector and a weight vector on a d-sphere. Second, to further increase the inter-class distances, we introduce a hyperparameter s to scale the hypersphere radius ( middle panel). Third, we introduce margin penalties m as hyperparameters ( ) to maximize intra-class compactness and inter-class distance ( right panel) in the θ-space, the N-dimensional space spanned by the angles between an embedding feature vector and every column vector in the weight matrix W.
Together, we consider the following loss function in our model
 Li′=-loges(cos(m1θξ+m2)-m3)es(cos(m1θξ+m2)-m3)+∑j≠ξescosθj
(10)
The geometries of decision boundary in the θ-space, specified by m1, m2, m3 respectively, are different [ ]. As an illustration, let us consider a binary classification task with two neuron classes ( ): m1 penalty changes the slope of decision boundary; m2 penalty translates the decision boundary in the normal direction; m3 penalty makes the decision boundary nonlinear [ ]. All three parameters would enforce a larger angular margin. By hyperparameter tuning, in practice we find that setting m1 = 1.05, m3 = 0.05 ( ) gives the best performance in the validation data.

 (right panel) provides a geometric view of the trained embedding feature vectors: N discrete neuron clusters are distributed sufficiently far away from each other on a d-sphere with radius s. Because wξ is optimized to maximize its cosine similarity with c, each column vector of W could well approximate a direction towards the centre of each cluster (also see ).

## Inference
During inference, the trained recognition neural network transforms concatenated feature vectors into embedding feature vectors {ci}, where the subscript i indicates different neurons. Next, we consider the following two cases.
Tracking within an animal: the test and the training volumes belong to the same animal. We compute the cosine distance matrix D with . The digital ID of each neuron can be allocated by finding the best match between all pairs, namely the optimal row and column permutations that minimize the trace of D, a problem that can be solved by the Hungarian algorithm.
Tracking across animals: the test and the training volumes belong to different animals. We first select an inference volume as a template, compute {cj} from the template, and let W = [c1, …, cN]. Next we also use the Hungarian method to allocate each neuron’s digital ID in other inference volumes.

## Digital ID, cell-type ID, and human annotation
Throughout the paper, we have used and discussed two kinds of neuronal identities that worth formal definitions and clarification:
Digital ID: a digital number assigned to a neuron. The number itself does not have any biological meaning. Because it is consistent across imaging volumes within an animal, digital ID allows the extraction of whole brain neural activity. digital IDs across animals do not have to correspond to each other.
Cell-type ID: Uppercase letters indicating class based on anatomy and synaptic connectivity followed by L (left), R (right), D (dorsal), or V (ventral) [ ]. Digital ID and cell-type ID do not have a fixed correspondence across animals.
Human annotation involves drawing bounding boxes to identify neuronal regions and assigning each neuron a digital ID across volumes within a single animal. A total of 350 volumes were labelled (C1, ) in our main dataset. To identify neurons, we first label cells around the amphid and ventral nerve cord, for these two regions have relatively sparsely distributed neurons. Next, we utilize local structural traits to label neurons within the nerve ring. All labeled volumes are carefully examined and compared with a few pre-selected volumes. In order to test whether the knowledge learned by the machine can be used to track neurons in another animal, we also manually labelled volumes from two additional worms (C2 and C3, ).
 

## Imaging setup
To capture whole brain neural activity in a freely behaving C.elegans, we combined a spinning disk confocal inverted microscope (Nikon Ti-U and Yokogawa CSU-W1, Japan) with a customized upright light path for worm tracking. Fluorescence signals, emitted from neurons at different depths in a head ganglion, were collected by a high NA objective (40X, NA = 0.95, Nikon Plan Apo), driven by a high-precision scanner (PI P721.CDQ). The measured lateral resolution is 0.30 μm/pixel; the scanning step along Z-axis is 1.50 μm. An imaging volume comprises 18 two-channel fluorescence images recorded at 100 fps by two sCMOS cameras (Andor Zyla 4.2, England) simultaneously. Our imaging system thus has a volume rate ≈ 5 Hz. Reducing the volume rate by increasing the inter-volume interval is not critical for CeNDeR, since both our training and inference methods are sequence-independent. A customized infrared LED ring (850 nm) was mounted above a worm, and dark-field images of worm behaviors were captured by an upright light path and recorded at 25 fps by a USB-3.0 camera (Basler acA2000–165umNIR).

## Red fluorescence channel for detecting and tracking neurons
Our calcium imaging experiments were carried out on transgenic animals (ZM9644 hpIs676 [Pregf-1::GCaMP6::3×NLS::mNeptune]), where green fluorescent calcium indicator GCaMP and red fluorescent protein mNeptune are co-expressed in the cell nuclei by a pan-neuronal promoter. The activity-independent RFP channel was used to detect and identify neurons; the activity-dependent signal was extracted by linearly mapping the neuron position from the red to the green channel ( ). We inferred neural activity from the ratiometric measure:
 R=FGCaMPFRFP,
(11)
where the red fluorescence FRFP was used as a reference to reduce spurious signals arising from animal movements.
 

## Code availability
The CeNDeR pipeline as well as the human annotation and proofreading toolkit can be accessed at https://github.com/Wenlab/CeNDeR.

## Results
CeNDeR aims to rapidly detect all neuronal regions in a volumetric image, extract each neuron’s 3D shape, and assign a consistent digital ID to each neuron across spacetime in a freely behaving C. elegans. The entire pipeline is divided into two parts: neuron detection task and neuron recognition task. To tackle neuron detection, we borrow deep learning methods from object detection, and use a trained neural network to predict 2D bounding boxes of all neuronal regions within a stack of fluorescence images. Next, by taking into account the physical constraints on spatial distribution of neuronal regions, we apply the Hungarian algorithm to merge 2D regions into 3D neuron objects. Unlike 3DeeCellTracker and other related methods that use extensive image registration and segmentation algorithms, we strive to minimize pixel/voxel-wise computations in order to maximize detection speed.
To tackle neuron recognition, we hypothesize that each neuron’s digital identity (see Digital ID, cell-type ID, and human annotation) is encoded by the density distribution of cell regions surrounding the neuron of interest and the relative positions between neurons. Using these spatial information as inputs, we train a deep neural network classifier from a small number of human-annotated examples to allocate each neuron’s digital ID across volumes. Because the inference of digital IDs can be carried out independently for each volume, our recognition algorithm is a sequence-independent method.
The Results section is organized as follows. First, we report the performance of the neuron detection model. Because there is no publicly available raw imaging dataset with human-annotated neuronal regions, we restrict the evaluation to the three datasets ( ) collected by our imaging system. Second, we evaluate the performance of the neuron recognition model by considering two tasks. In the first task, a small fraction of volumes collected from a single freely behaving C.elegans are used for training, while the remaining volumes from the same animal are used for testing. In the second task, we test the performance of our trained recognition neural network on a different animal (either the same strain or different strains generated by a different lab). Finally, we compare the model training time, inference speed, and accuracy with other state-of-the-art recognition methods under the same benchmark.

## Neuron detection
Neuron detection consists of two stages, neuronal region detection and neuron merging. The algorithms are detailed in Stage 2: Neuronal region detection and Stage 3: 3D merging. We use precision, recall, and F1 score to quantify region detection and merging results, respectively. We chose the model whose performance on the validation volumes showed the best 2D F1 score during the training phase (see for details). If the IoU (intersection over union) between a predicted region and a ground truth region is greater than a threshold 0.3, the predicted region is a True Positive (TP). Precision is the ratio of the number of TPs to the number of predicted regions, and recall is the ratio of TPs to the number of ground truth regions. F1 score is defined as the harmonic mean of precision and recall, namely 2/(recall−1 + precision−1).
 

## Region correction
We applied a simple location transform to implement region correction, inspired by Girshick et al. [ ]. During training, an ANN took an anchor box as an input and generated a score S, as well as corrections to the box position and size . The ground truth that has the maximum overlap with the box is the target. The ANN computed the binary cross-entropy loss for S and L2 loss for position and size corrections. The targeted corrections are defined as:
 Δx=(xG-xA)/wAΔy=(yG-yA)/hAω=wG/wAη=hG/hA
(12)
where xG, yG, wG, hG represent upper left coordinates, width and height of a ground-truth (target) region; xA, yA, wA, hA, zA represent upper left coordinates, width and height, and frame index of an anchor box. During inference, a box and its predicted corrections were transformed into a neuronal region candidate (x, y, w, h, z):
 x=Δx^·wA+xAy=Δy^·hA+yAw=ω^·wAh=η^·hAz=zA
(13)

## ANN training
Our detection neural network was trained by 30 randomly chosen volumes and 20 validation volumes from C1, and tested by 300 volumes from C1, 30 volumes from C2, and 30 volumes from C3. We used stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts and cosine annealing optimization strategy [ ] to optimize network parameters and avoid gradient explosion. The detection model received inputs from 5-channel 41 × 41 concentric multi-field images ( ), including an anchor box and 4 cropped images with various sizes (15 × 15, 31 × 31, 41 × 41, 81 × 81). Smaller or larger patch size would facilitate local or global feature learning respectively. A patch smaller than 41 × 41 was padded to 41 × 41; a patch bigger than 41 × 41 was resized to 41 × 41. The algorithm removed regions whose scores S < 0.4 and whose overlapping thresholds (derived from the non-maximum suppression algorithm) are less than 0.20. These values gave the best performance in the validation data. Pre-defined anchor box size was set to “9 × 9” or {“7 × 7”, “11 × 11”}. presents performances from different anchor box sizes, in which “9 × 9” represents the best trade-off between training time, inference speed and accuracy, consistent with the observation that 9 is the average regional size by human annotation ( ).

## Neuron recognition
The neuron recognition model aims to allocate consistent digital IDs for detected neuron objects across a 4D imaging dataset from a freely behaving C. elegans. Throughout this subsection, the word recognition is used interchangeably with the word tracking.

## Tracking neurons within an animal
To evaluate the performance of our algorithm, we first trained our recognition neural network on a small number of randomly chosen, human-annotated imaging volumes, 20 validation volumes, and then tested the model on the remaining volumes from the same animal.
Our algorithm is detailed in Stage 4: Neuron recognition. Briefly, the recognition neural network received a concatenated feature vector ( ) from each neuron, including a k × 3 dimensional K-nearest neighbor feature and a q × 4 dimensional neuronal density feature. Each input feature vector was embedded onto a d-dimensional sphere with radius s. k,q,d,s were optimized hyperparameters in the model ( ). Furthermore, we introduced and optimized margin penalty hyperparameters ( ) in the cross entropy loss ( ) to maximize inter-class distances while minimizing intra-class distances.
First, we report the tracking performance on C1 ( ), a total 350 human-annotated sequential imaging volumes collected by our imaging system. Notably, trained embedding feature vectors formed N = 163 + 1 segregated neuron clusters with a large inter-cluster distance ( ). N is a hyperparameter representing the number of neuron classes (see ), where + 1 denotes an extra class. Dimensionality reduction ( ) reveals that the majority of validation and test samples were organized near the corresponding trained cluster centers. The top-1 recognition accuracy increases monotonically with the number of training volumes, reaching an average 88.25% with 30 randomly sampled training volumes ( ). Furthermore, the accuracy approaches 95.48% with 130 training volumes. Across the 200 remaining test volumes, the recognition accuracy fluctuates, including a few cases where the performance drops below 60% ( ). Examining the MIP images suggests that these instances correspond to rapid and deep head bends, when dramatic deformation caused some neurons to be much closer to other sets of neurons. This precluded an accurate inference since our recognition method relies on relative positional information to identify neurons.
 Second, we report the tracking performance on the public dataset NeRVE ([ ] and ). With 130 training volumes, the top-1 recognition accuracy approaches an average 86.51% ( ), lower than the performance on C1. We suspect two differences in the datasets affecting the recognition accuracy: (1) fewer neurons were detected and annotated in NeRVE ( ); (2) NeRVE only includes the centroid locations of neuron objects, while C1 also contains neuronal region information (see Stage 2: Neuronal region detection and ).
 

## Tracking neurons in a different animal with a pretrained model
We next evaluate the performance of our algorithm when the recognition neural network, trained on 130 imaging volumes of C1, was tested on a dataset from a different animal.
First, we tested the tracking performance on C2 or C3, data collected from the same strain ( ) and by an identical imaging system. The top-1 inference accuracy drops to an average 66.70% across the 60 test volumes ( ). Second, we tested the performance on NeRVE, data collected from a different pan-neuronal imaging strain and by a different lab ([ ] and ), and found that the top-1 inference accuracy is 50.08% ( ). These results suggest that worm-to-worm and strain-to-strain variability has a strong impact on the performance of our recognition algorithm.
 We asked whether the variability across different datasets is a major challenge for other neuron recognition methods. Indeed, when the fDNC model [ ] was tested on our datasets, the inference accuracy drops to an average 41.51% (green violin plots in ).
In , we summarize our within-animal-tracking and across-animal-tracking results and compare them with other recognition methods under the same benchmark, together with training time and inference speed. It is important to point out that 3DeeCellTracker cannot be directly applied to freely behaving C.elegans: an imaging volume must first be straightened and coarsely aligned to a common template.
 

## Cell-type ID recognition
CeNDeR is not a method for identifying cell-type identities (see Digital ID, cell-type ID, and human annotation). Neurons with defined cell-type exhibit large positional variability across worms [ , ], both in absolute positions along dorsal/ventral and anterior/posterior axis, and in pairwise distances between neurons (Fig 2 in [ ]), a finding that is inconsistent with the central assumption behind our recognition algorithm. Indeed, when testing our recognition method on the NeuroPAL datasets ( ), which contain volumes from different animals with annotated cell-type IDs, the top-1 inference accuracy is merely 30% ( ). Therefore, additional information, such as color [ ], is required, and must be combined with our current method to allocate cell-type IDs.
 

## Speed analysis
We present, in , a detailed analysis of the processing time at each step in the CeNDeR pipeline. The two ANNs (detection and recognition neural networks) ran on a GeForce RTX 3090 GPU (24 GB, 29 TFLOPS in single precision) with CUDA 11.4, and other computations ran on an Intel Xeon Gold 5220R CPU (24 Cores, 2.2 GHz). Our analysis excludes the time for data loading and results saving. CeNDeR is a highly-encapsulated and parallelized system that is able to process acquired volumes simultaneously (e.g., 410 volumes in 5 minutes). also compares the speed of CeNDeR pipeline with other methods.
 

## Discussion
CeNDeR is able to rapidly detect and recognize neurons (<1 sec/vol) from whole brain imaging data without compromising the accuracy (Tables and ). If speed is a concern, our stage 2 and stage 3 in the pipeline (see Stage 2: Neuronal region detection and Stage 3: 3D merging) provide an alternative to neuron detection methods that rely heavily on pixel- or voxel-wise segmentation of neuronal objects such as 3D-UNet [ ] and watershed algorithm [ ]. There are several other promising approaches for neuron detection. The one-stage deep-learning detection algorithm (e.g., YOLO [ ]) may be a faster solution given that neurons in our dataset possess similar shapes and sizes; 3D detection or 3D instance segmentation (e.g., Mask R-CNN [ ]) may be an end-to-end solution to detect or segment three-dimensional neurons directly.
Here a “9 × 9” anchor box (2.7 μm in size) was selected for neuron detection, reflecting a trade-off between training time, speed and accuracy. Since data collected by customized optical systems entail different pixel resolutions, a different lab may opt for a different box size to suit their best need. In addition, different axial resolutions can affect the performance of 3D merging and neuron recognition, for lower Z resolution results in fewer neuronal regions. In the extreme case when only 3D neuron objects were used for feature engineering, as in the NeRVE dataset, we found that the accuracy of neuron recognition could be significantly different from that using neuronal region information ( ).
Our lightweight recognition model is suitable for tracking neurons over a long recording in freely behaving C. elegans and it complements state-of-the-art methods. Both fDNC and CeNDeR can rapidly track neurons at 10–20 ms/vol, but ours requires much less training time ( ). To use our method, we recommend the following steps to achieve the best performance.
Annotate carefully a small number (∼30) of imaging volumes that cover different head postures among the recorded 4D imaging dataset.
Train the recognition neural network from scratch.
Perform inferences on the remaining imaging volumes.
While the overall performance of our recognition method is excellent on the within-animal-tracking task, there are worst-case scenarios when head bending and brain deformation are dramatic. Human annotation of 30 volumes may still be a non-trivial amount of user input. Furthermore, tracking neurons across animals remains an unsolved and challenging problem. Here we suggest several ways to improve our current algorithm with the aid of newly developed genetic, imaging, and computational methods.
Whole brain calcium imaging has been augmented by sparse and combinatorial labeling of neurons that can be seen in orthogonal color channels [ , ]. These landmark neurons possess invariant features and can be added to the existing feature vectors to improve the recognition accuracy. Color information could be very helpful in the scenario of large brain deformation, namely when head movement causes a large group of neurons to be squeezed into a very small region. In addition, combinatorial color labeling can be combined with our current method to provide cell-type ID information.
In order to completely solve the neuron recognition problem under the umbrella of supervised learning, we, as a community, should make a great effort for sharing and standardizing datasets collected from different animals, different strains, and by different labs. Creating an equivalent ImageNet [ ] database for C. elegans and other model organisms can leverage the power of deep-learning for reliably and accurately tracking neurons across animals.
The idea of generating synthetic datasets [ , ] that quintessentially capture the neuron movements and their variability across animals is appealing. Better algorithms can be developed in this direction. With sufficient supervised data, different ideas, such as the transformer [ , ] and our feature embedding method, can be combined to further improve the recognition accuracy.
CeNDeR is a versatile method for detecting and recognizing neurons and their activity in a freely behaving animal. When dealing with data collected under different experimental conditions (e.g., different imaging systems and worm strains), our method aims to quickly learn the statistical representation of neurons and their relationships from a small number of human-annotated examples. We have also made an effort to minimize the number of parameters that need to be blindly tuned. Our supervised approach is potentially applicable to a spectrum of volumetric imaging data, including neural activity recordings in other model organisms, such as Drosophia, zebrafish, and mice.

## Supporting information
S1 Table

## Summary of tuned hyperparameters and feature vector design.
For a given training dataset, identical hyperparameters are used for feature engineering and network training. Neuronal regions (Region) or objects (Object) are used to build KNN and density feature vector, respectively. k and q are parameters for the KNN and neuronal density feature, respectively. d is the dimensionality of the feature embedding space and s is the hypersphere radius. m1, m2 and m3 are margin penalty coefficients. N is the number of neurons to be recognized.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Table

## An exploration of feature vector design using neuronal region or neuronal object.
The recognition model was trained on C1 by using KNN and neuronal density as a concatenated input vector and tested on various benchmarks, from which the mean accuracy was calculated. 4 different combinations (neuronal regions or objects) were used to construct input feature vectors during the training stage, and we refer to M1 in for the hyperparameters. If the test benchmark does not contain neuronal region information, we constructed feature vectors using only neuronal objects.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Fig

## Human-annotated region size distribution.
The median and average size is 9, so we design two types of anchor boxes: size 9 and size 7, 11. The second type would better cover regional size ≤ 6 or ≥ 13. See for task performance.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Fig

## Statistical analysis and visualization of the recognition model.
(A) Intra-class cosine distance distributions in every neuron cluster. Y-axis is cluster index; X-axis is the cosine distance between an embedding feature vector c and the corresponding weight vector wξ across the training set. A dashed line indicates a truncation to fit the figure panel into the page. (B) Distribution of cosine distance between a neuron cluster centroid and the corresponding weight vector wξ across the training set. Because the distance is very small (with a median ≈ 0.04), {wj} could represent neuron cluster centers. (C) t-SNE visualization of neuron cluster centroids and weight vectors in the embedding space, related to B.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Fig

## Detected neuronal regions with bounding boxes and digital IDs.
Detection (pink rectangle) and neuron tracking results (blue number inside a pink rectangle) of C2. Note that a raw imaging volume (1024 × 1024 × 18) has been automatically cropped into a smaller size (273 × 237 × 18) to embed a head region.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.

We thank Wesley Hung, Min Wu and Mei Zhen for sharing an unpublished reagent ZM9644, Shangbang Gao for reading our manuscript. Request for the strain is directed to meizhen@lunenfeld.ca. We also thank Xiangyu Zhang and Siqiang Yang for proof-reading some of the imaging volumes.
 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010594.r001Decision Letter 0
MarinazzoDanieleSection EditorRichardsBlake AAcademic Editor© 2022 Marinazzo, Richards2022Marinazzo, Richardshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
6 Apr 2022

Dear Dr Wen,
Thank you very much for submitting your manuscript "Rapid detection and recognition of whole brain activity in a freely behaving Caenorhabditis elegans" for consideration at PLOS Computational Biology.
As with all papers reviewed by the journal, your manuscript was reviewed by members of the editorial board and by several independent reviewers. In light of the reviews (below this email), we would like to invite the resubmission of a significantly-revised version that takes into account the reviewers' comments. Please pay particular attention to reviewer comments concerning evaluation and benchmarking of the performance of your approach.
We cannot make any decision about publication until we have seen the revised manuscript and your response to the reviewers' comments. Your revised manuscript is also likely to be sent to reviewers for further evaluation.
When you are ready to resubmit, please upload the following:
[1] A letter containing a detailed list of your responses to the review comments and a description of the changes you have made in the manuscript. Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.
[2] Two versions of the revised manuscript: one with either highlights or tracked changes denoting where the text has been changed; the other a clean version (uploaded as the manuscript file).
Important additional instructions are given below your reviewer comments.
Please prepare and submit your revised manuscript within 60 days. If you anticipate any delay, please let us know the expected resubmission date by replying to this email. Please note that revised manuscripts received after the 60-day due date may require evaluation and peer review similar to newly submitted manuscripts.
Thank you again for your submission. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive so far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Blake A Richards
Associate Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
Daniele Marinazzo
Deputy Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
***********************
Please pay particular attention to reviewer comments concerning evaluation and bench-marking of performance of your approach.
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Authors:

Please note here if the review is uploaded as an attachment.

Reviewer #1: Wu and colleagues present a novel and innovative method called CenDer that uses a set of algorithms to detect neurons in freely behaving C. elegans and track them across video frames in 3 dimensional volumetric images. These particular challenges were recently addressed by two innovative methods that were published in 2021 eLife papers. One method called 3DeeCellTracker was published by Wen C and colleagues in the Kimura, Hillman and Nemoto labs. Another method called fDNC was published by Yu X and colleagues in the Leifer and Linderman labs, who focused only on the challenge of tracking neurons in moving animals. In this new manuscript, Wu and colleagues use a combination of artificial neural networks and embeddings to achieve high accuracy on the tasks, but it seems they ultimately underperform 3DeeCellTracker which remains the state of the art. All that being said, the innovations brought forth by CenDer in this manuscript provide a new perspective on the existing problem and novel ideas that might be combined with the previous works to further improve accuracy for the challenge of detecting and tracking neurons. I believe that PLoS Computational Biology is an ideal venue for this manuscript and that readers will appreciate the ideas and innovations that are introduced by the authors.
The manuscript is nearly done and I suggest mostly minor revisions but I have three concerns that should be addressed. My first concern is that some sections lack clarity. Given how complex some of the ideas are the confusing parts of this manuscript should be rewritten for clarity. This will help researchers to reuse the algorithmic advances in future work to attack similar problems. My second concern is that the CenDer program is provided in several pieces that were written in different programming languages and requires a lot of work to use at the moment. Since this manuscript introduces and end to end solution for detecting and tracking neurons, the software should be made available in such a way that users can easily run it on prepackaged example datasets and also use it for their own datasets. One way to do this is to build a jupyter notebook for it, and an alternative way is to compile it and add a simple user interface. Lastly the performance comparisons to 3DeeCellTracker and fDNC use their reported values instead of comparing them on the same benchmark. For this reason it’s impossible to compare all three methods to determine which is best. A true head to head comparison on the same benchmark should be added so that readers can decide what solution to choose among the now three main choices.
1. Abstract: C. elegans is not a “mollusc”, the phylum is Nematoda. Same for Line 8.
2. Line 32-40: references should be added and addressed for “Simultaneous recognition and segmentation of cells: application in C. elegans” by Qu L, et al, Bioinformatics 2011; “A probabilistic atlas for cell identification” Bubnis G, et al, arXiv 2019; and “Probabilistic Joint Segmentation and Labeling of C. elegans Neurons” by Nejatbakhsh A, et al MICCAI 2020.
3. Line 42: “interference” should be “supervision and correction”.
4. Line 53: in “CenDer”, why is “Detection” capitalized but “neuron” and “recognition” are lowercase? I suggest capitalizing the remaining two words and rename it CeNDeR.
5. Introduction: 3DeeCellTracker and fDNC are the current state of the art programs for neuron recognition and tracking but they're not explicitly mentioned in the introduction. Readers deserve a better explanation of the state of the art programs available now, more information on the algorithms used by these programs, and a more explicit explanation of how CenDer improves upon or adds to the current state of the art work.
6. Line 71 and 123: what is “F”, Frame? Figure 1C uses (x,y,w,h,z). The authors should unify their notation and use “Z” in place of “F”. Or D and d, for depth, in case they think Z will be confused for integers and f for functions.
7. Fig 6D: the dashed colored lines barely visible and should be made thicker.
8. Line 84: is N a free parameter set by the user or is it fixed for the head? It looks like N was chosen from Table S5 but the authors should clarify this.
9. Algorithm 1, Require: how is the head contour determined? I see it’s the largest component after dilation but this should be made much more explicit to the reader.
10. Algorithm 1, procedure 5: how is the anterior-posterior directionality of the head determined? The algorithm generates a vector but how is the anterior direction of the worm determined?
11. Algorithm 1, procedure 6: how does the dorsal-ventral axis assignment work if the worm is twisted? It’s also unclear how the perpendicular angle is set to ensure it lies in the dorsal-ventral as opposed to any other in this axis, for example aligning instead with the left-right axis or some other angle between dorsal-ventral and left-right axes. The central moment is only sufficient to capture the anterior-posterior vector but the worm is a 3-dimensional deformable and twistable tube.
12. Line 91: why is the dilation filter larger than erosion? Please be explicit as to why empirical choices were made.
13. Line 110: please add a link to the results section for the ANN and specify that the details of its training/test set and validation are provided in that section.
14. Fig 3D: this panel is confusing, repetitive, and doesn’t really illustrate this portion of the algorithm. Please show just one iteration of the ANN architecture, then illustrate how multiple ANN outputs are unified into single a neuron detection. Since PLoS Computational Biology targets a broad computational audience, it would be best to imagine a naïve reader and then help them understand this process as best possible.
15. Line 150: the underlying assumption in the partition algorithm is that during successive frames in an image volume, neural vertices can be displaced due to worm motion within the XY plane, but not up and down in Z which could then lead to mis-partitioning and unification of multiple neurons into one very long neuron, or mis-partitioning one neuron into several smaller pieces. The authors should address this explicitly. One way to deal with this issue would be to impose an upper and lower constraint on neuron size that is learned from the dataset.
16. Line 152: what algorithm was used to determine if pixel intensity displays multi-modality?
17. Lines 163-180: this section is confusing and should be rewritten for clarity. What’s missing is both an overview, and also the motivation behind the various computations that take place. I assume the Dirac delta is used to approximate each neuron as a point but this should be made explicit. Why do the authors switch to cylindrical coordinates, is this for the purpose of computing the cosine similarity in the ANN? Why is the data sectioned into 4 quadrants? What happens when the head bends in opposite directions, across successive image volumes, such that some neurons are now closer to other sets of neurons and the KNN computation reallocates which neurons end up in which clusters?
18. Lines 195-203: this section is also confusing. The authors state that several modifications are performed to improve the discriminability of the model. These modifications should be covered in greater depth. I assume they’re all summarized as making space between the features in their embedding to make them more robust to a variety of noise in the feature vectors? It’s unclear why these choices were made and how they remedy the issues presented by real world videos. The authors need to improve their explanation here.
19. Line 188: what data are included in feature vector c, is it just the KNN values? This should be made explicit.
20. Stage 4, Neural Recognition section: this is a very difficult read and it’s one of the more novel stages of the algorithm. As is it doesn’t provide a good overview of what’s to come, the purpose of each part as it pertains to the whole isn’t clear, and the transitions between each part aren’t clear either. The authors would greatly benefit from having a naïve reader go through this section to help them in rewriting it to improve its clarity. This is also true of some of the previous sections, but to a lesser extent.
21. Line 218: both Toyoshima Y, et al BMC Biology 2020 and Yemini E, et al Cell 2021 show that neurons in C. elegans are positionally variable and thus require additional techniques, such as color, to identify cell types such as AWA. Assigning neuron cell-type ID’s across worms, using just the cell positions, leads to a considerable amount of mislabeling errors. The authors should address this and limit their claims to tracking neurons within single animals across image volumes. Neuron IDs in this paper appear to be limited to enumerations of N_i where i=1, …, total neurons. The authors should be explicit in explaining that their method can be used with other techniques for neural ID but cannot perform the actual cell type ID itself.
22. Line 231: as is the standard for such publications, the authors should provide the x, y, and z resolution for their microscope in microns. This becomes especially important later on when discussing neuronal regions in pixel “box” sizes, since these are expected to be sensitive to microscope resolution. In addition to this, the algorithm is likely limited to a minimum nuber of volumes per second below which it can no longer track neurons across frames. The authors should state the minimum volume rate needed for their algorithm to work.
23. Table 1: 80 total training volumes seems a bit low for training an ANN, I assume there are many neurons in each volume. The table should state how many neurons are present in each set of volumes to give the reader a better sense of whether sufficient observations were used to train the ANN.
24. Table 2: anchor box sizes are measured in pixels but the relevant measure is microns since different microscopes and objectives will result in images with different resolutions. The authors should provide box sizes in microns, in addition to their pixel measurements. The authors should also discuss the minimum axial and temporal resolutions required for their algorithm to work and whether they recommend downsampling high resolution images to improve their algorithmic speed and accuracy. This is especially relevant given their highly specific choices for anchor box and cropped image sizes, and choice of ANN training dataset, which are likely to depend strongly on volumetric resolution.
25. Lines 288-289: two thresholds, 0.4 and 0.2 are mentioned but seem arbitrary. The authors should clarify how these were chosen.
26. Line 307: it’s not clear why the link to Table S3 is given. The authors should clarify that this supplemental table shows why the values of d=56 and s=16 were chosen.
27. Table 3: as mentioned earlier, cross animal neuron ID is not verifiable without a method to perform cell type ID. The authors should remove this claim or use datasets that permit cell type ID to verify their claims. The Toyoshima Y et al 2020 and Yemini E et al 2021 papers make their real animal datatsets public. Wen C et al, and Yu X et al, both in eLife 2021 use both synthetic and real animal datasets to quantify the performance of their 3DeeCellTracker and fDNC algorithms, and these datasets are also publicly accessible. The authors can use any of these datasets to validate claims of cross animal ID if they wish to include this claim. That said I don’t see the claim of cross animal ID as necessary for this paper to be novel or of high impact, it is already very strong without this extra work.
28. Table 3, Accuracy: the comparison here uses reported accuracies from different papers using different benchmarks. It’s not an appropriate comparison. All algorithms should be tested on a common benchmark so that they can be compared head to head to determine which is best on each task. The authors also fail to report the published top-3 accuracy of fDNC which is 91.3% but this will no longer matter when all algorithms are tested on a common benchmark dataset. The authors should compare CenDer to 3DeeCellTracker, fDNC, and CRF by Chaudhary S et al, eLife 2021. A benchmark dataset was already created in the 3DeeCellTracker paper. The 3DeeCellTracker benchmark reused datasets from Toyoshima Y et al 2016 and Nguyen JP et al 2017 papers, and then added its own dataset to these. So the standard exists to use the existing benchmark datasets. The authors can add their own benchmark dataset to the existing ones if they feel that their dataset adds information that is relevant to the comparison.
29. I can’t verify that the software and algorithms work because they require a combination of python, matlab, and even Nvidia GPUs. I believe many readers will be unable to use this paper’s innovation for the very same reasons that I can’t. PLoS Computational Biology policy states “For studies that describe software for end-user applications, deposition either in a repository that enables remote code execution or instructions for installing and using the software are a prerequisite.” As is the code doesn’t conform to this standard. Since the code is largely in python and the matlab parts can be compiled into an executable, the authors should create a jupyter notebook that executes their code, provide a tutorial and examples to use it in the notebook, and allow users to upload their own volumetric images to the notebook so they can test these with the software.
Reviewer #2: Wu et al. describe CenDer, an interesting and speedy addition to the suite of algorithms for tracking of C. elegans neurons in whole-brain or whole-animal calcium imaging. This is a challenging problem for a variety of reasons, and is a very important one to solve well in order to allow biological insight to be derived from such recordings. In brief--we can watch worms think, but if we cannot keep track of which neuron is which even within an animal, much less across animals, we cannot understand what we are seeing.
The manuscript is clearly written, has figures that helpfully illustrate less-intuitive parts of the algorithm (e.g. concentric images), and sets out the current state of the art amply while describing the advances made by this paper. The main advance is that the method achieves quite-good performance with very little computation time--other approaches are either fast, but so poor as to be unusable (though to be fair it is not clear that the accuracy of this method is good enough either), or of good quality but slow enough to pose a major computational bottleneck. This paper's method computes neuronal identities only 4x slower than acquisition speed, making it very unlikely to be a bottleneck in any real setting. The best competitor, 3DeeCellTracker is 100x slower than CenDer and 400x slower than acquisition, meaning that an experiment that takes just three minutes will require a whole day to compute. Although this can be ameliorated somewhat by running on a large cluster or in the cloud, this emphasizes that speed is in practice a significant concern.
The authors do not, in this paper, present a final solution to the problem: though their method is fast and accurate, for some applications it is unlikely to be accurate enough. This manuscript should therefore be viewed both as a potentially useful tool and as a report on a promising direction that the authors or other groups could continue to pursue until accuracy is adequate. (The authors describe some potential improvements in the discussion.)
The biggest flaw in the results is that there does not appear to be any validation on a recording from an animal that has not been used as part of the training set. Instead, every animal is used to contribute to both training, test, and validation data sets by splitting the recording in time. While this is valuable, it is far from adequate. Even if it is too labor-intensive to annotate enough individual animals to get ground-truth for a reasonable sample size, showing at least one new animal is very important. Or, alternatively, the authors should at least retrain their network with two out of the three animals, and use the third annotated animal as the test set. The neuronal clustering appears promising--but this may be partly illusory due to the selection criterion for which neurons were even allowed to exist (i.e. only those appearing in all three--a retraining must be done WITHOUT excluding missing neurons from the held-out animal!). If I am mistaken and this never-trained-on-animal data does exist already, it should be highlighted much more, as this is how the tool would be actually used: people would generate new data sets, not annotated by humans, and would run the software to get their results. For the biologist, nothing else really matters. As a computational technique, even if it turns out that this doesn't work, the paper still has merit for its clever and speedy preprocessing and feature construction which provides an appropriate level of detail as input to the ML part of the analysis pipeline.
In addition to this one main concern--hopefully an easily addressed one--there are a variety of minor comments below.
Abstract: C. elegans are NOT molluscs! Their phylum is Nematoda!
Author summary: it would be more grammatically correct to say, "the fluorescent change in and thereby..." (add in). Alternatively, the sentence could be restructured.
Introduction: C. elegans are still NOT molluscs!
Methods, Stage 1: The tense is wrong in "We design an Automatic Pre-Processing (APP) algorithm". This happened in the past: "designed". The running of it can be stated in present tense (e.g. "to extract a head region and build a C. elegans coordinate system"..."use it to" is redundant and actually a bit confusing).
Methods, Stage 2: Here especially, but also elsewhere, the authors do not do a good job distinguishing between the *training* of an ANN and the *running* of the trained ANN to produce a result. Here, where the authors are describing the processing pipeline, "training" is not what is happening--the ANN is already trained. Thus, "Next, an Artificial Neural Network (ANN) is trained..." is not the right thing to say. The authors should clearly separate the two tasks:
(1) We trained an ANN on such-and-so data to find the center and size of candidate regions.
(2) We use this trained ANN as part of the processing pipeline.
Methods, Stage 3: It is very difficult to refer to the NeuroAlignment step due to the unexpected fancy calligraphic X as the first character (it's not a LaTeX standard that I'm familiar with, but looks similar to fonts I do know). It would be nice if the authors could just call it XNeuroAlignment or something like that, so that it's completely clear what the first letter is.
Methods, Stage 4: The K-nearest neighbors feature sectoin says "Here we ignore the size of a neuron object by treating it as a point in three dimensions." But this is what we've already been doing all throughout the Neuronal density feature section! That's the whole point of the delta function. I do also wonder about the formalism--while the integrals are technically correct, the entire problem is discretized and really is a point-set problem. Thus, I wonder if it might not be simpler to cast the problem as an intersection between the point coordinate set X = {x_R_j} and a set of concentric partial shells about a neuron i, which you can form by defining the partial volume V(i, h, l) and then computing X ^ (V(i, h, l) - V(i, h - dh, l - dl)). Anyway, treating neurons as points is not new by the time we hit K-nearest neighbors.
Methods, Imaging Setup: "inverted microscopy" should be "inverted microscope".
Methods, Red fluorescence channel...: Using the Fraktur font R, typically used to denote the real part of a complex-valued variable, is a peculiar choice. I understand that R is already in use for region, but this is liable to be confusing to any mathematician. Perhaps use Q, a calligraphic R instead of the Fraktur (\\Re) one, or something else. Every time I see it, I think that, for instance, neurons are complex-valued.
Figure 7: Same thing about Fraktur R used as ratio.
Results, ANN training: It would be nice if the authors say something about how long training takes, not just running the trained model. It seems like it ought not take very long, given the limited size of the data set, but I couldn't find any numbers. Also, in the pre-defined anchor box size line, 9x9, 7x7, and 11x11 sizes in quotes have close-quotes on both sides. Either they should be plain quotes (neither open nor closed), or they should be a proper open-closed pair. (Yes, I know LaTeX will tend to make this mistake at times.)
Figure 9: The colors of the different steps are too similar. Please make them more dramatically different so it's easy to tell at a glance what step is what. For instance, they could all be blue of different darknesses (substantially different!), with the preprocessing in green, if that is to stand out.
Reviewer #3: Wu and colleagues present a complete analysis pipeline for extracting calcium signals from large neural population recordings of moving C. elegans. Their pipeline segments neurons, tracks neurons through time, extracts calcium signals, and identifies the correspondence of neurons across animals. There has been a recent flurry of work in the literature presenting computational methods to address different aspects of this problem, which speaks to the interest and need in the community for developing a robust, high performing pipeline that could be of general use to the field.
My primary concern with this work is that the ground-truth evaluation of performance, as currently presented, is not yet satisfactory. If the reported performance holds up under more rigorous assessment, then I think this work would be a very valuable contribution to the field.
Most critical concerns:
1) Tracking performance (within-animal) should be more meaningfully assessed. Currently, performance is evaluated on an extremely small test set of 5 or 10 consecutive volumes representing less than 1 or 2 seconds of animal movement at the reported volume rate. This is woefully insufficient to evaluate the algorithm’s performance on a representative sampling of animal poses or movements. Evaluation on longer recordings will also help differentiate the performance of this algorithm from sequence-dependent methods (Lagache et al., 2021) that perform well on short times, but struggle with longer recordings.
2) The quality of ground truth used to evaluate across-animal neural ID performance is unsatisfactory. Other recent works (refs 19-21) have used human annotations of NeuroPAL strains to establish ground truth neural ID across animals. There a human relies on genetically encoded color labels in addition to position and morphology. In this work, it seems that ground truth is determined by a human using only position and morphology. I am skeptical of a human’s ability to accurately identify neurons across animals via position and morphology alone. More evidence is needed to show that the ground truth across-animal neural correspondence used here for evaluation is accurate.
Other major substantive feedback:
- The work would be strengthened by evaluating performance on another dataset from a different group. It is becoming clear that imaging hardware, conditions and labeling approaches vary across groups. If this work is to have the maximal impact on the field, it should show how well it can generalize to another C. elegans dataset. There are now at least a couple publicly accessible datasets in the literature. This also helps facilitate direct comparisons to other methods, because they can be evaluated on the same datasets.
- Please clarify when training must be performed, and all the instances where human input is required. For example, does the algorithm need to be trained anew for each worm? For each imaging setup? For each age of animal used or each strain? Make this information prominent in the text.
- Clarify how performance of this method is compared to competing methods in Table 3. Did the authors re-run those algorithsm on a common dataset? If not, where did the values listed come from? If they came from the literature, then please double check. Some of the numbers listed do not match what I found in the literature.
- Neuron detection superficially appears to have some similarities to 3DeeCellTracker (Wen et al., 2020). Please expand on similarities and differences.
Textual, visualization and some minor concerns:
- The detailed description of the pipeline can be hard to follow and reads more like a recipe. It would benefit from more high-level description to help guide the reader along and to better motivate each algorithm or implementation detail.
- Figure 9 is hard to decipher because all the colors are similar and I cannot tell which bar is which. Please remedy.
- Terminology is sometimes confusing. Please clarify when cell ID means ID across animals (e.g. the name in the connectome) vs the local identity within a worm.
- C. elegans come from phylum Nematoda not Mollusca . Remove all references to molluscan and mollusc.
- Some language is odd. “Gadgets” in “Despite the presence of modern gadgets” is wrong.
- 295: "A model was saved if it's performance has best" Please clarify. Does this refer to initializations of the parameters? Which are the different models?
**********

Have the authors made all data and (if applicable) computational code underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?

The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data and code underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data and code should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data or code —e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: None
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No

Figure Files:

While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org.

Data Requirements:

Please note that, as a condition of publication, PLOS' data policy requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions outlined in your manuscript. Data must be deposited in an appropriate repository, included within the body of the manuscript, or uploaded as supporting information. This includes all numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.. For an example in PLOS Biology see here: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5.

Reproducibility:

To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010594.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
1 Aug 2022

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response letter.pdf
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010594.r003Decision Letter 1
MarinazzoDanieleSection EditorRichardsBlake AAcademic Editor© 2022 Marinazzo, Richards2022Marinazzo, Richardshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
8 Sep 2022

Dear Dr Wen,
Thank you very much for submitting your manuscript "Rapid detection and recognition of whole brain activity in a freely behaving Caenorhabditis elegans" for consideration at PLOS Computational Biology. As with all papers reviewed by the journal, your manuscript was reviewed by members of the editorial board and by several independent reviewers. The reviewers appreciated the attention to an important topic. Based on the reviews, we are likely to accept this manuscript for publication, providing that you modify the manuscript according to the review recommendations. Please be sure to address all of the remaining items identified by the reviewers.
Please prepare and submit your revised manuscript within 30 days. If you anticipate any delay, please let us know the expected resubmission date by replying to this email.
When you are ready to resubmit, please upload the following:
[1] A letter containing a detailed list of your responses to all review comments, and a description of the changes you have made in the manuscript. Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out
[2] Two versions of the revised manuscript: one with either highlights or tracked changes denoting where the text has been changed; the other a clean version (uploaded as the manuscript file).
Important additional instructions are given below your reviewer comments.
Thank you again for your submission to our journal. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive so far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Blake A Richards
Academic Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
Daniele Marinazzo
Section Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
***********************
A link appears below if there are any accompanying review attachments. If you believe any reviews to be missing, please contact ploscompbiol@plos.org immediately:
[LINK]
Please be sure to address all of the remaining items identified by the reviewers.
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Authors:

Please note here if the review is uploaded as an attachment.

Reviewer #1: The authors have addressed all my comments and the new manuscript is excellent. I'm excited to see the paper out!
One very minor correction: Table 2, "NeuroPAL Yu" row, the strain should be "AML32" not "AML320"
Reviewer #2: I believe that the authors have expertly addressed all the comments that I and the other reviewers raised. The paper seems, to me, clearly written; it contains both promising results and thoughtful commentary about challenges; it describes how this work relates to and advances upon the state of the art; and it contains a variety of attractive and informative figures that document all main claims.
Among changes, the analysis of the NeRVE dataset is particularly interesting, and provides a cross-experimenter validation of method that is very important but often missing in work such as this.
As I was reading the otherwise excellent paper, I found a small number of typos and/or instances of awkward wording. None of these greatly impair understanding of the scientific content, but I point them out here anyway:
(1) Line 6--"dynamic brain" should be "brain dynamics"
(2) Line 112--"filter slightly bigger" should be "filter be slightly bigger"
(3) Line 125--"detecting" should be "detect"
(4) Lines 301 & 302--"It is the consistency of a number across imaging volumes within an animal that allows the extraction" is grammatically correct but slightly awkward; the same point might be conveyed more comfortably with "Because it is consistent across imaging volumes within an animal, digital ID allows the extraction"
(5) Line 306--"have correspondence" might be clearer as "have a fixed correspondence across animals".
(6) Line 325--"thus have a" should be "thus has a"
(7) Line 431--"Noticeably" should probably be "Notably". (The clusters are noticeable, but "Notably" is the usual way to phrase such things.)
(8) Line 439--"at times when" should be "including a few cases where" (or something like that--it is important to point out that these are rare cases, which "at times when" doesn't do, in addition to suggesting that fluctuation is limited to the cases where it drops below 60%, which isn't really the case...the other fluctuations are just smaller).
(9) Line 442--"neurons, precluding an" should be "neurons. This precluded" (to help break up the overly-long sort-of-run-on sentence).
That is all!
Reviewer #3: The authors should be commended for making very useful additions including adding more rigorous quantification of performance and adding comparisons against other existing datasets. A few points remain that are still confusing in the manuscript’s current form (even though they were explained clearly in the most recent response to reviewers). If these straightforward clarifications are addressed in the manuscript, then I believe the work will be a valuable addition to the community. I recommend acceptance pending the following specific clarifications.
Important clarifications needed in the main text:
Most importantly, the language about “within-animal” vs “across-animal” and “digital ID”, vs “cell ID” remains confusing despite the authors efforts to clarify in the text. For example, when I look at Table 4 I am inclined to think that “across-animal” tracking means tracking cell IDs across animals. But instead it refers to tracking digital neuron IDs within an animal, just using *training* from across animals. Please further clarify to the reader so this is less confusing. For example, language such as “within-animal tracking, via across-animal training” seems more accurate and clear.
Similarly the definition of “digital ID” and “cell ID” (lines 298) and a mention that CeNDeR is only for “digital ID”s (line 471) should be made very early on in the paper and not a dozen pages in, so that a reader can quickly and accurately understand the scope of this work. For example around line 51 the authors should say something to the effective of “matching cell-type identities across animals is beyond the scope of the present work”.
Also in the author summary, the word “recognizes” in “detecting and recognizing most of the neurons” also seems to incorrectly convey give the impression that the algorithm finds cell IDs as opposed to digital neuron IDs. Please clarify in these areas too.
Additionally, it it is important to explicitly remind the reader in the Discussion section about the non-trivial amount of user input required (30 frames) as a current challenge of the approach.
Minor:
-I recommend plotting 8C and 8E on a single plot for easier comparison
-I think Figure 9CD would be more useful if it was combined so that the two algorithms could be compared on the same dataset
**********

Have the authors made all data and (if applicable) computational code underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?

The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data and code underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data and code should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data or code —e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
Figure Files:
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org.
Data Requirements:
Please note that, as a condition of publication, PLOS' data policy requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions outlined in your manuscript. Data must be deposited in an appropriate repository, included within the body of the manuscript, or uploaded as supporting information. This includes all numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.. For an example in PLOS Biology see here: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5.
Reproducibility:
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
References:
Review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript.

If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.

10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010594.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
19 Sep 2022

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Reponse letter II.pdf
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010594.r005Decision Letter 2
MarinazzoDanieleSection EditorRichardsBlake AAcademic Editor© 2022 Marinazzo, Richards2022Marinazzo, Richardshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
22 Sep 2022

Dear Dr Wen,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'Rapid detection and recognition of whole brain activity in a freely behaving Caenorhabditis elegans' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Computational Biology.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us now if you or your institution is planning to press release the article. All press must be co-ordinated with PLOS.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Computational Biology. 
Best regards,
Blake A Richards
Academic Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
Daniele Marinazzo
Section Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
***********************************************************
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010594.r006Acceptance letter
MarinazzoDanieleSection EditorRichardsBlake AAcademic Editor© 2022 Marinazzo, Richards2022Marinazzo, Richardshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
5 Oct 2022

PCOMPBIOL-D-22-00186R2 
Rapid detection and recognition of whole brain activity in a freely behaving Caenorhabditis elegans
Dear Dr Wen,
I am pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Computational Biology. Your manuscript is now with our production department and you will be notified of the publication date in due course.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. 
Soon after your final files are uploaded, unless you have opted out, the early version of your manuscript will be published online. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
Thank you again for supporting PLOS Computational Biology and open-access publishing. We are looking forward to publishing your work! 
With kind regards,
Agnes Pap
PLOS Computational Biology | Carlyle House, Carlyle Road, Cambridge CB4 3DN | United Kingdom ploscompbiol@plos.org | Phone +44 (0) 1223-442824 | ploscompbiol.org | @PLOSCompBiol