464sageopenAutismAutismPMC9597148959714895971483506817410.1177/13623613211070869A virtuous circle: Stakeholder perspectives of a short-term intensive
parent training programme delivered within the context of routine services for
autism in China
FangZuyi LachmanJamie M ZhangCheng QiaoDongping BarlowJane 1Beijing Normal University, China2University of Oxford, UK3University of Glasgow, UK4University of Leeds, UK✉Zuyi Fang, School of Social Development and
Public Policy, Beijing Normal University, 19 Xinjiekou Wai Street, Beijing,
100875, China. Email: fangzuyi@outlook.com
241202226819731973–198627102022© The Author(s) 2022This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which
permits non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work
without further permission provided the original work is attributed as
specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).

## Abstract
Although the evidence of parent training programmes for families of autistic
children has continued to grow, little is known about the experiences and
perceptions of key stakeholders, especially in low- and middle-income countries.
This qualitative study was part of a larger real-world evaluation of a
short-term intensive parent training programme in routine services delivered to
caregivers of autistic children aged 3–6 years in China. It aimed to provide
insights into programme acceptability, reasons for participant involvement, and
factors related to programme implementation. Fourteen caregivers participated in
the in-depth interviews, and two focus group discussions were conducted with
eight practitioners. Data were analysed using a combination of data- and
theory-driven approaches. Findings point to the needs in low autism resource
settings for substantial practice and feedback; group support; individualised
coaching; more autism-related knowledge, resources and activities for children
and extended family members; and organisational support to practitioners.
Further research is suggested to address the recommendations and assess their
effectiveness empirically.

## Lay abstract
While much knowledge about autism derives from high-income countries, most
people diagnosed with autism reside in low- and middle-income countries,
where little is documented in terms of local interventions. This is also
true for parent training programmes for families of autistic children. An
evaluation was conducted to understand the effects of a short-term intensive
parent training programme delivered in routine services for families of
autistic children in China. This study reported results from the in-depth
interviews with 14 participating caregivers and group discussions with eight
group leaders. The interviews and discussions were aimed at learning (1) to
what extent the programme components were deemed acceptable, (2) what
affected caregivers’ attendance and engagement in the programme and (3) what
affected group leaders’ delivery of the programme. Findings suggested that
future parent training programmes provide adequate opportunities for
caregivers to practice and receive feedback; group support; coaching
experience tailored to individual challenges; more autism-related knowledge,
resources and activities for children and extended family members; and
organisational support to group leaders. This study highlights the value of
qualitative research and points to the need for more empirical studies to
address the recommendations, so that research findings can be better
utilised to promote practices.

Keywords: autism spectrum disorders, family functioning and support, interventions – psychosocial/behavioural, pre-school children, qualitative research

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoIssue date 2022 Nov.

A large regional study recently conducted in China showed a prevalence rate for autism of
1% (approximately 3.1 million children), which is in line with the estimate for Western
countries ( ; ). Families of autistic
children in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) tend to face more accumulated
adversities than those in high-income countries (HICs), including problems such as
resource constraints and social marginalisation ( ). Autistic children are
more likely than their non-autistic cohorts or cohorts diagnosed with other
developmental disabilities to experience co-occurring externalising behaviours ( ). These
behavioural challenges are linked to increased parenting stress and have an impact in
terms of child development ( ).
Early interventions have been advocated to optimise child outcomes in autism ( ). Early
behavioural treatment models for young autistic children, such as Early Intensive
Behavioural Interventions and Early Start Denver Model, have shown promising effects in
terms of improving behaviours, cognitive performance and language skills ( ). However,
the intensive delivery over several consecutive years makes such programmes unfeasible
for many families. Moreover, the common shortage of specialist providers and
infrastructure in low-resource settings limits access to intensive specialist care
( ).
As such, relatively shorter parent training and education has been identified to be an
important strategy to address this significant unmet need ( ).
Components of parent training programmes differ, ranging from information sharing to
teaching primary caregivers parenting techniques and involving them as the change agent
for child outcomes. Systematic reviews have been conducted to evaluate the effectiveness
of such programmes in terms of promoting child behavioural adjustment, improving
parent–child interactions, reducing autism symptoms and promoting child skills ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ). also focussed on programmes in China, found no significant group
differences between programmes that originated outside and within China or between
programmes with and without clinically qualified deliverers in terms of reducing child
challenging behaviour, thereby supporting the use of parent training across cultures and
resource settings.
While the growing evidence base for such programmes is promising, much less is known
about the views of key stakeholders with regard to the acceptability and feasibility.
Qualitative research can identify components that are meaningful to beneficiaries and
that have the potential to maintain participant engagement ( ). However, there are few
qualitative studies focussed on autism, especially in LMICs ( ). This current study aims
to address this gap by investigating the experiences and perceptions of key stakeholders
with regard to a short-term intensive parent training programme, named SREIA (Stars and
Rain Education Institute for Autism), which has supported thousands of families of young
autistic children in China over the course of two decades.

## Research question
This qualitative study was aimed at answering the following overarching research
question: What are stakeholders’ experiences of participating in and delivering the
SREIA programme within a routine service context? It was investigated with specific
reference to the extent to which the programme content and delivery methods were
deemed to be acceptable; and the extent and nature of the facilitators of and
barriers to participant involvement and programme implementation ( ).

## Methods

## Study design
This qualitative study was embedded within a larger quasi-experimental evaluation
of the SREIA parent training programme, delivered from September to November
2020 (ClinicalTrials.gov CT04257331). The programme was shown to be associated
with improvements in child behavioural adjustment, parental mental health,
parental knowledge and parental over-reactivity (under review). In-depth
interviews and focus group discussions (FGDs) were conducted immediately after
the completion of the programme to provide insights into the intervention
process and outcomes ( ). Ethical approval was provided by the
University of Oxford (R67619/RE001) and Beijing Normal University
(SSDPP-HSC2020001).

## Programme
The SREIA short-term intensive parent training programme has been delivered to
Chinese families of autistic children aged 3–6 years since 1993 by a
long-established non-governmental organisation (NGO). It is based on applied
behaviour analysis, social learning theory, operant conditioning, developmental
and cognitive behaviour theory. It is aimed at reducing child challenges and
promoting child development by increasing parental knowledge, improving
parenting skills, changing parental attitudes, promoting parental mental health
and creating social support. A range of techniques are delivered using a variety
of methods in an intensive format, involving 5 days a week for 11 consecutive
weeks ( ).
Such an intensive approach is feasible in China due to the fact that around
two-thirds of Chinese families of autistic children have at least one parent who
is a full-time caretaker ( ). Chinese parents are often the primary instructor
and advocator for their autistic child, which highlights the need for such
programmes to increase their self-efficacy.
 Individual pre-consultations are offered with the aim of enabling programme
practitioners to better understand family strengths and concerns. An
individualised treatment plan is created for each parent–child dyad, covering
targeted child behaviours, caregiver areas for improvement and other priorities
identified by caregivers. Fourteen 2-h didactic presentations on the core themes
are offered across the 11 weeks, with one or two topics each week. The large
didactic presentations are then followed by additional training and in vivo
practice in small groups of ten dyads to enhance the understanding and use of
skills. Content delivered in small caregiver groups focus on the weekly topics,
but are also tailored to various degrees for each group to address different
needs. Group sessions often start with the practitioner revisiting the content
in that week’s didactic presentation(s) and modelling the new techniques,
followed by caregivers practicing the techniques in vivo and receiving comments
from practitioners and other caregivers. Caregivers are assigned homework
activities to practice after sessions. They are encouraged to submit written or
video records of their practice at home for practitioners to provide feedback.
Communications between caregivers and practitioners remain open and flexible.
Opportunities for peer interactions are created by arranging group discussions,
group problem-solving activities and an online social and messaging group. The
programme is primarily delivered in person, with the 14 didactic presentations
also streamed online to avoid mass gathering during COVID-19. The pandemic also
led to a lack of childcare services, which used to be provided during the large
didactic presentations. The programme had two versions of delivery, which were
implemented concurrently and share the same programme content, with the purpose
of exploring ways to reduce cost while improving outcomes. Parent groups in
Version A attend didactic sessions together in a larger group but practice
sessions separately, whereas in Version B, parents have all sessions delivered
separately for each group.

## Participants
Participants were drawn from practitioners and families involved in the SREIA
programme delivered between September 2020 and November 2020. All programme
practitioners (N = 8) were invited and consented to participate
in the FGDs. They were employees of the SREIA implementing organisation and
included Han females in their 20s–40s. They were from diverse educational
backgrounds, having college or associate degrees unrelated to healthcare or
autism, such as in social work and early education. Five of the eight
practitioners had more than 5 years of experience in delivering the programme,
whereas the other three practitioners were relatively young. All had been
trained and certified by the implementation agency to deliver the programme. The
training for the old and new practitioners differed, as the training has evolved
over time, although the primary focus remained on knowledge about autism,
programme content and programme delivery.
The fidelity of their implementation was assessed using practitioner checklists.
Practitioners reported whether they delivered the core components prescribed in
the schedule each week. The fidelity scores (maximum = 1) comprised the overall
ratio of delivered components to prescribed components. Quality of delivery was
also measured by research staff observing parent group sessions and completing a
quality of delivery survey. The survey contained 24 items, assessing the general
skills of facilitating parent groups (such as knowledge of content, teaching
skills and sensitivity to participants’ feelings and experiences) and skills of
modelling parenting techniques and facilitating practice sessions (such as
appropriately setting up the space and providing adequate support during
participant practice). A total score is summed (maximum = 72). Two sessions for
each practitioner were randomly selected and recorded for research staff to rate
the quality of delivery. Their overall fidelity rate was 0.95 and the delivery
was of medium quality, with a mean score of 51.86
(SD = 1.13).
The programme was delivered to seven groups of 10 caregiver–child dyads – four
groups in Version A and three groups in Version B. All participating children
were diagnosed with autism aged between 3 and 6 years. Evidence shows that
caregiver involvement is linked to the potential of programmes to produce
desirable outcomes in interventions for autistic and non-autistic children
( ; ; ). As such, participants for the in-depth individual
interviews were identified based on their overall attendance and engagement as
rated by the programme practitioners. The practitioners recorded caregiver
attendance using an attendance register and judged their engagement on a daily
basis according to four criteria: responsiveness to practitioners, interactions
with other caregivers, participation in group discussions and completion of
homework activities. Three caregivers with the highest and lowest levels of
involvement were identified in each parent group. However, it should be noted
that the rates of attendance (0.98 out of 1) and engagement (5.58 out of 6) were
generally high. Recruitment was conducted with the help of practitioners and
stopped when data saturation – no additional data are found that can contribute
to the emergence of new codes or themes ( ) – was
reached. The final sample consisted of 14 caregivers (eight from Version A and
six from Version B) with different levels of involvement. presents the characteristics
of the caregivers. Oral informed consent was obtained from all participants.
 

## Data collection and analysis
The interviews and FGDs were conducted during the week immediately after the
completion of the intervention. The caregivers were interviewed individually for
a maximum of 1.5 h. Two FGDs were conducted, lasting for approximately 2 h
(N = 4 practitioners per group).
Semi-structured interview schedules were designed around acceptability,
involvement and implementation. Each topic was started with broad open-ended
questions followed by probes to evoke detailed responses. Questions evolved over
the course of the study to adapt the interview approach based on participants’
responses ( ). The FGDs were facilitated by the first author and
the caregiver interviews were conducted by the first author and a trained
interviewer with a master’s degree in social work.
The analytic approach was underpinned by a contextualist framework, which
involved combining the traditionally data-driven approach with a theory-driven
approach ( ). As such, coding of the data was guided by a coding
framework, while also allowed themes to emerge from the data, capturing the full
range of responses. This hybrid approach has demonstrated rigour in previous
research ( ). The data analysis integrated the development of
a coding framework into the six phases of thematic analysis described by . It involved the following six steps. First, several coding
domains were outlined based on the theoretical concepts (programme
acceptability, participant involvement and programme implementation) and
research questions (facilitators and barriers; ). In addition to these
coding domains, a topic pertaining to the experience of having an autistic child
in China emerged during data collection. Second, the transcripts were read and
re-read to create a list of coding ideas. Third, initial codes were generated
from a subset of data and organised in terms of the coding domains. Fourth,
preliminary themes were created to develop an initial coding framework. Fifth,
the coding framework was applied and constantly modified throughout the coding
process. Finally, themes were refined and reported.

## Reflexivity, quality and trustworthiness
The first author introduced the study to the participants and coordinated
interview times. The interviews were conducted by the first author and a trained
interviewer, who are both females, born and raised in China. The first author is
a PhD candidate at an academic institute in the United Kingdom, and has been
researching parent training programmes for children with and without
disabilities. The other interviewer completed a master’s degree in social work
in China, and has experience in working with families of autistic children and
conducting qualitative interviews.
Given the diverse backgrounds of interview participants, we promoted reflexivity
of this study by recognising and addressing power differentials between
interviewers and participants. All interviews were conducted in a friendly and
empathetic manner. Rapport was built prior to asking any questions. The
interviews started with casual conversations, informing participants what to
expect in the interview and addressing their concerns about confidentiality. The
interviews were conducted in a space that was familiar to the participants. The
purpose and anonymisation of recording, as well as their rights to erase the
recording and/or withdraw the data, was fully explained. Light refreshments were
also provided to create a welcoming and relaxed environment. Further, the coding
software ATLAS.ti was used to document the entire coding procedures, including
any evolving perceptions and critical decision points. The involvement of second
coder and the discussion of discrepancies also facilitated the introspection
process.
In addition, several steps were taken to improve the quality and trustworthiness
of the results including the data being collected from both caregivers and
facilitators and transcribed data being sent to participants for verification
and additional inputs before data analysis was begun. To further improve
credibility, data analysis was conducted by another researcher checking 50% of
the initial coding categories, participating in the development of the coding
framework and reviewing all codes and themes before they were finalised.

## Community involvement
The implementation organisation took part in the planning of the overall research
project, by contributing to the development of the research design, research
questions and interview tools. The recruitment of participants was undertaken by
the organisation using its existing resources. The programme was delivered by
staff of the organisation and took place at the SREIA venues. The organisation
did not take part in the data collection or analysis. However, it has been
actively involved in the interpretation of results and taking the lead in
conveying the research findings to a wider autism community in China. No other
organisations were involved in this study.

## Results
A summary of the themes and subthemes under each domain is presented in and discussed in the
following sections. The identifiers of caregiver quotes start with C and those of
practitioners start with FGD. Additional quotes for each theme are presented in the
Online Appendix.
 

## Perceived changes
The interviewees described numerous ways in which the programme had produced
changes in themselves, their child, parent–child relationships and other family
members.
Caregivers were viewed as having improved mental wellbeing after
participating in the programme, as a result of having better emotion regulation,
moral support from peers and practitioners and a sense of hope in relation to
the progress in their child. Caregivers also reported increased acceptance of
their child’s diagnosis: 
I haven’t even told my parents. I couldn’t accept that my son has Autism.
I was afraid that we would be discriminated. Now I feel much more
peaceful. Last week my neighbour asked me where we went, and I told her
. . . I plan to tell my parents. (CH3, 5-year-old boy)
Caregivers described increased parental self-efficacy
characterised by more positive parenting practices and less harsh discipline. In
addition, they highlighted the ability to make decisions about which other
services to use as a result of having more knowledge about autism.
Perceived changes in children included better emotional and behavioural
adjustment and more adaptive living skills, which
were perceived to be the result of more positive parenting practices and an
increase in child communication skills. More parent–child
interactions and affection were commonly referred
to by the caregivers, which were similarly considered as being attributable to
positive parenting and an increase in parent–child play.
Some caregivers who shared information from the programme with their partner
described positive changes in partners, such as less stress and
more collaborative parenting. These perceived positive changes may have created
a ‘virtuous circle’ in which the occurrence of one led to that of another, which
further promoted a continuous process of improvement. These interactions were
also well described by one of the practitioners: 
What we are hoping to do is to create a virtuous circle . . . The core is
centred around getting to know your child, know his deficit, and the
signals he tries to give you through his behaviours . . . based on the
signals, you apply the skills. During the process, you will know even
more about your child, and see all the challenges he has been struggling
with, then you know that you should control your own emotions and help
him . . . You will have more strength and confidence, which in turn
improves your emotions . . . With better emotions, you will also
communicate with your family in a better way . . . then there is a
better environment at home for your child to develop . . . So you can
see there is a virtuous circle – improvement in one area can ultimately
lead to the improvement of their overall functioning. (FGD2)
Despite attempts to share their learning, there was generally perceived to have
been a lack of change in elderly family members: 
I’ve tried to explain, Autism and the techniques, to his grandparents,
but I don’t see any changes . . . Some concepts, like Autism, are just
difficult for them to understand. In their opinion, if a child does not
communicate, it’s only because he doesn’t want to. No other excuse.
(CH8, 5-year-old boy)

## Programme acceptability

## Programme content
All aspects of the programme were perceived to be helpful by both parents and
practitioners, with many of the techniques being seen as interrelated. The
session that focussed on knowledge about autism at the
beginning of the programme was perceived to be central to understanding the
diagnosis and its implications, thereby promoting the acceptability of
techniques taught at later stages: 
[the knowledge of Autism] is like the central nervous system, without
which you won’t be able to receive other information or coordinate
any activity. (FGD1)
Those who skipped the session always don’t accept their children and
are more sceptical about whatever we say. (FGD2)
Skills reported by the caregivers as being the most likely to be used
included behaviour management techniques, visual supports
and daily structure and routine, which were consistent with
the perceived changes in children, such as fewer internalising and
externalising behaviours and improved communicational skills.

## Delivery methods
A number of delivery methods were perceived to have been important in
establishing new skills in caregivers, including modelling,
practice and feedback, as well as a combination of
group experience and individualised
support to promote social inclusion and address diverse
concerns.
The caregivers and practitioners both highlighted the importance of practitioner
modelling, which was perceived to have involved a demonstration of the
application of skills, build trust and promote caregiver understanding of their
child: 
. . . it made me see how it was like for my child to interact with other
people. (CL5, 3-year-old boy). . . . because they would only believe us
when they saw us successfully applying the skills to their child.
(FGD2)
In-session practice and in vivo feedback were also identified as being central to
their learning, as they were perceived to have scaffolded caregivers’ engagement
with targeted skills. The caregivers also explained that the parent groups
provided an experience of social inclusion and belongingness, which was felt to
have nurtured a greater acceptance of their children and themselves: 
(the caregiver group) were like a family . . . We learn from each other
about how we should treat our child and ourselves. (CH1, 5-year-old
girl)
Ongoing and flexible communication was also referenced by both groups of
participants. The constant close communication between practitioners and
caregivers was described as being like one-to-one coaching: 
They coached me on things that my child needed most. Every time I thought
I could not make it, I messaged her, and she would rebuild my
confidence. (CH6, 4-year-old boy)
Furthermore, the flexibility within the programme was described by the
practitioners as being core to implementation success, in that the programme
provided sufficient space to accommodate individual need. Other aspects of the
delivery that were described as being helpful by the caregivers included
dedicated practitioners and activities for
children. The practitioners were perceived to be knowledgeable,
responsive to caregivers’ concerns and as treating participants equally.
Activities for children freed caregivers from childcare: 
That is when I felt most relaxed. I take care of him 24/7. Only when they
were doing activities, I could catch a breath. (CH7, 3-year-old boy)

## Facilitators and barriers to participant involvement

## Facilitators
Facilitators of participant involvement included social
support and intrinsic motivation. Caregivers
emphasised social support as a major facilitator of their involvement,
especially with regard to programme enrolment. Support from a variety of
sources – spouses, extended families, relatives, peers and employers – made
enrolment possible. Social support was also perceived to have promoted
participant engagement by enhancing their learning experience through
collective problem-solving. They also considered familial support as being
necessary to help them to maintain consistency of practice at home. In terms
of intrinsic motivations, caregivers overwhelmingly talked about a sense of
urgency, as they were aware of the importance of early intervention and the
role of caregivers in influencing their child’s development. Children’s
progress was commonly identified as another major reason for continuing to
attend the sessions, as it was described as motivating their learning and
use of skills.

## Barriers
Participant involvement was perceived to have been inhibited by (1)
obstacles within the family, (2) problems with
the programme design and logistics and (3) caregiver
negative beliefs and emotions.
Lack of family support was one of the barriers to involvement described by
caregivers who described that grandparents were not exposed to any programme
content and did not understand the diagnosis or new skills, thus limiting
wider support from within the family.
In terms of the programme design and logistics, caregivers felt that it was
not long enough to support their learning of targeted skills, pointing to
the need for more opportunities to practice and receive feedback, and also
for the opportunity to address their lack of confidence: 
Less than three months . . . We had no chance to be supervised on
many of those skills . . . We will need to keep practicing and refer
to the notes. (CH9, 5-year-old boy)
I’ve heard it and understood it, but I still don’t think I can do it
well. (CH2, 5-year-old boy)
Children being present in sessions where they were not directly involved in
the demonstration and practice of skills was also reported by caregivers to
be distracting: 
I was about to take some notes and he started to yell. (CH7,
3-year-old boy)
Online delivery during COVID-19 was identified as another barrier by
caregivers who were less able to maintain their focus online and whose
learning was often disrupted by technological failure. Another perceived
common barrier to participant engagement that was caregiver negative
emotions, which were often perceived to have been caused by child
non-compliance and the lack of family support: 
Overall, it’s mainly their mental state that determines if they can
develop solid skills. . . . Although we practitioners need to guide
them towards better mental state, their family environment plays a
more decisive part in it. (FGD2)
Pre-existing knowledge of the diagnosis or effective practices also made some
caregivers resistant to the introduction of strategies: 
(previous service providers) said making the child speak was the most
important thing . . . So I skipped some sessions that I thought not
related to language skills. I did not realise until now that there
can be so many ways for us to communicate. (CL1, 4-year-old boy)

## Programme implementation

## Facilitators
Programme delivery was described by practitioners to be facilitated by (1)
caregiver–practitioner cooperation, (2)
caregiver peer support and (3) practitioner
peer support.
Caregiver–practitioner cooperation was perceived by practitioners to improve
the programme delivery and be promoted by caregiver trust: 
It took less time for us to build trust this time . . . Perhaps it’s
because the COVID quarantine made them realise what they need to
learn . . . Shared goals were established right away and I found it
easy to communicate with them . . . (FGD2)
Peer support among caregivers was also perceived to be important in terms of
implementation because it increased participants’ responsiveness during
sessions: 
There is a feeling of solidarity among them . . . I don’t need to do
much to coordinate. They influence each other and help each other.
(FGD1)
At the practitioner-level, peer support among practitioners
involving the discussion of difficult cases and sharing of stress-reduction
strategies, was perceived to have improved the quality of delivery.

## Barriers
The major obstacles to programme delivery that were identified by
practitioners were (1) caregivers’ lack of
acceptance of their children, (2) problems with the
programme and (3) insufficient organisational
resources.
A lack of knowledge with regard to the diagnosis was viewed as resulting in
denial of the autism-related deficits, which was in turn perceived to make
it difficult to convince caregivers of the relevance of the skills during
the delivery of the programme: 
Sometimes they don’t accept the deficits. Even if the child couldn’t
speak, she wouldn’t use pictures (to communicate), because otherwise
she was admitting that her child was different. Other people would
also notice his difference . . . It’s hard to deliver unless they
accept the diagnosis. (FGD2)
In terms of programme design, practitioners highlighted the dilemma of having
children present in the sessions. As with the caregiver reports, the
practitioners noted the distractions caused by children being present, but
also stressed that their presence allowed for substantial opportunities to
practice new skills. The practitioners further discussed the difficulties of
having to cover a wide range of topics. Thus, even though all the content
was perceived as being helpful and necessary, having too many topics within
one programme was also felt to be overwhelming and challenging.
At an organisational level, the heavy workload and lack of organisational
support were highlighted as significant barriers to programme delivery. The
shortage of personnel was perceived to have resulted in an intense workload
and high levels of practitioner stress. Practitioners also described an
absence of formal supervision and mental health support. This may explain in
part why practitioners identified peer support among practitioners as
essential for programme delivery.

## Areas for improvement

## Programme content
Given that children being present in the session was one of the major
barriers to participant involvement, it is possibly not surprising that the
caregivers predominantly asked for additional resources for
children, such as structured activities and childcare, when
their child was not involved in modelling and practice. Such activities were
also deemed to be an opportunity to develop children’s social skills. The
caregivers also highlighted the need for brief training targeting
other family members to reduce resistance with the family and
maximise child opportunities to learn: 
Other family members also need to learn, but they won’t listen to us.
They’ll listen better if it’s someone with more experience. (CH7,
3-year-old boy)
In addition, some participants suggested the need for more sharing of
information on autism treatments, such as other evidence-based
interventions and interventions for older children. They also emphasised the
need for formal mental health support, such as counselling
and referral. Furthermore, they wanted more instructions about
parent–child interaction: 
Parent–child relationship is the foundation . . . We noticed that
many caregivers did not know how to play, although they really
wanted to interact with the child, they did not know where to start.
. .We need to work on that. (FGD2)

## Delivery methods
In terms of delivery methods, caregivers identified the need for more
practitioner modelling, practice in session and
in vivo comments to enhance skills. More
individualised support was also perceived to be
required to address individual concerns.
Caregivers identified a need for the support to be extended
after the completion of the programme to facilitate the use of skills at
home and keep up a positive attitude: 
But when the programme ends and we stay back at home, we have to
again face all the challenges we had before. It is hard to make sure
we still have the strength to do all these (new skills) or even to
stay in a good emotional state. (CH5, 4-year-old boy)
Caregivers also highlighted the need for a better setup of the
learning space, including arranging for an offline venue to
better demonstrate skills and improving the quality of online sessions.

## Discussion
As the evidence in relation to autism treatments has evolved, an understanding of the
intervention experiences of stakeholders has become more important. This is
especially true in LMICs, where most autistic children reside but little is
documented in terms of local interventions and how they are provided. To the best of
our knowledge, this study is one of the few to investigate the experience of
participating in and delivering a short-term intensive parent training programme for
families of autistic children in an LMIC. The findings of this study provide
valuable information about the acceptability and feasibility of autism treatments
and can be used to address the substantial unmet needs of young autistic children
for interventions in low autism resource settings where families face similar
challenges.

## Summary and implications
The results indicate that caregivers and practitioners highly valued the
comprehensiveness of the programme, describing all topics as being helpful and
necessary. This may reflect the general lack of autism information and local
services more widely ( ). Indeed, many parents described the programme as being
the major source of information for them and wanted the opportunity to
participate in future programmes to secure more resources and support. Two
previous studies on parenting interventions for families of autistic children in
HICs also showed that parents often valued additional information, such as the
technique of social stories and advice on the seeking and selection of services
( ; ). However, practitioners were concerned
that the comprehensive cover of the programme could potentially compromise the
quality of delivery, suggesting the need to help caregivers maintain focus by
encouraging them to closely relate the programme content to their own personal
goals.
The results also highlighted the importance of learning about autism, which
enabled caregivers to better understand and accept the diagnosis and their
children’s behaviours, thereby paving the way for learning autism-related
parenting techniques. This is consistent with previous research, which showed
that introducing autism terms helped establish a ‘common ground’ ( ). Moreover, as parents in China typically receive inadequate
guidance on the selection of appropriate treatments for their children ( ), getting
to know autism and their child better may support their future decision-making.
In accordance with other research that found high caregiver rating of content on
behavioural management, visual support and structured routines ( ),
caregivers in this study also identified these techniques as the most likely to
be used. At the same time, respondents identified the need for more sessions on
teaching parent–child interaction to go beyond the theoretical principles and
increase caregivers’ skills in initiating and maintaining interactive play.
As a central aspect of their learning and engagement, participants emphasised the
importance of practitioner modelling, the opportunity for in-session practice
and feedback. This corresponds with previous studies that also identified the
role of modelling as a core programme component ( ; ).
Despite this, caregivers asked for additional coaching, indicating a general
lack of confidence in using all the taught techniques, which might be one of the
drawbacks of delivering many topics within a limited timeframe. Participants
also highlighted the value of combining group experience with individualised
support during and after the programme. Having an autistic child was experienced
by participants as leading to social marginalisation, and programmes of this
kind were perceived to provide an inclusive environment for caregivers to
normalise their experience and expand their social support networks ( ).
Practitioners further identified caregiver group support as facilitating
programme delivery, as it was perceived to enhance caregiver learning through
the sharing of resources and problem-solving strategies. The importance of
individualised support was evident in themes about programme flexibility and
ongoing communication sustained beyond the duration of programme. Previous
qualitative systematic reviews identified a consensus across providers,
researchers and parents that such programmes should be tailored to account for
individual ability and cultural differences ( ; ).
However, this presents a challenge to programme delivery, especially given the
lack of resources and the absence of research on the key intervention components
in LMICs.
Past research has indicated that a collaborative and therapeutic relationship
established by knowledgeable and non-judgmental group leaders contributes to
programme success ( ). Caregivers in this study also highlighted the
dedication of practitioners, who were perceived to be conversant, responsive and
unprejudiced, as playing a critical part in their overall positive experience of
the programme. Furthermore, multiple caregivers in this programme described how
practitioners improved their mental health, suggesting that, in low-resource
settings, practitioners do not only teach skills, but provide the type of
support that can lead to wider changes in parental functioning.
Having children participating in the sessions was, however, experienced in a
number of ways. Although it was identified as a core component in a review on
general parent training programmes ( ), it may be more
challenging to implement effectively when delivered to parents of autistic
children. While children being present in sessions offered substantial
opportunities in terms of in vivo practice and feedback, it was also regarded as
one of the major barriers to engagement and delivery. Therefore, caregivers
commonly requested more playful and structured activities for children when they
were not involved in modelling and practice. Childcare needs in parent training
programmes for autism may also differ from programmes designed for the general
population. Unlike caregivers of children without autism who need regular
childcare services to promote attendance ( ), due to the core
deficits of autism, caregivers of autistic children may expect more structured
activities arranged in childcare services to promote child development. For
example, parents in a study conducted to evaluate a parent training programme
for autistic children in the United States also requested such activities to be
included in the programme to engage children in social interactions ( ). Moreover, findings from a systematic review of parent training
programmes delivered in China to parents of children with a wider range of
developmental disabilities, found that components directly targeting child
social skills have the potential to further reduce child externalising and
international problems ( ).
With regard to facilitators of participant involvement, findings suggest that
caregivers predominantly considered child progress as their major motivation to
participate and learn. This is consistent with the quantitative assessment of
the SREIA programme process which found a connection between higher levels of
engagement and improved child behavioural adjustment (under review). Similarly,
a qualitative study in South Africa found that perceived improvement in child
development contributed to participant buy-in and might increase the likelihood
of behavioural changes in caregivers of autistic children ( ).
Qualitative systematic reviews of parent training programmes for children without
disabilities have indicated that familial support can influence participant
involvement ( ; ). Caregivers in this study also highlighted the impact of
support from other family members on the level of engagement, describing that
the lack of support as inhibiting them from signing up for the programme,
engaging in the targeted skills practice and maintaining consistent parenting
practices. This may also explain the recurrent request for brief training
sessions for other family members, alongside the need to enable other family
members to be aware of, and to use, the new skills being taught.
Raising an autistic child is stressful irrespective of geographical location, but
the severe lack of information and resources ( ) and the long-held
negative attitude towards disabilities in China ( ) may have
created additional sources of pressure for the caregivers in the current study.
Despite research suggesting that parental mental health can influence treatment
adherence ( ), and the fact that the quantitative SREIA assessment found
an improvement in mental wellbeing following the course (under review), only a
few caregivers explicitly linked their improved mental health status with the
course. One potential reason is that many caregivers of children with
developmental and behavioural challenges focus less on their own needs, as was
shown in the study of Incredible Years for autistic pre-schoolers, where parents
reported that there was little time to attend to their own self-care needs
( ). However, receiving more formal mental health support was among
the most important post-programme needs for caregivers in this study, which may
be related to their concerns about the potential fade-out of programme effects
in both child and parental domains ( ).
Disagreement about the skills being taught was perceived as another barrier to
participant involvement. The finding is in line with previous research showing
the negative impact of a mismatch between programme philosophy and parental
expectations ( ), pointing to the importance of clarifying the programme
goals at an early stage of intervention. Online delivery was considered by
caregivers as less helpful, because of technological failures and the difficulty
in maintaining focus. Nonetheless, online delivery of evidence-based
intervention has become a global trend driven by the efforts to promoting equal
access to healthcare services and accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic. This
highlights the need to address technical challenges, especially in LMICs where
there is a lack of infrastructure, and to explore ways to promote participant
engagement in digital intervention initiatives.
In terms of programme implementation, research shows that practitioner peer
support can promote long-term skill development and the sustainability of autism
early interventions in other low-resource contexts ( ). Practitioners
in this programme recognised the benefits of seeking advice and wider support
from peers. However, the lack of organisational resources may have led to their
overdependence on peer support. Capacity building has been consistently shown by
the literature as a key ingredient to implementation success, especially in
terms of the delivery of complex interventions ( ). Therefore, it is
of particular importance that implementing organisations provide adequate and
ongoing supervision and training, especially given that the use of less
qualified programme providers has been increasingly advocated to close service
gaps in LMIC contexts ( ). Other aspects of organisational support
related to the need for a reduction in their workload and the improvement of
practitioner mental health. Despite their dedication, practitioners in this
study perceived the quality of their work as being limited by an intensive
workload and stress. This was further reflected by their high fidelity score but
medium quality of delivery. The stress may be alleviated by, for instance,
organisational mental health support and rest breaks. Alternatively, the
intensity of the programme can be reduced by spreading out the programme
sessions, providing the same number of sessions and content over a slightly
longer period of time. Lower intensity may also increase the accessibility of
the programme, as well as provide caregivers with longer support and more
opportunities to establish and generalise new skills. More fundamental solutions
to reduce workload are also needed at a state-level, including investment in
autism-related professional training and incentivisation of service
provision.

## Strengths and limitations
This study was conducted within a routine service setting and involved
participants who were representative of a real-world population, thereby
improving the generalisability of the findings. The study nevertheless has
several limitations. There was a lack of male caregiver interviewees thereby
limiting our ability to comment on their experiences and perceptions. Also, the
data were collected retrospectively, which might have introduced recall bias. In
addition, the interviews were conducted in Chinese thereby necessitating
translation, which could have resulted in more bias. To improve validity, the
data analysis was conducted in Chinese, involving two bilingual co-authors, who
were born and raised in China. The English report was prepared by one bilingual
co-author in discussion with the other, and further checked by co-authors who
are native English speakers. Also, we did not identify distinct patterns between
caregivers with different rates of attendance and engagement, potentially due to
the high levels of involvement in general. Future studies may consider assessing
participant involvement using standardised tools to increase sensitivity. Future
research can also stratify participants by demographic characteristics and
explore how participant experience may differ by background. Moreover, the
involvement of stakeholders in this study was insufficient. Stakeholders were
limited to organisation staff, who provided only basic inputs into the research
design and interpretation of results. Family beneficiaries and stakeholders in
the wider community could have been included. More opportunities could also have
been sought at every stage to deepen the partnership, so that we could further
improve the relevance of the research to the community and shorten the time it
took to translate the findings into practice.

## Conclusion
This study provides important insights on key stakeholder perceptions about a
short-term intensive parent training programme for parents of autistic children in
an LMIC. A number of suggestions are provided for future parent training programmes
for families of autistic children. In terms of programme design, adequate
opportunities for caregivers to practice and receive feedback, as well as a mixture
of group and individualised support, are central to creating an overall positive and
empowering experience. It is also recommended that support be extended beyond the
duration of the programme, or the programme sessions be spread out over a slightly
longer period of time, to maintain programme effects. Autism knowledge and programme
goals should be introduced at an early stage to help caregivers maintain focus and
increase the likelihood of collaborative relationships between practitioners and
caregivers. More instructions on parent–child interaction may also promote
parent–child relationships and parental use of targeted skills at home. Structured
activities can be arranged separately for children, except when parents need to
practice skills directly with children with the support of a practitioner. Resources
should be shared to help caregivers navigate the service system and improve mental
health. Other family members may also need to be briefly involved to strengthen
family support. In addition, helping caregivers identify progress in children may
promote participant engagement. To improve the quality of programme delivery, more
organisational resources – including adequate and ongoing supervision and training,
and mental health support – should be provided to practitioners. Practitioner stress
could also be reduced by spreading out the programme sessions. Support at a national
level is needed to address the human resource challenges. Finally, creative
solutions are needed to overcome technical barriers and to engage participants via
online platforms. More mixed-methods research is needed to evaluate the impact of
the recommended changes and assess their effectiveness using experimental designs,
such as micro-trials and factorial experiments.

## Supplemental Material

## sj-docx-1-aut-10.1177_13623613211070869 – Supplemental material for A
virtuous circle: Stakeholder perspectives of a short-term intensive parent
training programme delivered within the context of routine services for
autism in China
Click here for additional data file.
Supplemental material, sj-docx-1-aut-10.1177_13623613211070869 for A virtuous
circle: Stakeholder perspectives of a short-term intensive parent training
programme delivered within the context of routine services for autism in China
by Zuyi Fang, Jamie M Lachman, Cheng Zhang, Dongping Qiao and Jane Barlow in
Autism

## Footnotes
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship and/or publication of this article.
Funding: The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the
research, authorship and/or publication of this article: ZF’s involvement was
partly funded by the Swire Charitable Trust. JML’s involvement was supported by
the University of Glasgow Social and Public Health Sciences Unit Complexity and
Relationships in Health Improvement Programs of the Medical Research Council MRC
UK and Chief Scientist Office (Grant: MC_UU_00022/1 and CSO SPHSU16,
MC_UU_00022/3 and CSO SPHSU18). The funders played no role in the design,
conduct, or interpretation of the analyses.
ORCID iD: Zuyi Fang 
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8619-0137
Supplemental material: Supplemental material for this article is available online.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## sj-docx-1-aut-10.1177_13623613211070869 – Supplemental material for A
virtuous circle: Stakeholder perspectives of a short-term intensive parent
training programme delivered within the context of routine services for
autism in China
Click here for additional data file.
Supplemental material, sj-docx-1-aut-10.1177_13623613211070869 for A virtuous
circle: Stakeholder perspectives of a short-term intensive parent training
programme delivered within the context of routine services for autism in China
by Zuyi Fang, Jamie M Lachman, Cheng Zhang, Dongping Qiao and Jane Barlow in
Autism