pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLoS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC9223313PMC9223313.1922331392233133573765810.1371/journal.pone.0270131PONE-D-21-362651Research ArticleComputer and Information SciencesSocial SciencesEconomicsLabor EconomicsEmploymentCareersPhysical SciencesPhysicsMathematical PhysicsScience PolicyScience and Technology WorkforceCareers in ResearchScientistsPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsProfessionsScientistsSocial SciencesEconomicsFinanceBiology and Life SciencesEvolutionary BiologyEvolutionary ProcessesEvolutionary EmergenceBiology and Life SciencesTaxonomyComputer and Information SciencesData ManagementTaxonomyPhysical SciencesMathematicsProbability TheoryStatistical DistributionsDistribution CurvesQuantifying the rise and fall of scientific fields
Quantifying the rise and fall of scientific fieldshttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-6496-0778SinghChakresh KumarData curationFormal analysisMethodologyValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing BarmeEmmaData curation WardRobertWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing TupikinaLiubovConceptualizationMethodologyWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1491-0120SantoliniMarcConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 
1
Université Paris Cité, Inserm, System Engineering and Evolution Dynamics, Paris, France

2
Learning Planet Institute, Paris, France

3
School of Public Policy, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, United States of America

4
Nokia Bell Labs, Nozay, France
SinatraRobertaEditor – ], to the slow-down in their growth due to the ever rising number of publications [ ]. In particular, methods ranging from bibliometric studies [ , ] to network analyses [ , , ] and natural language processing [ – ] have been implemented on large publication corpora to monitor the propagation of concepts across articles [ – ] and the social interactions between researchers that are producing them [ , – ].
To study field evolution, one first needs an operational definition of a field. Scholars have most often defined fields using taxonomies provided by professional societies (as in the case of PACS, the Physics and Astronomy Classification Scheme [ ], the ACM Classification Scheme in Computer Science or the JEL scheme in Economics) that authors use to self-annotate their papers, or taxonomies used by citation indexers (as in the case of PubMed MeSH terms and Web of Science Subject Categories) to annotate papers in their collection. Taxonomies at the level of topics can then be clustered into fields. For example, when working with the more than 30,000 MeSH terms, scholars have defined fields by constructing their co-occurrence network and clustering dense areas of connection into discrete fields [ , ]. Others have used citation networks themselves to group articles by relatedness and map the knowledge flow within and across research fields [ , , , ]. Still others have inferred areas of research directly from the text of scientific papers, avoiding the manual annotations performed by authors and indexers elsewhere [ – , ]. These various methods provide clusters of closely related topics corresponding to putative research fields, allowing to monitor how the changing relations between topics and ideas underlie the dynamic evolution and mutual interactions between fields. A final stream of literature infers field structure from the collaboration networks of their members. For example, the co-authorship network between researchers has been shown to undergo a topological transition during the emergence of a new field [ , ]. Co-authorship relations also influence the individual evolution of research interests and foster the emergence of a consensus in a research community [ – ].
While fields rise and fall on different temporal and population scales, they are generally argued to pass through a common set of evolutionary stages [ , ], a process driven by consensus building within the scientific community and the discovery of new research fronts and the development of corresponding technologies [ , ]. Different stages are typified by micro-level changes in membership and behavior proposed to drive macro-level dynamics from birth to death. To study these temporal patterns, dynamical models were introduced to characterize the evolution of research fields [ , ] and the spread of innovation [ – ]. Yet, we are still lacking a unified empirical framework that delineates these stereotyped stages in the evolution of scientific fields and investigates the specific actors and behaviors across them that can be validated over a large number of well-annotated research fields.
Here, we address this gap by developing techniques for identifying common patterns in the evolution of fields. We demonstrate their usefulness using a large corpus of 1.45 million articles from the arXiv repository with self-reported field tags spanning 175 research fields in Physics, Computer Science, Mathematics, Finance, and Biology. We show that the evolution of fields follows a right-tailed distribution with two parameters characterizing peak location and distribution width. This allows us to collapse the temporal distributions onto a single rise-and-fall curve and delineate different evolutionary stages of the fields: creation, adoption, peak, early decay, and late decay. We then describe the characteristics of articles and authors across these stages. We finish by discussing these results and their implications for further work in science and innovation.

## Results

## Description of the data
Since its launch in 1991, the arXiv repository has become a major venue for research dissemination of particular importance in fields of Physics, Mathematics and Computer Science. As an open and free contribution platform, it provides an equal opportunity for publication to researchers globally, and plays a dominant role in the diffusion of knowledge [ ] and the evolution of new ideas [ ].
When submitting a contribution, authors declare the research fields that the article is contributing to by selecting from a list of subject tags. Here we collected information about authors, date of publication, and research fields of 1,456,403 arXiv articles until 2018 (see section and ). The number of articles and authors exhibit an exponential growth over time with a doubling period of 6 years (see and S1 Fig in ). To control for this effect, here we focus for each field i on the yearly share of articles fi,y = ni,y/Ny, where ni,y is the number of articles published in the considered field at year y and Ny is the total number of articles in arXiv in the same year. We represent the temporal distributions of all fields in by chronological peak time. Over the past 30 years, the research interests have shifted from high-energy physics to computer science and more recently economy.
 

## Quantifying the rise and fall of scientific fields
Despite differences in overall number of articles and eventual duration, we observe a general rise-and-fall pattern across research fields ( ), prompting us to explore if a simple model can capture their temporal variation.
Extreme value theory [ ] predicts that under a broad range of circumstances, temporal processes displaying periods of incubation (such as incubation of ideas) or processes with multiple choice (such as the choice of ideas or research fields) follow skewed right-tailed extreme value distributions. Examples of such processes can be found in diverse areas, for example when modelling the evolution of scientific citations [ ] or disease incubation periods [ , ]. In the context of the evolution of scientific fields, epidemiological models have been proposed [ ] to capture the dynamical patterns underlying the contagion of ideas and the choice of researchers to work on different ideas. Such models exhibit right-skewed temporal distributions in the number of infected individuals, which in this case consists of articles and researchers in the field.
Following these insights, here we use the Gumbel distribution ( ) as an ansatz to model the observed field temporal distributions. Belonging to the general class of extreme value distributions [ , ], it provides interpretable parameters for the peak location α and distribution width β (S3 Fig in ). Denoting by t the time since the first article was published in the field, the share of articles G(t) follows :
 G(t)=1βe−(t−α)βe−e−(t−α)β
(1)
where α is the location parameter and β the scale parameter.
In order to estimate the model fit, we consider fields that satisfy three conditions as represented in : (i) longevity—having at least 10 years of activity to ensure a sufficient observation period, (ii) unimodality—we exclude multimodal distributions as it would require introducing a mixture model going beyond the scope of this study and (iii) completeness—we require the peak of the distribution to be at least 3 years away from the beginning and the end of the collection period to ensure that we capture sufficient data on both sides of the distribution. This reduces the number of fields to 72, which we consider in our analyses below.
 Using a least-squares optimization fitting procedure (see ), we show that 66 out of 72 fields (91.6%) exhibit a significant goodness of fit (k < 0.3 and p > 0.05 under KS-test). We show in the temporal distributions and Gumbel fits for the fields with the largest total numbers of articles in Physics, Mathematics and Computer Science. For every field we fit the corresponding α and β parameters. To get more insights on the interpretation of the α and β parameters, we show in S3a, S3b Fig in some examples of Gumbel distributions with varying parameters. The location parameter α corresponds to the mode of the distribution, i.e when fields peak in their lifetime, while the scale parameter β corresponds to the distribution width. Fields with a low β have a rapid rise followed by a rapid decay with a long tail. These could be the fields promoted by sudden advances in science and technologies or economics, for example, the field of Pricing of Securities in Quantitative finance (q-fin.pr) (S3c Fig in ). On the other hand fields with a large β have an elongated rise and fall with a long tail in the decay phase—for example Condensed Matter Material Sciences (cond-mat.mtrl-sci) (S3d Fig in ).
After obtaining the location α and scale β parameters from the fitting procedure, we compute for each field the re-scaled time:
 t′=t−αβ
(2)
By re-normalizing fields with this standardized time, we observe that the various temporal distributions align on a single curve, highlighting the shared patterns of rise and fall across the fields studied ( ). In particular, the Gumbel distribution provides a more stringent fit of the tails, as can be observed when comparing to other distributions (S4 Fig in ).

## Characterizing the stages of research field evolution
Using the re-scaled time from , we next explore the characteristics of articles and researchers at different stages of a research field evolution. We adopt hereafter the standard delineations of stages from the innovation diffusion literature [ ] and define 5 periods of research field evolution (creation, adoption, peak, early decay, and late decay) delineated on the re-scaled timeline corresponding respectively to the 2.5%, 16%, 50% and 84% quantiles of the Gumbel distribution in (blue curve). We then group articles within these categories for each field and examine the variation of their characteristics when averaging across all fields.
We consider characteristics of the articles submitted at various field stages, and of the authors who submit them. For articles, we focus on the number of fields reported (article multidisciplinarity), the number of authors (team size), the number of references made to other arXiv articles, and the number of citations received within arXiv (article impact). For authors, we consider their career stage within arXiv at the time of submitting the article, the total number of articles submitted to arXiv (longevity), the number of fields their articles span during their career and the number of fields per article (author multidisciplinarity). We average these characteristics over the article coauthors for which we have a unique identifier (ORCID). In the case of career stage s, we use , where Nart is the chronological rank of the current article across the author’s publications and Ntot is the total number of articles:
 s=Nart−1Ntot−1
(3)
We show in the average values of these features for each stage across the 72 fields along with random expectations (see ). In the context of article metrics ( ), we find that the early stages of research fields are characterized by interdisciplinary articles (2.36 fields, vs. 2.05 for late decay) co-authored by small teams (2 authors vs 4.5). As fields evolve, we observe a steady growth in the number of references to earlier arXiv articles, indicating that the community builds on earlier works in arXiv ( and S5a Fig in when restricting to the same field). Finally, we find that article impact, measured by the number of citations within arXiv, is maximal at the Adoption phase before the field has reached its peak. The citation count observes a similar trend in the case of total citations within arXiv shown in as well as citations within arXiv received in the first five years (S5b Fig in ). For author metrics ( ), we find that the early stages of research fields are characterized by multidisciplinary authors (16.9 fields in career for creation vs 7.9 in career for late decay, and 2.13 fields per article vs 1.91 fields per article), who tend to be in their early career (8% of total duration vs 60%) with the longest longevity (55 papers vs 27).
 These observations show that small teams of interdisciplinary authors contribute to the early stages of a field’s evolution, in line with previous findings that small teams produce more disruptive [ ], novel [ ] and creative research [ ]. To test these insights further, we calculated the disruptive index of all arXiv papers using the internal citation network (see ). We find that papers in the creation stage have the highest disruptive index, followed by a steady decrease in later stages ( ), highlighting the relevance of the delineated phases as markers of innovation and development of a field.
 

## Cognitive distance and early innovation
The previous results show that works submitted in early phases of research fields tend to mix a larger number of field tags. However, this measure does not take into consideration the various levels of similarity between fields. For example, publishing an article within sub-fields of physics is different from publishing an article mixing quantitative biology, computer science, and physics. This is rendered apparent when examining the co-occurrence network of fields across arXiv articles ( ). In the co-occurrence network, nodes represent field tags, and edges represent their co-occurrence across articles. The network represents the landscape of fields in the arXiv, with closely related fields clustering together into communities corresponding to 6 broader categories: Physics (purple), Quantitative biology (gray), Computer Science (green), Mathematics (blue), Statistics (pink) and Quantitative Finance (orange).
 Using this network construction (details in ), we define the Cognitive distance Ci,j between field tags i and j as the weighted shortest path , where e are the edges on the shortest path between the two tags i and j and We are their weights in the co-occurrence network. This cognitive distance allows us to provide a weighted proxy for interdisciplinarity. In particular, it allows to quantify the distance between disconnected fields: an example of this is shown in S6 Fig in where q-fin.ec (Economics) connects to hep-ph (High Energy Physics) by a path length of 4.
We use this measure to compute for each article with at least two field tags the maximum cognitive distance between any pair of tags. We find that articles published in the early stages of a research field have a significantly larger cognitive distance, while the measure decays to the random level by peak stage ( ). Similarly, for authors we find that in earlier stages authors publish in cognitively distant fields, which narrows down to similar fields in later stages ( ). The relative difference with random at the creation stage is more stringent than the previous measure using number of tags (articles: 0.3 vs 0.1, authors: 0.8 vs 0.1), strengthening our previous observation.

## Discussion
Science evolves as scientists cast and redirect their attention over the knowledge space. As scientists are drawn to similar topics, collective attention organizes into fields of inquiry. Understanding how fields emerge, grow to maturity and decline is thus a central challenge for the science of science [ ] but the backing for claims about how and why fields evolve has historically consisted illustrative cases rather than comprehensive evidence. Although theoretical claims are often universal—applying equally to large and small, fast and slow changing fields—our ability to make comparisons across different temporal and population scales has been limited, making it difficult in turn to provide rigorous tests of such claims.
In this study we introduced a method for rescaling the dynamics of scientific fields to normalized population and temporal scale. We argued that the processes that drive field evolution are likely within the family of extreme value distributions and showed that 91% of the fields in our sample are well fitted by a Gumbel distribution. To demonstrate the utility of this method, we applied it to 1.5M articles from the arXiv preprint repository and compared the membership and behavior of authorship teams at different canonical stages of field evolution. Our descriptive results suggest common patterns consistent with existing theory. Early evolutionary stages are populated by small teams of early career researchers from diverse and dissimilar disciplines. As the number of papers in a field saturates, we observe a shift to larger and more specialized teams. These organizational shifts are coupled to shifts in the type of knowledge being produced. Early stages abound in disruptive articles—contributions that replace prior knowledge in the citation graph—with that disruptiveness fading as a field evolves. We find that the highest impact papers too are produced before the field reaches maturity, perhaps reflecting the publication of foundational texts as a field is born that most subsequent authors cite. Finally, we observe authors becoming less reliant on references to external fields as a new field matures, in line with the argument that fields internally integrate their knowledge over time [ ].
Our study is not without limitations. We focus on fields whose dynamics are unimodal—with a single rise and fall—which limits our sample to 72 out of the 175 present on arXiv. Follow on work can extend the method introduced here by considering mixture models capable of capturing multiple waves of interest in a field. When estimating the age composition of author teams, we relied on ORCID IDs to disambiguate author names, which similarly limited our sample to a small and biased subset of authors. For the Disruptive Index measure we note that the citation network in our dataset only includes citations within arXiv, which are sparser compared to Web of Science or Scopus for example, and citation behavior may be particular to the fields predominant on arXiv or variant across them. While arXiv is an open-access repository, submitting authors need to be invited by another existing member from the main field of interest. As with other venues, gatekeeping and the ability of authors to effectively navigate it shapes who can publish and therefore membership in the fields of our sample [ , ]. Finally, the descriptive results shown in this study should not be interpreted as causal nor should they be taken as representative of science as a whole. Future work should expand this study to larger, more representative databases with more comprehensive paper and author level metadata.
More comprehensive fields-level data could also help understand broader trends within the arXiv community as a whole. For example, while originally focused on Physics fields, arXiv submissions have become more diverse, with increasing submissions from the Computer Science and Economics fields ( ). This uptake could be related to an increase in research demand from the side of these fields (problems, grants, and publication opportunities), or research supply from the side of Physics (e.g., talent spillover from physics, which attracted and trained capable researchers but does not necessarily offer enough relevant jobs). Alternatively, this can be part of a broader trend towards open access research and increasing leniency towards preprints on the part of publishers [ ]. Institutional factors at the level of funding agencies or universities, as well as norms within particular organizations or fields may also create field-specific incentives to share open access versions of papers. Future work could study what drives this trend, for example by examining formal requirements for open access and using surveys of scientists in these fields and others to understand the preferences and incentives that drive this behavior.
Beyond these considerations, we hope the methods introduced here help future studies build a deeper understanding of scientific change. First, the composition and behavior of scientific fields at different stages of their evolution bears deeper examination, in particular with the goal of understanding the causes of birth, maturity and decline and the extent to which these drivers are universal or particular. Many scholars have argued that these causes are scale-invariant. For example, in his postscript to The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, Kuhn clarifies that the emergence of a new paradigm “Need not be a large change nor need it seem revolutionary to those outside a single community, consisting perhaps of fewer than twenty-five people.” [ ]. At the same time, scaling effects involving nonlinear relationships between size and collective behavior are common in complex systems. The effects of scale on scientific change remain unresolved.
Broad evidence suggests the social organization of science is changing, yet how these changes affect field evolution is unclear. In particular, the trend towards increasing team size [ , ] and bureaucratization [ , ] bears consideration. Does the size and structure of a team affect their propensity to enter a field at each stage? Or their capacity to succeed, conditional on entry? Are the drivers of field evolution stationary? Or have they changed with the micro-organization of science? Additionally, while there is growing work on the effect of funding size and structure on individual scientists, [ – ] the optimal ways to grow a new field remain unclear.
Finally, while scientific knowledge evolves as a function of scientists decisions, it also feeds back into the decision making process. That is, the structure of scientific knowledge shapes which problems are salient and solvable, constraining scientists future behavior [ , ]. These effects seem likely to result from both first-order structure (the patterns in which individual concepts are connected) as well as higher-order structure (the patterns in which sets of concepts are connected). Some neighborhoods of the knowledge space are presumably more fertile ground for new fields to grow than others. It may also be true that the neighborhood in which a field lies is a key condition that shapes its dynamics far into the future. Recent work has found that the sheer volume of new papers published in a field is a strong predictor of disruption and growth [ ]. Similarly, scholars have begun to study how the higher-order structure of scientific knowledge evolves in time [ ]. Future work can probe deeper into exactly how the structure of scientific knowledge shapes field evolution.
Overall, explaining and predicting the evolution of scientific fields may require models including all of the factors discussed—sensitivity to scale, to time, to the organization of scientists and of scientific knowledge—along with the interactions between them. By making cross-field comparisons easier to make, our method should prove as useful for studying the role of single factors as for testing more complex models of field evolution. As such, we expect these insights to be helpful for researchers and policymakers interested in the emergence and development of research fields and more broadly in the dynamics of innovation.

## Methods

## Dataset extraction
We extracted the publication metadata from the arXiv website using the arXiv API (https://arxiv.org/help/api/). The data spans years 1986 to 2018, with a total of 1,456,404 articles. For each article we retrieved the following characteristics: a) the unique article ID, b) the timestamp of article submission, c) the list of subjects categories (field tags), d) the citations received within arXiv, e) the references to other arXiv articles, and f) the list of last names of authors. We show an example article in . Furthermore, we extracted when possible the ORCID IDs of the authors that declared it in arXiv. The number of unique ORCID IDs was 50,402, allowing to disambiguate these authors’ names. The dataset produced can be accessed on https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6598737. For the citation network we used the dataset from [ ] which can be accessed on https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/Cornell-University/arxiv or https://github.com/mattbierbaum/arxiv-public-datasets/releases.

## Fitting procedure

## Uni-modality test
For filtering multi-modal fields we use the diptest R library to compute the dip unimodality test. We remove fields that fail the test (p < 0.05). Separately, we also use the kernel density estimation(kde) method to find the peaks using varied bandwidths. Fields that have consistent bimodality are removed. Finally, fields that are unimodal in both the calculations are chosen.

## Least square optimization
For the selected fields, we strip years before the first publication to only consider years since first article. We then constrain the mode of the fitted distribution to coincide with the empirical one, and we fit the location and scale parameters using least-square optimization.

## Assigning articles and authors to evolutionary stages
We first collect for each field all articles containing the field tag. We associate each article to the evolutionary stage corresponding to the re-scaled time obtained for that particular field. We then assign the authors of each article with an ORCID ID to the corresponding evolutionary stage. Note that articles with multiple field tags can be assigned to different stages of evolution corresponding to the re-scaled times of the different tags.

## Randomization
The observed features in are compared with random expectation by shuffling for each field the re-scaled times across articles. This procedure is repeated 50 times for each field and we compute the average for each stage. Finally, we compute the average and standard deviation across fields.

## Disruptive index measure
Given a paper p followed by Ns subsequent works, if Ni papers out of the Ns cite only p, Nj out of Ns cite both p and its references and Nk out of Ns cite only its references, then the Disruptive Index (DI) of the paper p [ , ] is defined by
 DIp=Ni−NjNs
(4)
where Ns = Ni + Nj + Nk.

## Constructing tags co-occurrence network
We construct an undirected, weighted tag co-occurrence network where the edge weights indicates the similarity between the fields corresponding the tags. Let N are the total number of articles published, K the number of articles using field tag i and n the number of articles using field tag j with k articles that use both i, j. Then integrating 
 pij=(Kk)(N−Kn−k)(Nn)
(5)
for k or more articles yields the hypergeometric p-value pv that the two fields have at least this number of co-occurrences given the number of times they each have occurred. Note that here lower p-values indicate stronger similarity. As such, we define the edge weight Wij between fields i and j as −log10(pv). Edges corresponding to pv > 0.01 are filtered out.

## Supporting information
S1 File(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.

 10.1371/journal.pone.0270131.r001Decision Letter 0
SinatraRobertaAcademic Editor© 2022 Roberta Sinatra2022Roberta Sinatrahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
4 Jan 2022

PONE-D-21-36265Quantifying the rise and fall of scientific fieldsPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Santolini,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
The two Reviewers agree that this manuscript is worth of publication after some issues are addressed - I agree with their assessment and encourage the authors to revise the manuscript according to the Reviewers' points and resubmit. 
Please submit your revised manuscript by Feb 18 2022 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Roberta Sinatra
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. Thank you for stating the following in the Competing Interests section:
“The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.”
We note that one or more of the authors are employed by a commercial company: Nokia Bell Labs.
a.           Please provide an amended Funding Statement declaring this commercial affiliation, as well as a statement regarding the Role of Funders in your study. If the funding organization did not play a role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript and only provided financial support in the form of authors' salaries and/or research materials, please review your statements relating to the author contributions, and ensure you have specifically and accurately indicated the role(s) that these authors had in your study. You can update author roles in the Author Contributions section of the online submission form.
Please also include the following statement within your amended Funding Statement.
“The funder provided support in the form of salaries for authors [insert relevant initials], but did not have any additional role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. The specific roles of these authors are articulated in the ‘author contributions’ section.”
If your commercial affiliation did play a role in your study, please state and explain this role within your updated Funding Statement.
b. Please also provide an updated Competing Interests Statement declaring this commercial affiliation along with any other relevant declarations relating to employment, consultancy, patents, products in development, or marketed products, etc. 
Within your Competing Interests Statement, please confirm that this commercial affiliation does not alter your adherence to all PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials by including the following statement: "This does not alter our adherence to  PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.” (as detailed online in our guide for authors http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/competing-interests) . If this adherence statement is not accurate and  there are restrictions on sharing of data and/or materials, please state these. Please note that we cannot proceed with consideration of your article until this information has been declared.
Please include both an updated Funding Statement and Competing Interests Statement in your cover letter. We will change the online submission form on your behalf.
3. Thank you for stating the following in the Acknowledgments Section of your manuscript:
“Thanks to the Bettencourt Schueller Foundation long term partnership, this work was 240 partly supported by the CRI Research Fellowship to Marc Santolini.”
We note that you have provided additional information within the Acknowledgements Section that is not currently declared in your Funding Statement. Please note that funding information should not appear in the Acknowledgments section or other areas of your manuscript. We will only publish funding information present in the Funding Statement section of the online submission form.
Please remove any funding-related text from the manuscript and let us know how you would like to update your Funding Statement. Currently, your Funding Statement reads as follows:
“The author(s) received no specific funding for this work.”
Please include your amended statements within your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
4. We note that you have stated that you will provide repository information for your data at acceptance. Should your manuscript be accepted for publication, we will hold it until you provide the relevant accession numbers or DOIs necessary to access your data. If you wish to make changes to your Data Availability statement, please describe these changes in your cover letter and we will update your Data Availability statement to reflect the information you provide.
5. Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information.
6. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
********** 
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
********** 
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
********** 
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
********** 
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Summary
This paper reveals the common pattern in research productivity over the lifecycle of academic fields by analyzing millions of papers submitted to arXiv, the open-access repository of digital preprints, over two decades (Fig. 1). Annual research productivity in a field changes over time, following a growth curve of “fast increase and slow decay (Fig. 2),” during which process small teams dominate the first stage by combining distant, interdisciplinary ideas to create theories, methods, and paradigms, pushing the field towards the peak of productivity, whereas large teams dominate the second stage by citing, developing, and fine-tuning what has been created, leading to the maturity and eventually decline of the field (Fig. 3).
Contributions
The contribution is threefold 1) identifying the common patterns of productivity lifecycle across fields, which allows for the effective comparison between fields of different history length and distinct productivity levels in search of universal mechanisms of attention shifting and knowledge production; 2) linking team characteristics and contribution to field development, demonstrating how small and young teams working on broad topics are followed by large and old teams working on specialized topics; 3) quantifying the cognitive distance between fields to support team interdisciplinary analysis, which eases the concerns that some fields are closer than others.
Recommendation
The method is solid, the writing is fluent, and the organization of main figures and supportive materials is clear. Meanwhile, the introduction and discussion sessions can be strengthened. I recommend major revision. My assessments and suggestions for which I expect point-by-point responses are shown below.
Assessments and suggestions
I used the following checking items to guide my assessment in addition to the journal’s rubric.
1. Research question non-trivial?
Yes. The pattern of field development and its association with individual research choices is an important question with both theoretical meanings (organization of scientific knowledge) and policy implications (national funding strategies to develop fields).
2. Assumption rationale insightful?
No. A convincing assumption rationale is not presented. The current rationale reads like “because Gumbel is used a lot elsewhere so we assume it may also work here” (line 73-74). I would encourage unfolded discussions on why “fast increase and slow decay” should be anticipated if Gumbel is pre-determined as the best candidate. Otherwise, Gumbel is discovered rather than expected, then alternative distributions should be compared. The best is to do both.
3. Assumption testing solid?
Yes, but could be better. The authors only calculate the goodness of fit for the Gumbel distribution rather than comparing Gumbel against other possible candidates. For example, why is Poisson distribution, which is similarly skewed but has fewer parameters, not considered? Without comparing against other distribution of similar shapes, it is hard to understand what the Gumbel model uniquely contributes. While the distribution fitting and comparison can be improved, the comparison against random-shuffle models in presenting the association between team characteristics and field stage is well done (Figure 3).
4. Literature review relevant and extensive?
Yes, but weak. The author claimed “we are still lacking a unified framework to delineate stereotyped stages in the evolution of scientific fields that can be validated over a large number of well-annotated research fields. (Line 33)” This is not true. While I agree that large-scale empirical tests are rare, theoretical framework on the development of scientific fields is not rare. Randall Collins’s theory on “high-consensus, rapid-discovery science” (1994, https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF01476360 ) is the most relevant to this study. Also the work by Moody & White (2003, https://www.jstor.org/stable/3088904 ) in analyzing field cohesion. Recent work measuring the “paradigmaticness” of disciplines by Evans et al. (2016, https://sociologicalscience.com/articles-v3-32-757/ ) from an NLP perspective could also be a good complement to the network perspective of this work.
5. Large and novel datasets that may contribute to the community?
Yes, but could be better. The author used arXiv which is open-access datasets and specified the API in the Methods section (URL should be provided). The best is to also share processed datasets to maximize the impact of this work through supporting future explorations.
Additional suggestions:
6. If the authors want to maximize audience appreciation, maybe want to consider getting rid of “scale invariant?” This term comes from physics where pattern universality across scales is appreciated as a default. For scholars from bibliometrics, information science, policy scholars, and more, who do not necessarily have this background but could potentially be interested in this paper, this word may push them away. The use of this word implies that (field) size is the main “trouble” in understanding knowledge organization so that if the size is controlled, the major challenge is solved. But large and small fields may have distinct dynamics that not necessary can or should be cheaply “controlled”. See recent discussion on slowed canonical progress in large fields by Chu & Evans (2018, https://www.pnas.org/content/118/41/e2021636118 ). I would encourage considering sticking to “common patterns,” but this is a rather personal (writing-style) suggestion that authors should feel free to ignore.
7. Somewhere in the paper, the Diffusion of Innovation Theory by Rogers (1962) (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffusion_of_innovations) should be cited. Rogers is well-acknowledged by proposing the “s-curve” theory of diffusion and firstly identified innovators, early adopters, early majority, late majority, and laggards, which seem very similar to the five stages proposed by the authors.
8. The shift peak of arXiv research interests from physics to computer science and economy is worth saying more (line 64). Is it because of the increase in research demand (problems, grants, and publication opportunities) or caused by the increase in research supply (e.g., talent spillover from physics, which attracted and trained capable researchers but does not necessarily offer enough relevant jobs)?
9. The meaning of parameters alpha and beta should be discussed in the field development context (line 78).
10. The method authors used to model cognitive distance between fields is a network model (within which what the edge weight represented should be explained) but not “network embedding (line 153),” which is to learn the vector presentation of nodes and edges by extending word2vec (Mikolov, 2013). This differentiation is important because there is emerging work on quantifying cognitive distance between fields using network embeddings, such as (Peng et al. 2021: https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/sciadv.abb9004) and (Lin et al., https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.03398).
11. The thresholds used to identify five stages seems arbitrary: “2.5%, 16%, 50% and 84% (line 104).” How these numbers are picked against “natural options” like 20%, 40%, 60%…should be justified. These numbers are very similar to the five numbers used by Rogers (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffusion_of_innovations). If so, Rogers’ book should be cited with numbers explained.
12. How the author’s career stage is associated with the field stage should be explained better. For papers, it is straightforward to understand which field stage it belongs to because a paper has a publication year. But many scholars have a career length equal to or even longer than the analyzed time period (two decades).
Reviewer #2: This paper tackles the question on quantifying the dynamics of various scientific fields. The question is addressed by performing a statistical analysis and modeling of a dataset of well-annotated fields tags in Computer science, Mathematics, Finance and Biology, where for 1.45 million articles from 175 research fields in arXiv repository are used. The authors use Gumbel distribution as a proxy to model the field temporal distributions. It is a new and simple scale-invariant methods in quantifying evolution of scientific fields. Then the statistical analysis shows the general characteristics of articles and authors across evolution stages of fields: the early phase is represented by the mixing of cognitively distant fields by small teams of interdisciplinary authors, while late phases exhibit the role of specialized, large teams building on the previous works in the field.
The method and results are presented well using appropriate metrics and figures. The claims of the paper are supported by the results.
Everything looks technically correct and the language is clear.
I have two major issues and a few minor concerns regarding the analysis and interpretation of some of the results:
Major issues:
1. In order to control the growth effect over time of arXiv articles, the authors use yearly proportion of articles of considered field in arXiv as a metric to delineate the temporal characters instead of absolute number. My concern on this metric is that papers in some big fields will be like to be overwhelmed to small fields resulting in the misunderstanding of real evolution trend of small fields. For example, we can see from fig 2d, Computer science recently enters in decay stage. However, the empirical intuition is that computer science is booming specially in AI field. The phenomenon could also happen in other fields. The authors are suggested to further clarify the reasonable usage of this metric to eliminate reader’s worries.
2. By statistical analysis highlighting characteristics shared by articles and authors across various stages of a field evolution, the authors draw one of the main conclusions: early stages are characterized by small teams and interdisciplinary authors, while late stages exhibit the role of large, more specialized teams. They wrote in Discussion section of the paper “This supports the general finding that small teams disrupt while large teams develop science and technology [33, 34].” Although I agree the narration above, I also suggest that the authors make an extra effort to calculate the Disruptiveness Index to support their findings.
And there is a recently published paper closely related to the topic in this paper, it is recommended to be added in the reference list.
Johan S. G. Chu, James A. Evans. (2021). Slowed canonical progress in large fields of science. Proc Natl Acad Sci, 41(118), e2021636118.
A few minor concerns:
3.The paper uses re-scaled Gumbel distribution to model the rise and fall of a scientific filed. I have a detailed doubt about the calculation of stages. In fig 2b and fig 2d, if they use the 25%, 16%, 50% and 84% quantiles of the Gumbel distribution as cutpoints of stage, the math is recently on the decay stage. But at 84% quantiles, it is around the peak rather than late decline in fig 2b. Maybe I miss the details about the method. The authors are suggested to explain this point clearly.
4.Under strict conditions for data: longevity, unimodality and completeness, 175 research fields are reduced the number of fields to 72. The exiting rate of fields is bigger than ½, which means the authors lose and neglect lots of information in the main text. In my opinion, while it is much meaningful to find the scale-invariant patterns in the evolution of many scientific fields, the manuscript can be better if the authors clearly highlight the limitation in Discussion. The evolution characters of 72 fields in the paper cannot stand for the pattern of all fields in science. And it is worth exploring the untrivial patterns in further research.
5. In fig 1b, the authors compare the publishing seasonality between weekdays and weekends while the information is not mentioned or discussed at all to support the results in the manuscript. In my opinion, it is redundant and useless for publication.
6. The Fig 2d is lack of description in caption of Fig 2.
********** 
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: Lingfei Wu
Reviewer #2: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Quantifying scientific fields_PONE-D-21-36265_Lingfei WuReview.docx
Click here for additional data file.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: version1.pdf
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0270131.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
31 May 2022

please find attached the Response to Reviewers in the revised submission
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.pdf
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0270131.r003Decision Letter 1
SinatraRobertaAcademic Editor© 2022 Roberta Sinatra2022Roberta Sinatrahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
6 Jun 2022

Quantifying the rise and fall of scientific fields
PONE-D-21-36265R1
Dear Dr. Santolini,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Roberta Sinatra
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
I would like to thank the authors for the thorough review of the manuscript - they have addressed all the reviewers' points, as well as my comments. 
10.1371/journal.pone.0270131.r004Acceptance letter
SinatraRobertaAcademic Editor© 2022 Roberta Sinatra2022Roberta Sinatrahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
13 Jun 2022

PONE-D-21-36265R1 
Quantifying the rise and fall of scientific fields 
Dear Dr. Santolini:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Prof. Roberta Sinatra 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE