pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLoS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC9565374PMC9565374.1956537495653743624025010.1371/journal.pone.0276213PONE-D-22-165271Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesViral DiseasesCovid 19Medicine and Health SciencesDiagnostic MedicineDiagnostic RadiologyPulmonary ImagingResearch and Analysis MethodsImaging TechniquesDiagnostic RadiologyPulmonary ImagingMedicine and Health SciencesRadiology and ImagingDiagnostic RadiologyPulmonary ImagingBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyThoraxPleuraeMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyThoraxPleuraeMedicine and Health SciencesDiagnostic MedicineDiagnostic RadiologyUltrasound ImagingResearch and Analysis MethodsImaging TechniquesDiagnostic RadiologyUltrasound ImagingMedicine and Health SciencesRadiology and ImagingDiagnostic RadiologyUltrasound ImagingMedicine and Health SciencesPulmonologyPneumoniaResearch and Analysis MethodsImaging TechniquesNeuroimagingComputed Axial TomographyBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceNeuroimagingComputed Axial TomographyMedicine and Health SciencesDiagnostic MedicineDiagnostic RadiologyTomographyComputed Axial TomographyResearch and Analysis MethodsImaging TechniquesDiagnostic RadiologyTomographyComputed Axial TomographyMedicine and Health SciencesRadiology and ImagingDiagnostic RadiologyTomographyComputed Axial TomographyMedicine and Health SciencesHealth CareHealth Care FacilitiesHospitalsIntensive Care UnitsBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyRespiratory PhysiologyReliability and clinical correlations of semi-quantitative lung ultrasound on BLUE points in COVID-19 mechanically ventilated patients: The ‘BLUE-LUSS’—A feasibility clinical study
The ’BLUE-LUSS’ protocol: A feasibility studyhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-9254-0623OroszGáborConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing GyombolaiPálData curationInvestigationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing TóthJózsef T.Data curationInvestigationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5482-6989SzabóMarcellData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Department of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Therapy, Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary2
Medical Imaging Centre, Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary3
Department of Surgery, Transplantation and Gastroenterology, Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, HungaryChenRobert JeenchenEditor – ], ultrasound- and CT-based studies [ , , – ] were dealing with the disease-pathognomonic patterns, their types, localization and distribution. Although there is a clear association between CT scan findings and disease severity, in the critically ill, unstable patients it is quite challenging to perform these scans: transporting the patients is relatively unsafe [ ] and requires complete staff. Having several patient and staff safety issues taken into consideration, bedside lung ultrasound has gained a key role as a feasible solution for these problems, while providing a diagnostic accuracy which is similar [ , ] or even superior [ , ] to conventional radiographic measures.
Unfortunately, it is hard to precisely compare these studies and the results because of the lack of standardization. Recognizing this issue, LUS experts proposed the basics of standardization for the machine settings and scanned regions as well [ , , , , ].
Besides the machine settings, the optimal type of scanning technique (e.g. longitudinal or transverse) is a matter of discussion which is still controversial [ – ] for daily practice and can be a source of misinterpretation or misdiagnose.
This can lead to confusion for the clinical staff, and may prolong the LUS examination time–thus the contact time with the infectious patient. Furthermore, finding and learning ‘COVID-specific’ patterns/scoring systems may not be the right way: as some experts have already pointed out, LUS itself is not able to be disease-specific [ , , ].
The widely used and claimed to be ‘COVID-19 gold standard’ 12- or 14-region LUS protocols [ , ], however have some drawbacks when applied as part of the daily routine in ICUs: to obtain images from all regions, the potentially unstable, critically ill patients especially those who are ventilated in prone position must be moved or turned in bed; one single operator usually cannot perform it alone in a situation when the infectious risk, availability and overuse of personal protective equipment and workload of the clinical staff is crucial [ ]; with the 14-region protocol the dependent dorsal areas are overweighted, constituting a scan-location bias [ ].
The above mentioned factors can contribute to the fact that most LUS protocols published to date in COVID-19 pneumonia are time-consuming and cumbersome to perform [ ].
Using the well-published, proven scoring systems should be more applicable and reduces the chance for further confusion in nomenclature.
BLUE (or, for precise nomenclature in the ARDS (acute respiratory distress syndrome) patients by the author, Daniel Lichtenstein: PINK [ ] protocol is one of the widely used LUS systems in the last two decades [ ]. Its popularity is based on its simplicity and well-powered scientific background, however for those who would like to quantify their findings, it may seem to be ‘insufficient’ and hard to compare for a daily reassessment, furthermore ARDS patients have non-frank profiles, using the BLUE-protocol itself.
Taking into consideration all the above detailed factors, we hypothesized that a BLUE point-based, single-operator, easy-to-perform methodology for semi-quantitative assessment in the mechanically ventilated COVID-19 patients in the ICU, using the well-known cLUSS (standard coalescence-based lung ultrasound score) and qLUSS (quantitative lung ultrasound score based on % of involved pleura) [ ] protocols could be an acceptable way—as we called it: the ‘BLUE-LUSS’.
Our main goal was to prove its feasibility, reliability and clinical value by verifying its possible correlations with disease severity.

## Materials and methods
This is an University ICU-based, single center, prospective, observational study. Between 01 December 2021 and 08 April 2022, a total of 24 patients were enrolled in the investigation, each over 18 years of age, admitted to the ICU with a positive SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR (reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction) result and respiratory insufficiency requiring mechanical (invasive/non-invasive) ventilation. Exclusion criteria was any living will prohibiting ICU care or declared treatment restriction. Bedside lung ultrasound assessment is a declared part of the daily care at the study site, constructed by the authors of this study and therefore no additional consent was needed. The study was performed with permission of Semmelweis University Regional and Institutional Committee of Science and Research Ethics (Nr. 303/2021 SE-RKEB) and written informed consent was waived. The complete study protocol was conceptualized according to the relevant experiences during the three previous surges of COVID-19. Patients enrolled in this study were treated as per international and institutional standards and guidelines (i.e. mode of ventilation, positioning [supine, prone] of the patient, changing respiratory parameters…etc) and study lung ultrasound scans were not used in any way to guide or modify treatment (only exception in obvious emergency situation).

## Patients
The study period coincided with the spread of the ‘delta’ (B.1.617.2) and the ‘omicron’ (B.1.1.529) variants in Hungary. We collected relevant clinical information on the patients (e.g. antropometry characteristics, different predictive scores, laboratory findings, oxygenation parameters, vaccination status) as well, detailed later on.

## Ultrasound settings, data collection protocol
We aimed to set up a reproducible, detailed ultrasound protocol. With the following preset of the machine we were able to collect an image pool that was appropriate to precisely observe both the pleura and the artifacts below in sufficient depth to find them without risk of missing important findings [ ]. Emphasis was placed upon patient safety as the thermal- (TI) and mechanical indices (MI) were strictly adjusted to the international safety standards [ ]. We used a Philips CX50 machine (Philips Healthcare, The Netherlands) with a convex transducer (Philips C5-1 convex probe, 1–5 MHz) and a GE Venue GO machine (GE Healthcare, United States of America) with a convex transducer (C1-5-RS convex probe, 1.4–5.7 MHz). Obligatory basic settings are listed in . Based on our clinical and educational experience and in line with international trends in LUS [ ], we recorded 4–6 seconds long loops instead of single frames to get the most accurate results possible. The operator was blinded to the clinical course of the patient, not being a member of the treating staff. Loops were recorded with pseudo-anonymization (personal code for the patient) and saved to the hard drive in DICOM (digital imaging and communication in medicine) format, strictly complying with the GDPR (general data protection regulation) rules. Patient data were then transported to an Excel-based dataset with a three-step encryption protocol.
 

## Imaging protocol
As proposed by Daniel Lichtenstein, the inventor of BLUE/PINK protocol [ , , ], we used the defined points, three per hemithorax, to collect image data, shown in . Imaging was performed as a part of the daily routine. Based on previous expert reviews [ ] and taking into consideration the heterogenous and ‘patchy’ characteristic of COVID-19 pneumonia, we recorded loops both in the longitudinal and transverse directions. The exact locations and directions were tagged with predefined codes. This imaging protocol allowed for assessing the patients in a single-operator manner: no additional help was needed to the operator. As the examinations were all performed by LUS experts with 7+ years of experience, we did not record the exact time length of examination, as it has no additional relevance. Scoring of the loops was performed off-line by default, but in case of readings where an equivalent of emergency was found, the operator obviously reported it to the clinical team as soon as possible. It was the case in one of the examinations when a right-sided acute pneumothorax was accidentally discovered: a life-saving intervention has been performed immediately.
 

## Scoring protocol
As detailed above, there are several scoring protocols proposed for COVID-19 pneumonia. At the level of loop scoring, we chose two well established, previously validated LUS scoring systems: cLUSS and qLUSS [ ], see .
 In case of loops where an inhomogeneous LUS pattern was found, we always considered the area with the most serious pathology (i.e. highest cLUSS or qLUSS score),–according to the international standards [ , , , ].
Four experts, each with 7+ years of bedside LUS experience, blinded to any of the clinical data related to the patients, scored the loops off-line, one-by-one on a personalized scoring sheet. As data were collected in DICOM format, we used RadiAnt DICOM viewer software (version: 2020.2.3., 64-bit) for loop analysis. There was no time limit or other limitation for loop analysis (e.g. adjusting gain, frame speed…etc were accepted).
BLUE-LUSS was calculated on three points per hemithorax with a minimum of 0 and a maximum of 18 points per patient.
Representative images for cLUSS and qLUSS scores, labeled with 3D-Slicer software (origin/version: 4.13.0-2022-01-03 r30524 / ae608a6) [ ] are shown in .
 

## Statistical analysis
Data were pooled for analysis in Microsoft Excel for Office 365, for the statistical analysis, we used StatsDirect 3.1.20 Statistical Software (Stats Direct Ltd., Grantchester, Cambridge, UK). Continuous patient characteristics are presented as median (interquartile range). Categorical data are shown as the number of cases and percentages. For interrater reliability analysis we used different methods for the analysis of variability observed in the level of single loop scoring and for summarized LUSS at the level of the patients. Single loop characteristics and their LUSS were considered categorical variables and κ values were calculated using Cohen’s method with either Fleiss-Cuzick extension or with Landis-Koch extension (two or more than two possible responses, respectively). Intraclass correlations (ICC) for the global LUSS calculations were assessed in a two-way random-effects model [ ]. In these analyses we evaluated separately the scores calculated with longitudinal or transverse ultrasound probe orientation. For the evaluation of correlation between continuous clinical variables and LUSS values (median values of the 4 observers) we determined Pearson’s r coefficients.
Statistical significance was defined as p<0.05. Results of two-tailed tests are presented where applicable. For assuming adequate sample size a type I error of 0.05 and a required power of 0.8 were sought. ICC and Pearson coefficients were the variables of interest, we used an expected reliability of 0.8±0.15 and an r value of at least 0.55 as the basis of the calculations [ ]. ICC calculations required the inclusion of 20 patients. Considering that the greatest number of patients was necessary for correlation calculations, the study was powered on the basis of this assumption and we aimed to evaluate 24 patients corresponding to at least 156 ultrasound loops.

## Results
Lung ultrasound scans of 24 patients were eligible for analysis, corresponding to 132 LUS scans. We had to exclude 4 of previously eligible patients because of technical issues: lung scan loops were not able to be totally read from the hard drive after saving or were categorized as damaged by the software and technical support personnel were not able to restore the data structure.

## Population characteristics
Patient demographics and clinical characteristics are described in . Median age was 60 years (46.5–67.5), we observed predominantly male patients (75.0%). CT scans verified at least 50% lung involvement in 50.0% of cases. Majority of the patients were unvaccinated against SARS-CoV-2.
 

## Interrater reliability
Calculated κ values from individual loop scoring are presented in .
 We observed moderate agreement evaluating individual cLUS and qLUS scores, with a tendency for better reliability of cLUS scores. The highest κ value was detected for the detection of lung sliding, where excellent agreement was verified.
ICC values for summarized cLUS and qLUS scores are shown in .
 

## Correlation of BLUE-LUSS and P/F ratio
Relation of BLUE-LUSS and P/F (partial oxygen tension/fraction of inspired oxygen) ratio is depicted on . All of our BLUE-LUS scores correlated inversely and significantly to the P/F values. Best correlation was achieved in the case of longitudinal qLUSS (r = -0.55, p = 0.0129).
 

## Correlation of LUSS and inflammatory biomarkers
Parallel LUSS (both cLUSS and qLUSS) showed weak to moderate positive correlation with WBC measured on the day of LUCI.
CRP did not correlate to any of the LUSSs, summarized on .
 

## Discussion
Our first important clinical observation was the quantification of interobserver agreement of the single loop scores. We observed moderate agreement with both cLUSS and qLUSS values, with a tendency for better reliability of cLUSS. Several previous studies dealt with interobserver agreement issues on specific single pathologies (e.g.: B-lines, A-lines, consolidation…etc) and have generally found fair to moderate κ values [ , , ]. However, it is highly important to verify the agreement not only for single pathologies but also for the calculated single scores. Our results correlate well with the previous findings. The moderate agreement values for single LUS scores (qLUSS and cLUSS) is clinically important and confirms the usefulness of these scoring systems in everyday clinical practice, when the examinations are usually performed by many different observers.
The evaluation of specific single pathologies in previous studies usually did not contain another important issue: the dynamics of the lung. For this reason we also evaluated the single scores for lung sliding, which showed an excellent agreement. As we used only B-mode loops in this study, this finding is in line with the previous observations and recommendations of the inventors of BLUE-protocol, who claim that M-mode is rarely indicated for the assessment of lung sliding, and that practitioners should recognize lung sliding on real-time images first [ ].
Although the single loop scores and their coherence are important factors, in day-to-day clinical practice the overall lung condition is the relevant information. Thus, we calculated ICC values for our summarized BLUE-LUSS results, which showed good and excellent correlations for qLUSS and cLUSS methods, respectively. This is a major confirmation for everyday practice and helps to reduce controversies and debates about the reliability of LUCI and issues of comparability [ ]. As this study was carried out by experts from the same center, the above findings can be considered to be primarily true in this context. Further investigations are needed to assess the same at other levels of expertise (e.g. novice, trainee, etc) and in different centers, which we plan to perform later on the same dataset.
Good and excellent ICC values may also underline the importance of protocol-based ultrasound settings, data collection and adequate training. The patterns may be easily missed with different device settings, therefore we took into consideration the international proposal of Italian expert colleagues [ , , ], as well as some previous studies comparing CT scans with different LUS findings and artifact types [ ]. Based on these it would be useful to update and revise lung ultrasound protocols—also at the level of machine settings. We do not claim that the parameters we used should be chosen, but we would like to draw attention to this issue as it can be an important factor for better correlations and comparability, as previously stated by other experts [ , , ]. Knowing the optimal values of depth, focus and other basic parameters may make LUCI a more powerful tool in the hands of practitioners.
Another important issue is the assessment of the correlation between LUS scores and various clinical parameters and findings. In this respect, a number of possible parameters arise [ – ]. We did not intend to compare our results with CT scans, as these correlations have been extensively studied during the COVID-19 pandemic and are also well documented for the scoring systems we used [ , , – ]. For similar reasons, mortality was not an end-point for our investigation—the case number was also not planned for this issue. As for laboratory parameters, we tested the correlation of our BLUE-LUSS results with WBC, PCT and CRP values of the patients from the same day, and did not find any significant correlations. This is not surprising, however, given that the role of ultrasound has already been questionable in this regard. During the pandemic, some studies found correlation with some of the measured laboratory parameters (e.g. CRP and IL-6 (interleukin-6), D-dimer levels) but the results were not consistent [ ]. Taking into account all the factors that may influence the above (mainly inflammatory) parameters (e.g. co-infections, comorbidities, latency, plasma half-life etc.), and that they mostly reflect pathophysiological processes from the whole body, it is unlikely that the correlation with lung ultrasound is always present, especially if the assessment is repeated on a daily basis.
The situation is different for parameters that provide information on the patients’ actual oxygenation. In our assumption, lung ultrasound should be able to link two very important clinical features: the actual oxygenation status and the current lung aeration of the patient [ , , , ]. We were therefore pleased to see that our data showed a significant negative correlation between actual P/F ratio and BLUE-LUSS values of the patients. This linkage is well-described again [ , , – ], but other scoring systems may have some drawbacks: compared to our BLUE-LUSS approach, they are usually more time-consuming, can be cumbersome to perform, require patient mobilization, all of which can be significant issues in the management of the critically ill. Indeed, although most of the above studies performed lung ultrasound at admission [ , – ], a recent study utilized LUCI on a day-by-day basis, and the authors themself declared that the 12-point protocol was very hard to perform, mainly due to staffing and time constraints [ ]. This statement by the authors highly underlines the usefulness of our efforts to create a protocol that is easy to implement.
Combining the usage of the conventional BLUE-points with well-powered, ‘non COVID-specific’ scoring systems can be an optimal way, especially for general everyday use, taking into consideration that in ARDS patients we can observe non-frank profiles. Its important advantages are that it absolutely meets the needs of being fast in time without moving the patient significantly, it is widely known and used (no need to practice a new scanning method) with standardized BLUE-points, and it is usually used on-the-spot in case of sudden changes in the patients’ respiratory status on a daily basis.
The scoring systems used here—namely cLUSS and qLUSS—are well-described and widely used, and not thought to be ‘specific’ for COVID-19 pneumonia. Since cLUSS was the first of the two, maybe practitioners have more experience with it, but qLUSS may have the potential for more detailed discrimination between pathologies, especially inhomogenous or ‘patchy’ ones, such as COVID-19. In our study we found both of them equally correlated with the P/F ratio, with some tendency for the best correlation in the case of longitudinal qLUSS scans.
Debate on longitudinal vs transversal scanning is still controversial, so in the present study we measured both. Drawback of longitudinal scanning may be that it is thought to be technically more challenging at a non-expert level [ ]. On the other hand, the examined lung surface is more extensive—the diagnostic potential can be better [ , ]. Again, in this study performed by experts we found no significant difference between the two scanning methods, but we plan to perform another study with novices on the same dataset.
Our main goal was to introduce the novel ‘BLUE-LUSS’ protocol and to prove its feasibility, reliability and clinical value by verifying its possible correlations with disease severity. As this score is not intended to be ‘specific’ for COVID-19 disease or for any virus variants, it may be used to assess patients with respiratory insufficiency of other origin who are posing a risk for being transported as well. We plan to prove these features of extensive usability in a subsequent study of patients with miscellaneous origin of respiratory insufficiency.

## Strengths and limitations
The main strength of our study is that it is a prospective, feasibility one. We tried to carefully detail all the factors, settings that we used, mainly upon the experiences of previous COVID-19 surges and implement our own clinical experiences, proposing the BLUE-LUSS itself.
Creating a setup which is easy-to-perform, compatible with the everyday workflow, using well-described scoring and scanning protocols and taking into consideration the staff related factors is another important positive issue. Providing some ultrasound setting details for further use may impact the daily routine. It is important to note that training in new protocols and models is a crucial factor for efficiency. With our setup no new skills should be trained, as it utilizes well-practiced, widely known ones, also for the implementation of findings. This may help novice physicians to avoid confusion.
Proving good-to-excellent ICCs and finding important fundamental correlation with the proposed BLUE-LUSS and P/F ratio is notable and can be a possible daily practice in the future as well.
We highlighted the importance of some previously existing score systems and proved their usefulness in this scenario.
The main limitations of our study is its size and that it is single-centered. The sample size was planned to give adequate power for the above detailed results. Image collection and rating of loops in this study were performed by experts in the field of LUCI. Further investigations are needed to validate whether practitioners with less experience, or from different centers can reproduce the results. We plan to set up a study for these issues as well.

## Conclusion
To summarize our results, we found it useful to simplify the semi-quantitative LUCI assessment for everyday clinical practice through some restrictions. Combining the traditional BLUE-points and the well-validated cLUSS/qLUSS scores into a novel ‘BLUE-LUSS’ value is a feasible option, while extending the transversal scanning planes with longitudinal ones is technically manageable and non-inferior to ‘traditional’ transversal planes.
BLUE-LUSS can be a general option for LUCI at places of limited or restricted human- and personal protective equipment resources or in case of another surge of COVID-19 pandemic.
Agreeing with large, multicentric studies, we claim that in case of optimal circumstances, enough time and staffing, other scoring systems and scanning protocols can add other important information to the LUCI findings.

## Supporting information
S1 Table

## Correlations of LUSS scores and PCT, APACHE II and CURB 65 pneumonia score.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.

The authors wish to thank the nurse staff of the Semmelweis University Intensive Care Unit for the sustained hard work they did during the pandemic, saving as many lives as possible. The critical reading of the manuscript by Associate Professor Balázs Hauser M.D. PhD (Semmelweis University) is acknowledged with many thanks.
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0276213.r001Decision Letter 0
ChenRobert JeenchenAcademic Editor© 2022 Robert Jeenchen Chen2022Robert Jeenchen Chenhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
6 Sep 2022

PONE-D-22-16527Reliability and clinical correlations of semi-quantitative lung ultrasound on BLUE points in COVID-19 mechanically ventilated patients: The ‘BLUE-LUSS’ - a feasibility clinical studyPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Orosz,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please revise. 
Please submit your revised manuscript by Oct 21 2022 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Robert Jeenchen Chen, MD, MPH
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf  and

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. In your Data Availability statement, you have not specified where the minimal data set underlying the results described in your manuscript can be found. PLOS defines a study's minimal data set as the underlying data used to reach the conclusions drawn in the manuscript and any additional data required to replicate the reported study findings in their entirety. All PLOS journals require that the minimal data set be made fully available. For more information about our data policy, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability.
Upon re-submitting your revised manuscript, please upload your study’s minimal underlying data set as either Supporting Information files or to a stable, public repository and include the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers within your revised cover letter. For a list of acceptable repositories, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-recommended-repositories. Any potentially identifying patient information must be fully anonymized.
Important: If there are ethical or legal restrictions to sharing your data publicly, please explain these restrictions in detail. Please see our guidelines for more information on what we consider unacceptable restrictions to publicly sharing data: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions. Note that it is not acceptable for the authors to be the sole named individuals responsible for ensuring data access.
We will update your Data Availability statement to reflect the information you provide in your cover letter.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Partly
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: With interest, I read the manuscript titled: “Reliability and clinical correlations of semi-quantitative lung ultrasound on BLUE points in COVID-19 mechanically ventilated patients: The ‘BLUE-LUSS’ - a feasibility clinical study”.
Lung ultrasound (LUS) is a non-invasive tool for the fast differential diagnosis of pulmonary diseases and is used in different settings in intensive care. LUS pose a significant advantage due to their widespread availability and cost-effectiveness, potentially allowing more patients to access lung imaging, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic. However, the inter- and intraobserver agreement of LUS findings is an issue. This study aimed to assess the interobserver variability of BLUE protocol in LUS.
However, I do have some suggestions about this manuscript. First, one of the main findings of this study is that it is only moderate agreement values for single LUS scores (qLUSS κ value: 0.56 [95% CI, 0.52–0.06] and cLUSS κ value: 0.48 [95% CI, 0.44–0.51]). I suggest the authors further explore the reasons for moderate agreement values for single LUS scores, e.g., different scoring points (0–3) and other lung conditions (consolidation, pneumonia, pulmonary edema, effusion…). Second, it shows good reliability of interobserver agreement in LUS scores after using BLUE points protocol. Could the authors give more discussion about the reasons for interobserver agreement improvement after using BLUE points protocol? Thirds, COVID-19 pneumonia is also one type of severe pneumonia in mechanically ventilated patients. The presentation of COVID-19 pneumonia in LUS should not be different in others of severe pneumonia. Are there any possible reasons why this study focuses on COVID-19 pneumonia patients?
Reviewer #2: This research article from Gábor Orosz and the colleagues evaluate the feasibility of semi-quantitative lung ultrasound on BLUE points, as the authors called the "BLUE-LUSS" protocol, in COVID-19 mechanically ventilated patient by a ICU based, single-center, prospective, observational design. The theme is interesting, yet there are some points need to be clarified.
1. When is the day of LUCI(lung ultrasound of critically ill) ? from ICU admission or from COVID diagnosis was confirmed ?
2. What's the correlation between LUSS and PCT? APACHE II score? and CURB-65 score?
3. The study included patients who required invasive and non-invasive ventilation. How many and what kind of non-invasive ventilation used in the study ?
4. The study period coincided with the spread of both the delta and the omicron variants. Is there any differences in ultrasound finding or BLUE-LUSS score between different variants?
5. The majority of patients have P/F ratio lower than 300 as shown in Figure 3. What procedures (i.e. prone positioning) had done for these hypoxic patients? Did the ultrasound performed before or after these procedures?
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0276213.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
11 Sep 2022

Comments from Reviewer #1 
Comment 1: I suggest the authors further explore the reasons for moderate agreement values for single LUS scores.
Response 1: Thank You for pointing this out. As we highlighted in the ‘Discussion’ of the manuscript (lines 249-257) several previous studies dealt with interobserver agreement issues on specific single pathologies (e.g. B-lines, A-lines…etc) which in general can be much easier for the observer to identify – and have generally found fair to moderate κ values [39, 47, 48]. In this instance, having a moderate agreement value for a much more complex score (i.e. cLUSS and qLUSS), where the observer should identify and analyze several specific single pathologies [see Table 2. Scoring protocol: cLUSS and qLUSS]) can be interpreted as quite a respectable result. Of note, single loops' individual scores and global LUSSs were examined using different statistical methods. Kappa values, widely used for categorical agreement analysis, are more prone to even mild differences. The intraclass correlation coefficient is a commonly applied measure of agreement for continuous data [PMID 29677066]. Generally speaking, it is a more robust statistical method and better describes the patient's global clinical condition. However, as we point out in our manuscript (lines 270-273) this study was carried out by experts. Further investigations are needed to assess the same at other levels of expertise (e.g. novice, trainee). This further study is in progress however.
Comment 2: Could the authors give more discussion about the reasons for interobserver agreement improvement after using BLUE point protocol?
Response 2: Thank You for this remark. As we mentioned above, the single scores can vary very easily, since the several specific single pathologies that we take into consideration can be interpreted slightly differently. As we point out in the ‘Discussion’ section (lines 265-270), the individual loop scores and their coherence are important factors, but in everyday clinical practice the overall lung condition is the relevant information. This is the great value of our scoring system: in real clinical scenarios, it is absolutely realistic for an aggregate score to correlate better with some important clinical (in this case the P/F ratio) value than an individual value – attributable to a single region. However, when an overall score is calculated - summed - for the final BLUE LUS score, these fine differences are somewhat mitigated. 
Comment 3: The presentation of COVID-19 pneumonia in LUS should not be different in others of severe pneumonia. Are there any possible reasons why this study focuses on COVID-19 pneumonia patients?
Response 3: Totally agree. We added some completion in lines 334-339 according to Your remark. However, this remark is the best support for usage of the LUCI in patients with respiratory insufficiency. One of the greatest advantages of lung ultrasound is that it can be used in almost any situation and any disease. However, COVID-19 pneumonia was a new entity: as researchers we felt it our job to validate our previous knowledge in this brand new situation. On the other hand: our BLUE-LUSS, constructed in this situation, is a new approach. We have used the well-known BLUE-points and we also use several - also well-established - scoring systems as discussed in the ‘Discussion’ (lines 314-327) section, but our approach is novel in combining them. We validated this approach on COVID-19 pneumonia patients for simple reasons: a) we were in a critical surge due to the pandemic and we needed some solutions to the problems discussed in ‘Introduction’ (lines 67-78); b) in this hard situation our tertiary intensive care centre was one of the largest that treated critically ill COVID-19 patients in our country. For the future, we plan to ‘generalize’ this new scoring system to other critically ill conditions. 
Comments from Reviewer #2 
Comment 1: When is the day of LUCI? From ICU admission or from COVID diagnosis was confirmed?
Response 1: Thanks for this important question. We intended to define the day of LUCI from the day of ICU admission, and specified it for Your question in Table 3. as well. However, 80% of the patients arrived directly from the ED, and in these cases admission and RT-PCR testing were almost simultaneous (no more than a few hours apart); 20% of the patients arrived through open ward – all of them on the same day when they arrived to the hospital, and so RT-PCR testing was again nearly at the same time (on the same day). To summarize: every patient included in this study was diagnosed with COVID-19 on the day of their admission to ICU. 
Comment 2: What’s the correlation between LUSS and PCT? APACHE II score? And CURB-65 score?
Response 2: Thank you for this remark. As we mention in ‘Discussion’ section (lines 285-300), taking into account all the factors that may influence the above parameters/scores (e.g. co-infections, comorbidities, latency, plasma half-life…etc), and that they mostly reflect pathophysiological processes from the whole body, it is highly unlikely that the correlation with lung ultrasound scores is always present. The role of lung ultrasound is at least questionable in this regard. Other studies have already dealt widely with these issues, and - not surprisingly - the results were not consistent. We provide our results in detail for Your question (S1 Table as for ‘Supporting information’ section) and marked it in the manuscript as well (line 291). These unverified very weak negative correlations cannot be clinically evaluated. In the hypothetical case of similar negative correlations, they may rely on the calibration of these variables to bacterial infections and sepsis, which are later complications of COVID-19 evoking possibly less severe initial oxygenation disorder allowing for less mortality and longer ICU treatment.
Comment 3: How many and what kind of non-invasive ventilation used in the study?
Response 3: Thank You for this request for clarification. We added clarification to the ‘Materials and Methods’ section according to this (lines 104-107). Overall 3 out of 20 of our patients in this dataset were ventilated non-invasively. In this regard, all of these patients were ventilated with positive-pressure ventilation via full face masks. None of these patients were supported with HFNO. We used dedicated NIV-machines (Philips Trilogy EVO; Philips Respironics Amara full face mask). The decisions about mode of ventilation were made as per standard – according to international and institutional guidelines (https://semmelweis.hu/aneszteziologia/files/2020/10/ARDS-es-paciens-leleg-lepesrol-lepesre_nyilv.pdf). 
Comment 4: The study period coincided with the spread of both the delta and the omicron variants. Is there any differences in ultrasound finding or BLUE-LUSS score between different variants?
Response 4: Thanks for this interesting question. Unfortunately, we did not have the opportunity to verify the exact genotypes during the study, so we do not have these data. On the other hand, we believe that lung ultrasound findings are not able to be so specific. Maybe the distribution of the known artefacts can differ, but up to date we have not read any review studies upon this issue. However, one - only peer reviewed – CT study exists which claims that omicron variant was associated with fewer and less severe changes on chest CT compared with the delta variant and patients with omicron variant had a greater frequency of bronchial wall thickening than those with delta variants (1). According to this result – which is a feasible one retrospectively – we would not expect to have marked differences between the LUSS scores. 
Comment 5: What procedures (i.e. prone positioning) had been done for these hypoxic patients? Did the ultrasound perform before or after these procedures?
Response 5: Thank You for this question. We added some explanation and clarification in the ‘Materials and Methods’ section according to this (lines 104-107). In our department where this study was carried out we used the whole spectrum of conventional and non-conventional ventilation modes. According to international guidelines and our experience, we used APRV ventilation mode quite frequently during COVID-19 surges. Our institutional guideline had clear rules about prone positioning, and in our dataset 10% of the patients were ventilated in this position at the time of LUCI. It is important that the trigger for proning was not the LUCI we used for this study but the standard institutional guide (https://semmelweis.hu/aneszteziologia/files/2020/04/Hason-l%C3%A9legeztet%C3%A9s.pdf). So in cases where the patient was in a prone position at the time of LUCI, the examination was performed in prone; when in the time of LUCI the patient was in supine, the examination was performed in supine. VV-ECMO treatment was also available at our university for the treatment of severely hypoxic COVID-19 patients, however none of the patients included in our study was on VV-ECMO at the time of our investigation.
References in this response letter:
1. Yoon SH, Lee JH, Kim B-N. Chest CT Findings in Hospitalized Patients with SARS-CoV-2: Delta versus Omicron Variants. Radiology.0(0):220676.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.pdf
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0276213.r003Decision Letter 1
ChenRobert JeenchenAcademic Editor© 2022 Robert Jeenchen Chen2022Robert Jeenchen Chenhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
2 Oct 2022

Reliability and clinical correlations of semi-quantitative lung ultrasound on BLUE points in COVID-19 mechanically ventilated patients: The ‘BLUE-LUSS’ - a feasibility clinical study
PONE-D-22-16527R1
Dear Dr. Orosz,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Robert Jeenchen Chen, MD, MPH
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: A relatively brief review in the context of the revised manuscript.
The authors had adequately revised the manuscript regarding the points I mentioned before. I congratulate the authors on completing this interesting manuscript.
Reviewer #2: The authors have addressed all my comments and I have no further question related to this research article.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: Kuo-Yang Huang
Reviewer #2: No
**********
10.1371/journal.pone.0276213.r004Acceptance letter
ChenRobert JeenchenAcademic Editor© 2022 Robert Jeenchen Chen2022Robert Jeenchen Chenhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
6 Oct 2022

PONE-D-22-16527R1 
Reliability and clinical correlations of semi-quantitative lung ultrasound on BLUE points in COVID-19 mechanically ventilated patients: The ‘BLUE-LUSS’ - a feasibility clinical study 
Dear Dr. Orosz:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Robert Jeenchen Chen 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE