pmcSSM Ment HealthSSM Ment Health445elsevierwt9918248909306676Ssm. Mental Health2666-5603pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleElsevier Sponsored DocumentsPMC9792372PMC9792372.1979237297923723668823610.1016/j.ssmmh.2022.100063S2666-5603(22)00003-21000631ArticleA qualitative exploration of perceived needs and barriers of individuals with schizophrenia, caregivers and clinicians in using mental health applications in Madhya Pradesh, India
BondreAmeya P.ameya.bondre@sangath.in ShrivastavaRitu RaghuramHarikeerthan TugnawatDeepak KhanAzaz GuptaSnehil KumarMohit MehtaUrvakhsh Meherwan KeshavanMatcheri LakhtakiaTanvi ChandPrabhat Kumar ThirthalliJagadisha PatelVikram TorousJohn RozatkarAbhijit R. NaslundJohn A. BhanAnant aSangath, 120 Deepak Society, Chuna Bhatti, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, 462016, IndiabAll India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), Saket Nagar, Bagh Swaniya, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, 462020, IndiacNational Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences, Hosur Road, Lakkasandra, Wilson Garden, Bengaluru, Karnataka, 560029, IndiadDivision of Digital Psychiatry, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center (BIDMC), 330 Brookline Ave, Boston, MA, 02215, United StateseHarvard Medical School, 25 Shattuck St, Boston, MA, 02115, United States∗Corresponding author. 120 Deepak Society: Chuna Bhatti, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, 462016, India. ameya.bondre@sangath.in122022242455210006312102021271220212612022011220221801202323012023© 2022 The Authors2022https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Introduction
About 3.5 million people are living with schizophrenia in India, with most failing to receive minimally adequate care. Digital mental health applications could potentially decrease this treatment gap; however, these applications should be tailored to meet the needs and overcoming barriers of its end-users to ensure their adoption and sustained usage. Few studies in India have explored the perspectives of target stakeholders to understand how digital tools could be viable for supporting care. Therefore, this study explores the perceived needs and barriers of patients with schizophrenia, caregivers and clinicians in using digital mental health applications.

## Methods
Focus group discussions (FGDs) were conducted with patients having schizophrenia attending outpatient clinics at a government tertiary hospital, and their caregivers, and mental health clinicians in Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, India. FGDs were audio-recorded and coded. Framework analysis was employed to guide the analysis, involving deductive and inductive generation of themes, data triangulation and comparison of perspectives between participant groups.

## Results
Six FGDs were conducted with individuals with schizophrenia (n ​= ​11), their caregivers (n ​= ​14), and mental health clinicians (n ​= ​19). Four a priori themes were established: a) Prior experiences with health applications; b) Content of a mental health application; c) Involvement of caregivers in mental health application usage and d) Supporting doctors’ work through mental health applications. Additionally, two themes were generated inductively: a) Qualities of a mental health application and b) Data privacy and confidentiality.

## Conclusion
Exploration of stakeholder perspectives on the content, features, and uses of mental health applications is crucial to yield initial insights about the use of these digital programs in India. This study generated a multitude of suggestions on app functionality and components, which can guide ongoing efforts to develop and deliver digital mental health applications for patients living with schizophrenia in low-resource settings, with limited access to mental health services.

## Highlights
•Patients preferred an app that probes symptoms and gathers urgent concerns.
•Clinicians wanted to know more about target symptoms and details of patients’ mood.
•Both groups advised to capture users’ daily activities to assess mental balance.
•Clinicians found app utility in their daily tasks e.g., logging patient history.
•Patients generally agreed for their data sharing e.g., for customized suggestions.

## Keywords
Digital healthmHealthQualitativeMental healthSchizophreniaSmartphone applicationGlobal mental healthLMICLow-resource settingpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY1

## Introduction
Schizophrenia affects 20 million people globally ( ) and exerts a substantial burden on patients and their caregivers in terms of illness cost and disability ( ; ; ). There are approximately 3·5 million people living with schizophrenia in India ( ). Psychosocial interventions, in addition to medications, are critical to enable patients living with schizophrenia to improve their independence, functioning and productivity ( ). However, access to psychosocial interventions for patients and their caregivers is severely limited in a country like India given the scarcity of mental health professionals; there is approximately one psychiatrist for every ∼333,000 people ( ), with a concentration of specialized mental health personnel in the cities ( ), a scarcity of integration of mental health care into routine primary care ( ; ), and a dire shortage of mental health resources ( ). Over 80% of patients suffering from severe mental illnesses, such as schizophrenia, fail to receive minimally adequate treatments ( ; ), creating an alarming mental health ‘treatment gap’. Therefore, there is an urgent need for innovative interventions to support care of individuals living with schizophrenia, and scaling up community-based services in conjunction with existing clinical treatments.
With increasing access to digital technologies, including smartphones and greater mobile internet connectivity across the country, digital solutions could potentially yield novel approaches for decreasing the treatment gap for schizophrenia ( ; ). For instance, this could be achieved by reducing stigma, as patients may feel more comfortable in reporting their concerns via personalized calls, messages or in-app communication, compared to clinic appointments ( ); allowing patients to access peer support by individual or group calls, and seeking remote support from lay providers, which maybe preferred by patients over meeting with physicians or psychiatrists ( ); and increasing service access by bringing interventions to the patient rather than requiring the patient to go to the health facility, as could be supported through the relay of information to the patient on treatment adherence, appointment reminders, and physician queries via text messaging ( ; ). Smartphone-based psychosocial interventions for persons living with schizophrenia, therefore, may focus on mental health literacy, medication adherence, prevention and management of relapse or worsening of symptoms, self-monitoring/self-care, vocational support, and psychosocial support for family members.
There is a paucity of studies describing digital mental health applications for schizophrenia in resource-limited settings such as India ( ; ). Existing evidence points to challenges in the development of smartphone applications, and in sustaining usage among patients and caregivers ( ; ; ; ). Many commercial smartphone applications are not often rigorously tested and, in some cases, could potentially increase risk of harm for users ( ). Studies have found such applications to have content that does not align with established practice guidelines or self-management principles ( ), or does not adequately involve individuals with lived experience of mental illness in the development process ( ). From a mental health user-perspective, studies have shown that since most of the available applications have commercial purposes, their development processes focus more on the novelty of app operations and features, rather than acceptability and usability of technology among users ( ), which reduces long-term app usage. In addition, subscription-based or paid applications significantly limit access among those in low- and middle-income countries.
Furthermore, users’ engagement with the application may be mediated by their perceived and actual challenges of using technology, which is even true for simple SMS-based reminders for adhering to medications, as patients may perceive those as an irritation or disturbance ( ). There are also potential threats to the utility of the application design when users are not closely involved in the application development process ( ), as also by an imbalance of technology expertise between developers and users, reflected by low digital literacy of patients and caregivers, a concern that is particularly pronounced in low-resource settings ( ). Many individuals living with schizophrenia also experience potential cognitive or motor functioning challenges that can hamper application usage ( ), further reinforcing the need to rigorously co-develop applications with patients, caregivers and clinicians to overcome these limitations. On the whole, it is necessary for intervention developers to consider user behavior in smartphone usage, technological literacy and clinical factors to develop a tailored digital intervention, which reinforces the need for collaboration with local participants who would be the end-users of the intervention ( ).
Few studies in India have closely involved target users across the development, piloting and deployment of a digital mental health intervention ( ). It is essential to study the needs, perspectives and challenges of patients, caregivers and clinicians, to better understand how these potential digital tools could be viable for supporting care, and to inform their effective design. The use of ‘participatory methods’ ( ) can enable various users to share insights through a series of focus group discussions. Moreover, there is a need to build more evidence on participatory qualitative studies in India in government health settings, as they serve a wide range of patients from various socio-economic backgrounds, particularly in regions with high treatment gaps in mental health.
Therefore, this qualitative study seeks to explore the perceived needs and barriers of patients with schizophrenia, their caregivers and mental health professionals in using digital mental health applications. These findings will inform the design, adaptation and roll out of a digital mental health application (section ) for management of schizophrenia in low-resource settings.

2

## Material and methods
2.1

## Study setting
This qualitative study is nested within a larger project called SHARP (Smartphone Health Assessment for Relapse Prevention ( )) focused on the systematic development and adaptation of an open-source smartphone application called “mind-LAMP” (Learn, Assess, Manage, Prevent) across different cultures and contexts to prevent relapse among individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia spectrum disorders. This study was conducted at the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), a government funded tertiary care hospital in Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, between October 2020 and March 2021. AIIMS Bhopal represents a leading regional institution for provision of psychiatric care, and specifically, treatment of schizophrenia and severe mental illnesses. Madhya Pradesh is a state where upwards of 90% of people living with mental illness do not have access to care ( ) and the ‘contact coverage’ (proportion of people with mental illnesses who seek care for their symptoms) is as low as 13% ( ). Ethical approval was obtained from each institution involved in this project, including AIIMS Bhopal, India; the National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences in Bengaluru, India; Sangath, India; and Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston, USA. A joint application was approved by the Health Ministry Screening Committee at the Indian Council of Medical Research, New Delhi.

2.2

## Study procedures
We conducted a secondary analysis of data obtained from the parent SHARP project ( ). Perspectives of patients, caregivers and clinicians on the use of digital mental health interventions were collected through focus group discussions. Specifically, our aim was to gather participants’ insights about mental health applications, and the features, visualisations and functionality aspects that they perceive as important, which make an application most compatible for daily usage.
We used a flexible, semi-structured topic guide based on a review of relevant literature, and informed by prior guidelines on focus group discussions (FGDs) ( ; ; ). The topic guide broadly explored the experiences of participants in routine smartphone usage and their reasons to continue or discontinue using applications of general use; the perspectives on health applications including the barriers and expectations out of mental health applications, aspects of data privacy and confidentiality, and role of caregivers in mental health applications; as well as the perspectives of clinicians on mental health applications that can facilitate routine clinical work, documentation of patient treatment and communicating with patients and families.
We extracted data from transcripts pertaining to participant perspectives towards mental health applications. We recognize that focus groups with a diverse group of participants and resulting group dynamics can reflect conversations on specific topics in a natural setting, and thus, reduce moderator bias, compared to interviews, where participants’ views could be influenced by the interviewer ( ). We conducted two separate types of focus group discussions: those involving mental health professional cadres or ‘clinician FGDs’; and involving both patients and caregivers or ‘patient-caregiver FGDs’. A mixed group helped us in initiating discussions, encouraging diverse points of view and cross-communication between various mental health cadres, and between caregivers and patients, and promoted a wider perspective to the problems faced by patients in their routine life, clinicians in delivering services, and caregivers in providing support to patients. The FGDs, averaging 60 ​min in duration, were conducted by experienced facilitators (RS, HR and APB) as part of an iterative and inductive data collection process.
The FGD was preceded by a brief orientation to the parent study procedures followed by administration of the consent process – a written informed consent was obtained at the beginning of each person’s participation in the study. Inclusion in the study did not have any bearing on the patient’s outpatient treatment or hospital stay, and similarly had no impact on the clinicians’ role within their clinical setting. All participants had the right to decline any information or leave the study at any point, without consequence. Our team was also sensitive to the fact that individuals living with schizophrenia represent a vulnerable group, which is more likely to experience social and cultural disadvantages relative to the general population. Therefore, to ensure their comfort and safety, FGDs were conducted by trained researchers, and supportive referral protocols were put in place in response to any potential psychiatric emergency (e.g., feelings of distress).
After completion of the consent procedure, the FGDs were moderated as per the topic guide with consistent support offered by the moderators to the participants, for the latter to freely express their views and discuss as a group. The order in which the topics emerged in the discussion was flexible – it was influenced but not exclusively mediated by the guide. Each FGD would typically include 7–8 participants and two to three moderators and was audio-recorded using two voice-recorders. An additional observer (or the non-participating moderator) collected notes on participants’ responses, non-verbal cues and overall behaviour observations during the FGDs, and these were used to supplement the data analysis.

2.3

## Participant recruitment
Adult patients (at least 18 years of age) diagnosed with schizophrenia (as per the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems 10th Revision (ICD-10) ( )), either attending outpatient clinics at the Department of Psychiatry, AIIMS Bhopal, or clinically stable ambulatory in-patients were planned to be included. Primary caregivers of these patients, who were themselves not suffering from any mental or cognitive disorder, were invited to participate. Mental health professionals, such as psychiatrists (including residents), clinical psychologists, psychiatric social workers, or psychiatric nursing professionals, working at AIIMS-Bhopal or other hospitals and clinics in Bhopal, were also invited to participate in the study. We used a non-probabilistic sampling approach to recruit a maximum-variation purposive sample ( ) of clinical staff in the Department of Psychiatry at AIIMS-Bhopal and other health facilities in Bhopal, and patients and caregivers attending outpatient clinics at AIIMS-Bhopal.

2.4

## Data collection and processing
All FGDs were conducted in Hindi or English, audio-recorded and subsequently transcribed verbatim and translated into English. All audio-files were accessed only by the researchers who conducted the FGDs. As part of initial review, three researchers (RS, HR, APB) independently reviewed raw audio files for clarity and quality. Thereafter, these files were independently transcribed and Hindi quotes were translated into English for consistency of language. Any queries on participants’ responses or audio clarity issues were discussed between the researchers and resolved, to maintain coherence of the transcript content. The complete transcript was reviewed, before initiation of preliminary ‘open-text categorizing’, to facilitate the subsequent process of coding and thematic analysis.

2.5

## Data analysis
Data were analysed using a framework analysis approach ( ). Framework analysis flexibly allows the inclusion of both a priori themes, or ‘deductive’, pre-existing themes deduced from the FGD guide, and themes emergent in the course of the analysis or ‘inductive’ themes. In collaboration with senior researchers (JN, JT, AB), the on-site researchers at Sangath (RS, HR and APB) developed the initial coding framework, reflecting important areas of exploration, before reviewing the transcripts and further developing the framework. The topic guide essentially informed the framework’s a priori themes. After independently coding the transcripts, we refined the framework using inductive themes, and after consultation with the wider research team, we allowed subsequent iterations in the framework.
Development of the framework involved nonlinear stages. This started with familiarization with the data, where we listened to recordings, made notes and became immersed in the transcribed content. Next, we coded the data, arriving at the aforementioned deductive and inductive themes. Thereafter, we developed and refined our thematic coding framework, where the initial framework was developed through deductive FGD guide-based themes and the independent coding of transcripts assigned emergent/inductive themes to the framework. During this process, the pre-existing and new themes were compared and a set of themes was agreed upon to finalize the framework. This process also involved interpretation and summarization of data, addition of new themes, deletion of redundant themes, and integration of overlapping themes. Further, in a process referred to as ‘indexing’, we identified sections of the transcript textual data that corresponded to particular themes. We extracted this original textual data and placed it in charts with headings and subheadings, drawn from the thematic coding framework. We used QSR International’s NVivo 12 data management software to facilitate this process ( ). Lastly, in a process of mapping and analysis, we identified connections between themes, and explored relationships (similarities and differences) between concepts.
RS, HR and APB held regular consensus meetings towards developing a framework, which was reviewed by senior researchers in the team (JT, JN, AB, DT). The framework was not completed or finalized until all the transcripts were coded and analysis of information obtained from clinicians, patients and caregivers was triangulated ( ). Therefore, the framework allowed for a comparison of perspectives from patients, caregivers and clinicians, to account for the possibility of overlapping (or contrasting) themes between different groups of participants. During the analysis, we have stratified the themes as per the participant group wherever possible (i.e., patients-caregivers, and clinicians), to clarify these differences and similarities.

3

## Results
3.1

## Study sample
We conducted 3 FGDs with 11 patients and 14 caregivers, and 3 FDGs with 19 clinicians. The final clinician FGD was conducted remotely over Zoom videoconferencing software due to restrictions on in-person gatherings imposed by the COVID-19 pandemic. Participant demographic characteristics are summarized in .

3.2

## Deductive ‘a priori’ themes
A key part of our thematic analysis involved exploring four themes that were established a priori ( ). These include: prior experiences with health applications; perceived content of a mental health application; involvement of caregivers in the use of a mental health application and, use of a mental health application to support clinical work. We summarize these themes in the sections that follow, and include representative quotes in .
3.2.1

## Theme 1 – Prior experiences with health applications
We explored participants’ prior exposure to digital health applications to understand their views on using these applications and whether these apps were helpful or not. Patients and caregivers commented on their usage of lifestyle modification applications, with perceived benefits on physical health, and possibility to derive mental health gains from physical fitness applications. Participants also mentioned the utility of applications with details on available medications, and highlighted that a single application providing comprehensive and relevant information would be especially helpful. Participants also cited interest in applications to learn more about their own health condition, or to obtain medical help from a qualified expert.
Among mental health clinicians, they mentioned having recommended lifestyle modification applications to their patients, where simple features of a diet application and contextually relevant food items were underscored. In another instance, a clinician discussed the presence of coaching for lifestyle modification, for respondents who may have little awareness. One clinician pointed out the need for piloting lifestyle modification applications among rural, low-literacy patients, while recognizing that these patients would need support of family members in understanding app usage, and ensuring access to a smartphone. Clinicians also recognized the utility of apps that could enable online placement of medication requests and dispatch of medicines. Additionally, clinicians highlighted key app characteristics such as easy language, use of simple, practical terminology, and means of establishing a connection or contact with the health expert/doctor.
Given the pandemic, patients/caregivers and clinicians also observed the need of mental health apps to facilitate access to treatment when in person meetings were not possible, or to ensure availability of medicines/counselling for patients.

3.2.2

## Theme 2 – What should a mental health application have?
We were interested in eliciting participants’ needs and expectations out of digital mental health applications. Despite participants’ limited exposure to these types of applications, they offered important suggestions for developing or improving the features and content of mental health applications. Specifically, participants mentioned key topics related to signs and symptoms, medication side-effects, promotion of mental health knowledge and wellbeing, help seeking and availability of medical help. The findings are illustrated in the sections below, and summarized in .
3.2.2.1

## Sub-theme – signs and symptoms
Several participants described use of an application for self-assessment of signs and symptoms, or reporting of mental health concerns, to seek answers or solutions to help with their mental health concerns. Patients and caregivers emphasized the importance of queries on symptoms or symptom relief and precautions. They expressed preference for self-assessment questionnaires that could generate more clarity for addressing any prevailing symptoms or difficulties, or probe into emerging symptoms. Some participants were open to having a system to raise an alarm or communicate urgent symptoms, depicted as a ‘panic button’ for connecting with doctors, and even other social/family contacts, to ensure early intervention. Participants also expressed interest in features for specific symptoms, such as addressing anxiety.
Clinicians recognized the need for applications to improve the understanding of patient users about the symptoms of mental disorders or focus on ‘psychoeducation’. Clinicians expressed a need to obtain information on patient’s target symptoms and early warning signs of relapse, and have means to achieve immediate consultation and scope for patient’s self-assessment. Clinicians also commented that a mental health app should prioritise identifying ‘target symptoms’, such as common observed symptoms in schizophrenia. Clinicians also stressed the inclusion of early warning or ‘danger signs’, which can be identified by caregivers, and the application should facilitate the early reporting of these indicators to the immediate attending doctor. Alternatively, presence of these danger signs can be reported to another person or caregiver, who can immediately help the patient, for example, by accompanying him/her to the doctor. Other aspects of seeking treatment included the use of in-app checklists, such as what the patient specifically needs to do following clinical encounters. Clinicians also expressed interest in obtaining regular symptom reporting from patients via a mental health application.

3.2.2.2

## Sub-theme – medication side effects
Patients and caregivers provided suggestions on management of medication side effects, stating that the complete adverse effect profile of a medication could be informed through the application. Patients expressed the need to differentiate a clinical symptom of the illness from a manifested medication adverse effect. Among clinicians, they highlighted the importance of managing side-effects of ongoing medication use where mental health applications could allow patients to report their treatment experiences. Clinicians added that advice on management of different side effects could be provided via the mobile application. Clinicians also mentioned that patients could be given reminders through the application on bringing packets of consumed drugs during follow-up visits for the doctor to understand the level of medicine intake, which could be combined with blood tests to make informed decisions about the presence or likelihood of an adverse effect.

3.2.2.3

## Sub-theme – promotion of mental health knowledge and wellbeing
Patients and caregivers opined that any planned mental health application should have activities that improve the user’s overall mental or emotional state. Participants stressed the inclusion of tips or content in the application to strengthen a daily ‘mental health routine’, as well as capacities of an application to help beyond the management of clinical signs and symptoms and redressal of clinical queries. Participants highlighted the usage of applications to disseminate the right kind of mental health knowledge, particularly for rural users, and reduce superstitions around mental health conditions to promote care seeking. Caregivers also commented that mental health applications can play a role in improving awareness/knowledge of mental health conditions and their treatments.
Clinicians concurred with patients’ perspective that the app can serve the function of knowing more about the patient’s overall mental health, or making inferences on patient’s mental health by obtaining general data on routine functioning. Clinicians expressed this view by focusing on granular aspects of the patient’s daily schedule of activities. Clinicians also agreed that mental health applications should have a form of assessment of patient’s physical/fitness activities, and added that the app can provide guidance on activities to engage the patient, given the nature of his/her clinical condition, as well as mindfulness activities. Clinicians also identified that caregivers may need communication channels through a mental health application, such as closed virtual group meetings among caregivers to voice concerns, particularly in view of the larger social stigma surrounding mental health disorders.

3.2.2.4

## Sub-theme – Help-seeking and availability of medical help
Patients and caregivers noted several challenges in terms of availability of doctors to enable them to make the right choices. The difficulty in reaching a doctor during the lockdown situation in the wake of the pandemic was also highlighted. On being asked about the availability of a nearby family physician, a patient commented on the distance being “50 ​km” and highlighted that the treatment should be over the phone (Patient, pFGD-3). Caregivers also emphasized their interest in video consultations through an application. Clinicians stressed upon the need for an application to provide useable data on availability of medicines, access to financial support for treatment as provided by the government or other forms of financial aid such as concessions for medication costs.

3.2.3

## Theme 3 – How can caregivers be involved in the use of a mental health application?
Caregivers concurred with patients’ perspectives on mental health application usage, although, interestingly, clinicians primarily described the specific ways to support caregiver involvement. Clinicians expressed that they should be able to communicate with the caregiver through a mental health application in a structured manner as they perceived the caregiver to be a point person for transfer of knowledge. Clinicians also expressed that the caregivers can serve an important role of verifying the information that patients enter in surveys or symptom inquiry forms or check-lists developed within the application. Therefore, while clinicians wanted the patient-users to self-report mental health concerns, clinicians also wanted caregivers to review the situation independently at their level. Clinicians also suggested that the manual data entered in the application can be monitored by caregivers, or there could be caregiver-guided patients’ responses to symptom-related questions. In one instance, a clinician suggested for the caregiver to refill the same symptom survey, so as to “collect the correct information” (cFGD-2). Finally, a clinician also suggested for greater caregiver control (‘user role’) to increase the veracity of information reported through the application. Clinicians also recommended that caregivers’ be actively involved in the development of mental health applications.

3.2.4

## Theme 4 – How can a mental health application support doctors’ clinical work?
Clinicians suggested that a mental health application can have intelligence to store the reported data such as patient’s history, symptoms or treatment details of previous visits, and any improvement in the patient’s condition over successive visits, for usage in subsequent visits. Clinicians also suggested the need to reduce the effort of recalling previous visit data (in view of managing several patients), while also suggesting that an application can show a measure of change in the patient’s condition. Clinicians emphasized that an application can reduce the cumbersome process of logging patient’s history; however, they expressed scepticism on the ability of an application to capture and store the variations in a patient’s mental health history, particularly when it comes to patients with complex psychiatric disorders.
Clinicians also highlighted that the app should facilitate communication between doctors and patients through a question-and-answer system that is easy to follow for the patient. To identify patients' symptoms, the app needs to communicate in simple phrases that can be easily identified by patients without even asking or seeing the clinician - the latter was perceived to be important given the workloads of clinicians. These phrases or messages can be used by clinicians to better organize the symptoms and help prioritise patients, which in turn, will help in their continued follow-up with the clinician through the application. In addition, clinicians mentioned the separate presence of apps for scanning documents and the “sharing apps” for videos and photos (e.g., of clinical reports) but they seemed to indicate that a single app with these functions can make it easier for conducting their routine work.
With respect to clinicians’ perspectives on using applications to support caregivers, we found that beyond the clinic visits at the aforesaid Government hospital, clinicians are not communicating with caregivers via other channels, which could be partly due to the Government health system constraints (refer , theme-4). Clinicians indicated that while they would want to communicate with caregivers through an app, there will be restrictions in the public health care system, and private practitioners will have more freedom to interact with caregivers via apps – for example, they could recommend apps to clients, track the usage of an app and communicate with clients on various topics through the recommended app. Yet, clinicians endorsed the use of mental health applications to provide direct support to caregivers, accentuated during the pandemic when caregiving at home became crucial. Clinicians added that technology can play a key part to bridge the access gap in situations like these, or more generally, they suggested that an app can use content from some of their existing in-person/group interactions with caregivers. Clinicians stressed the use of a mental health application to reduce what they referred to as ‘caregiver burden’.

3.3

## Inductive themes
The data obtained in FGDs also helped us to identify two inductive themes discussed below ( ).
3.3.1

## Theme 5: Qualities of a mental health application
Patients’ and caregivers’ offered reflections about features or functionality aspects of a mental health application that they desired. For instance, use of non-medical, simple and understandable app-language, translated into local language was repeatedly emphasized across all patient-caregiver discussions. Participants reinforced the value of simple app messaging, particularly for patients living with schizophrenia. There was also a preference noted for minimum user effort, where users desired information from an application directly, and without any conditions on the application or without making them take additional steps. The ability for an app to provide urgent and specific information in emergency situations was also deemed as important.
In one instance, a caregiver of older age, suggested that while he is not comfortable with using technology, he has found an application used by his son (i.e., the patient) on accessing medicines to be simple enough and got an idea of its usage. This suggests the possibility of shared usage of applications between patients and caregivers, especially in families with differential technological comfort levels among individuals. This also underpins the point of simplicity in app functioning, to the extent that caregivers of older generations can be engaged in the app to support the care for a loved one living with schizophrenia.
Similarly, among clinicians, there was emphasis on technological simplicity and the importance of language translations, particularly in India, where they strongly recommended a mental health application to be multi-lingual and not “too technical”; for example, not involving too many steps, or heavy use of language, or complex terms in its interface.

3.3.2

## Theme 6: Data privacy and confidentiality
Patients and caregivers indicated situations where they could be comfortable in sharing personal data and instances where they would not share personal data. There was a certain degree of acceptance among participants of the fact that some amount of data sharing would be necessary if they needed to benefit from the strengths or services offered by a mental health application. Participants’ initial responses revealed that they seemed comfortable with location data sharing in a fitness app, given the purpose of this app to track step count or distance covered, as well as for purposes related to seeking treatment or accessing a care facility. One participant mentioned that if an application needs to offer personalized suggestions to the user on any aspect such as treatment or care-seeking, it would need to “track our historical data”. However, at the same time, participants were conscious of breaches in data security and privacy, and encouraged the use of permissions to access personal data depending on the situation, and not a one-time direct access of data. Clinicians largely agreed with the above aspects and provided a broad position on protecting the confidentiality of patient data.

4

## Discussion
Few qualitative studies in India have examined the perspectives of individuals living with schizophrenia, their caregivers and clinicians in adopting and using mental health applications to improve care-seeking, illness management and remote care. Our study offers novel insights about the perceived needs and barriers among these different participant groups in using mental health applications in a government funded public institution for provision of psychiatric care in Madhya Pradesh, India. offers a summary of these key findings.
This is one of the early qualitative studies in India examining the perspectives of key groups of potential users of a mental health application. To our knowledge, this is the first such study conducted in Madhya Pradesh, a lower resource setting where there exists a serious mental health burden and treatment gap. The scarce research on this subject has mainly focused on caregivers’ needs and barriers in the design of mental health applications, but not that of patients and clinicians, which are highly important user-groups ( ). Our exploration of patients’ and clinicians’ perspectives on the content and features of mental health applications, potential usage of applications to communicate with each other, ways to involve caregivers in the process of treatment, and for clinicians to improve the efficiency of their routine work is crucial to build the evidence base in India on digital mental health applications, which is an urgent mental health policy priority. Moreover, the research so far has explained broad caregiver perspectives ( ), for example, usage of apps to improve medication adherence, patient’s connectivity with doctors, tracking of symptoms, and promotion of mental health literacy. Our exploration into these themes offers specific suggestions on app functionality and components, which can guide the frameworks that would be used to develop digital mental health applications.
Among clinicians in this study, we found that they seemed to recognize that mental health applications could provide a new means of communicating with patients and caregivers and supporting remote care and oversight of patients’ symptoms or mental distress. Interestingly, even with a diverse age range among participating clinicians, there did not appear to be any preferences towards face-to-face contact for providing care, compared to an application. The clinicians seemed to recognize that the two treatment channels could be supportive of each other. This is an important observation and distinct from prior studies where only more digitally-savvy doctors would be more comfortable with apps ( ; ). This could partly be explained by the existing high workloads on doctors in traditional clinic-based care provision settings in India, as well as the rapidly emerging digital health field and high smartphone penetration across much of India.
Clinicians also did not express any lesser preference towards digital communication with patients compared to traditional clinic appointments, due to reasons found in other studies, such as absence of warmth, nuance and empathy in a therapeutic relationship (important for clinical outcomes in mental health) due to the digital format of communication ( ; ; ). This could be partly due to the low patient-clinician interaction time given high workload, which could have prompted clinicians to be more receptive to other channels of communication such as digital applications.
Specifically, we found that patients and caregivers stressed the use of mental health applications to not only alleviate symptoms or distress but also to promote mental health knowledge, and particularly in rural or hard-to-reach users, to ensure the correct knowledge to overcome superstitions, irrational beliefs, or misinformation around mental disorders. Prior studies have also viewed digital solutions as a form of ‘social equaliser’, or having a potential to improve social inclusivity via dissemination of a common knowledge base to all, including hard-to-reach groups ( ; ). One intriguing finding was that caregivers expressed wanting to use mental health applications for “a little bit, before approaching a doctor”. This suggests the prevailing stigma around care-seeking for mental disorders by visiting a formal health facility, as reflected in previous Indian studies ( ; ). Yet, this also highlights the potential receptivity of users to obtain knowledge/psychoeducation on mental health conditions in the comfort of their private space (confines of an app) before they seek professional care.
Among all participant groups, there were clear recommendations for use of simple, non-medical terms as part of app language, and importantly, the need for a multi-lingual mental health application, which reflects the fact that although smartphone usage has expanded in India, use of regional or local languages in apps will be essential for ensuring comprehension across diverse settings. Indeed, only 10% of Indians use English as a second or third language ( ) and ∼45 million active Internet users (including 64% rural users) access Internet in their regional language ( ). Our findings on language are consistent with those found in recent Indian research on acceptability of digital mental health applications ( ), where acceptability is more related to the user’s comprehension of understandable and useable content, and not only to the user’s knowledge of a second or third language. Periodic pilot testing of an app for user feedback on language, therefore, becomes necessary given the breadth of mental health content and its sensitive nature, which again underscores the importance of a participatory approach of involving patients/caregivers and clinicians in development of apps.
Interestingly, clinicians indicated uncertainty regarding their position on using patient’s self-reported data for remote supervision and care collected through mobile apps – even though clinicians encouraged self-reporting, they also recommended caregivers to oversee and verify the self-reported data. This is concurrent with observations in other studies where input of data by patients could be prone to errors, such as incorrect dosage intake or false feedback about medicine intake to get rid of medication adherence, which could threaten the successful adoption of a mental health application ( ; ).
While this study explored the doubts and anxieties of patients and caregivers on the inappropriate usage of their personal data entered in a mental health application, we did not probe the same fears among clinicians, as explored in prior studies ( ; ; ; ). This could be due to the fact that this was not one of our primary study objectives. However, research has pointed that data security concerns can act as barriers for adoption of digital mental health applications among clinicians as well, across a range of healthcare settings ( ; ; ; ), including qualitative research with mental health staff working with individuals with severe mental health problems ( ).
Findings of studies involving mental health applications and digital capacity-building in India could be triangulated with the results of our study. For example, a study on the pilot evaluation of ‘POD Adventures’, an app-based guided problem-solving intervention for adolescent mental health delivered in Indian secondary schools with guidance by lay counsellors, integrates face-to-face contact with self-guided digital content and its approach is consistent with findings that human support can optimise engagement with digital interventions ( ). This concurs with themes of the present study where patients expressed the need to stay in touch with the clinician (follow-up visits) while providing data on their symptoms through the application (e.g., self-assessment, symptom reporting and feedback) and differentiating a medication side-effect with an illness symptom with the help of the attending clinician. Another study on digital training of rural frontline workers to deliver a brief psychological treatment for depression in India ( ) revealed practical user-related challenges such as poor connectivity, smartphone app pages not loading, and difficulty in navigating the course content, which although in a rural setting, could reflect similar potential challenges in urban areas of low and middle-income countries. While service satisfaction scores were high in the aforesaid study with adolescents, the heterogeneity of skills in using digital applications across socio-demographic and cultural groups in India and the anticipated technological challenges as cited in the study with frontline workers, suggest a need for introducing interventions to increase digital/smartphone competence and independence of users having mental health conditions. Digital Opportunities for Outcomes in Recovery Services (DOORS) is a pragmatic hands-on group approach in the United States with a similar goal for individuals with serious mental illness ( ). DOORS was implemented in two different settings: a first-episode psychosis program and a clubhouse for individuals with serious mental illness, which resulted in the production of publicly available, free training manuals to empower others to run such groups and adapt them according to local needs.
4.1

## Limitations
Our qualitative study has certain shortcomings to consider. We have analysed data as a secondary step, based on a guide primarily used to obtain feedback on the ongoing development of a specific digital mental health application (section ). Therefore, our scope to probe patients, doctors and caregivers on various themes was limited, for instance, the insufficient probing of doctors’ fears and anxieties on threats to their data privacy and confidentiality, relative to the probing of patients on the same. We also have an under-representation of caregiver-specific perspectives under the patient-caregiver FGDs, which is partly because a significant part of the discussion was also dedicated to the demonstration of the basic version of the mindLAMP application. Most studies in India have not adequately explored caregivers’ wellbeing and needs, while they facilitate recovery of patients and fewer interventions in India have addressed ‘caregiver burden’, as quoted by one of our participants ( ; ). We also realise that caregivers could have provided more perspective on the potential risks of patients using mental health applications, as cited in previous Indian studies, such as ‘overuse of a mobile phone’ under the excuse of using the app, and ‘internet addiction’ and ‘gaming abuse’, which may disrupt the maintenance of a daily routine as advised by the doctor ( ). In this respect, given the mixed group of patients and caregivers, we could not identify potential problems due to patients or caregivers not fully expressing themselves before each other. If this was a primary data collection design, we could have separated the patients and caregivers in different focus group discussions to potentially eliminate the effects of power dynamics and better facilitate the expression of emotions during focus groups.
Participants may have also faced peer pressure that could have influenced their thoughts or opinions during focus groups. Some of the study procedures aimed to minimize these, for example, during the screening of patients (outpatient clinic), the attending clinician oriented the participants to the study objectives and after a thorough discussion on their willingness to participate, the clinician offered them to contact the research team for a further orientation and consenting procedure (in a separate venue). Any concerns on study participation, usage of their data, and protection of the information to be provided in focus groups were discussed and resolved during this process, before formal consent was obtained. In addition, the participating patients have been visiting the clinician for several months or years, thereby establishing trust with their attending clinician, prior to their role in the study.
We have also realised that further research with clinicians, caregivers and patients is needed with tailored questions on their experiences of living with and treating schizophrenia, as the current study was not primarily designed to obtain unique perspectives of participants on schizophrenia care, both at home and via the remote clinician. Moreover, the study sample had a limited scope i.e., urban tertiary care-level providers, hospital patients and caregivers, which can challenge the generalizability of results to other settings in India such as primary or community health centres in rural areas or private healthcare facilities. This also applies to the education profile of our study participants, limiting the generalizability of findings to participants having a lower educational level. The study also could not directly measure the capacity of the three kinds of participants to use mental health applications. Finally, impact of COVID-19 on availing and accessing mental health care and clinicians’ concerns of reaching out to their patients may have influenced their overall viewpoints.

5

## Conclusion
Our parent study ( , ) is guiding the systematic development and adaptation of an open-source smartphone application called “mindLAMP” across diverse settings in Boston, Bengaluru and Bhopal, to promote personalized care, with the goal of predicting and preventing relapse among individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia spectrum disorders. Findings of a qualitative study integrating the perspectives of patients, caregivers and clinicians obtained through focus group discussions across the three sites, specifically on mindLAMP, with respect to its features, functionality and utility have been recently published ( ). Findings of the present analysis that focus on user perspectives towards mental health applications in general, indicate themes that are largely similar to the aforementioned paper on mindLAMP and build on the observations of the former manuscript ( ) such as participants being open to integrating technology into treatment to better understand their mental conditions and inform their treatments; recognizing the need to report symptoms, medication side effects and emergency concerns to mental health professionals on a dynamic basis (particularly after the pandemic); emphasizing the need for an accessible user interface and app language; and sharing concerns on the usage of their personal data. Findings from both the manuscripts have been communicated to the software development team, which is working on refining the mindLAMP application (BIDMC, Boston) and have been duly considered by teams of the Indian sites to incorporate customized features into the mindLAMP application for usage in individual settings, as part of the upcoming phases of the parent study ( ).
Specifically, findings of this qualitative analysis represent a step forward in building the much-needed evidence base in India on perceptions around digital mental health applications, and their desired components, ways of usage, and barriers to adoption. These findings will be valuable for informing our subsequent work, but also offer important insights for broader research efforts aimed at developing digital mental health interventions for low-resource settings. In a country with a tremendous mental health treatment gap for individuals living with schizophrenia, the building of evidence on the strengths and challenges of using digital applications is essential to fulfil the specific needs of these patients, and of their caregivers, as well as their attending clinicians.

## Author contribution
Ameya P. Bondre: Investigation, Validation, Formal Analysis, Writing – Original draft preparation, Visualization. Ritu Shrivastava: Investigation, Data Curation, Validation, Formal Analysis. Harikeerthan Raghuram: Investigation, Validation, Formal Analysis. Deepak Tugnawat: Resources, Data Curation, Supervision, Project Administration, Writing – Review and Editing. Azaz Khan: Writing – Review and Editing, Supervision. Snehil Gupta: Writing – Review and Editing, Resources. Mohit Kumar: Resources, Project Administration. Urvakhsh Meherwan Mehta: Writing – Review and Editing, Supervision. Matcheri Keshavan: Writing – Review and Editing, Supervision. Tanvi Lakhtakia: Software, Resources, Project Administration. Prabhat Kumar Chand: Writing – Review and Editing, Supervision. Jagadisha Thirthalli: Writing – Review and Editing, Supervision. Vikram Patel: Conceptualization, Methodology, Supervision. John Torous: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Writing – Review and Editing, Funding acquisition. Abhijit R. Rozatkar: Writing – Review and Editing, Resources, Supervision. John A. Naslund: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing - Review and Editing, Supervision. Anant Bhan: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing - Review and Editing, Supervision, Project Administration.

## Funding
This work was supported by the 10.13039/100010269Wellcome Trust, UK (grant no. 215843/Z/19/Z).

## Data statement
Due to the sensitive nature of the questions asked in this study, the respondents of focus group discussions were assured that raw data would remain confidential and would not be shared.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

 

## Appendix

 
 
 
 
 

## Acknowledgements
The authors wish to acknowledge the effort of colleagues at Sangath, Bhopal (in particular, the supporting team for focus group discussions, including Salik Ansari and Abdul Samad Hashmi), Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center (BIDMC), and All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), Bhopal, for the implementation of the study, as also the vital contribution of the participating patients, caregivers and clinicians.