pmcPLoS Comput BiolPLoS Comput Biol328ploscomp101238922plosPLOS Computational Biology1553-734X1553-7358PLOSPMC9681066PMC9681066.1968106696810663641352310.1371/journal.pcbi.1010654PCOMPBIOL-D-21-013641Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyPerceptionSensory PerceptionVisionBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyPerceptionSensory PerceptionVisionSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyPerceptionSensory PerceptionVisionBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceSensory PerceptionVisionBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologySensory PhysiologyVisual SystemEye MovementsBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceSensory SystemsVisual SystemEye MovementsBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyAttentionBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyAttentionSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyAttentionBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaAnimalsVertebratesAmniotesMammalsPrimatesMonkeysBiology and Life SciencesZoologyAnimalsVertebratesAmniotesMammalsPrimatesMonkeysBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaAnimalsVertebratesAmniotesMammalsPrimatesBiology and Life SciencesZoologyAnimalsVertebratesAmniotesMammalsPrimatesComputer and Information SciencesNeural NetworksBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceNeural NetworksResearch and Analysis MethodsMathematical and Statistical TechniquesMathematical ModelsBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyBrainVisual CortexMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyBrainVisual CortexLook twice: A generalist computational model predicts return fixations across tasks and species
Look twice: A model of return fixationshttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-2694-7097ZhangMengmiConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSoftwareValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7905-1104ArmendarizMarceloFormal analysisInvestigationVisualizationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5555-3217XiaoWillConceptualizationData curationInvestigationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1762-2829RoseOliviaInvestigationWriting – review & editing BendtzKatarinaInvestigation LivingstoneMargaretSupervisionWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9887-3234PonceCarlosConceptualizationData curationSupervisionWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3505-8475KreimanGabrielConceptualizationFunding acquisitionProject administrationResourcesSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 
1
Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America

2
Center for Brains, Minds and Machines, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America

3
CFAR and I2R, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore

4
Laboratory for Neuro- and Psychophysiology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium

5
Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America
FaisalAldo A.Editor – ]. Certain locations in an image are more salient in the sense that they draw more fixations; for example, subjects rarely make saccades to the middle of a white wall, but they will saccade to a moving yellow car.
Models that aim to predict eye movements generally postulate an attention map that specifies how saliency differs across an image (e.g., [ – ]) A winner-take-all mechanism selects the maximum of the attention map as the location for the next fixation. Thereafter, some change must occur in the attention map to allow the eyes to explore other locations and prevent the system from repeatedly selecting the same maximum. An inhibition-of-return (IOR) mechanism is typically imposed to ensure that the model can choose the next maximum [ ]. A balance must be struck between an IOR mechanism that is too strong, which would prevent the system from scrutinizing the areas of maximum interest in the attention map, and a weak IOR, which would prevent image exploration.
A finite IOR mechanism would allow subjects to return to previously visited locations. Indeed, behavioral studies have shown that return fixations often take place during normal gaze behaviors including reading [ ], pattern copying or block sorting [ , ], portrait painting [ ], solving arithmetic and geometry problems [ ], visual search [ , – ], and free viewing [ , – ]. Return fixations have been used in neurophysiological studies of target detection [ ], to study working memory during visual search in change detection tasks [ , , , ], in object and location recall tasks [ ], to study the effects of memory load [ , , – ], in rejection of distractors [ ], and the comparison between IOR and memory-less models [ ].
The neural mechanisms driving return fixations remain poorly understood and likely involve multiple factors including the content of the visual field, contextual relations among objects, goal-relevance and task instructions, eccentricity-dependent sampling, object familiarity, visual working memory, and eye muscle constraints [ , – ]. These different factors could change across different experimental conditions. Several studies examined the trade-offs between scrutinizing information at a given scene location and the drive to examine new salient locations during eye movements, e.g., [ , , – ]. For example, the Bayesian models proposed in [ , , ] generate saccades for scene viewing and fit human eye movement data. Recent work has also characterized strategies of deploying eye movements within image regions for exploitation or other regions for exploration during free-viewing of natural images by humans [ ].
While previous studies focused only on a single task performed by one species under specific conditions, here we set out to quantify and model the universal properties of return fixations across a wide variety of naturalistic tasks, conditions, and across two species. We assessed the general principles underlying return fixations, as opposed to only capturing how locations are revisited under a single experiment. We studied eight experiments that included different species (humans and monkeys), different types of images (isolated object arrays, natural images, and Waldo images), different tasks (free viewing and visual search), and different stimulus dynamics (static images and egocentric videos). We show that both monkeys and humans make frequent return fixations across all the tasks and conditions studied. These return fixations have few intervening saccades, often follow a 180-degree turn in saccadic direction, and are more prevalent in areas of high saliency and areas of high similarity to the target during visual search. To gain insight into the potential neural mechanisms that drive return fixations, we propose a proof-of-principle, image-computable, and biologically-inspired neural network model of eye movements. Without fine-tuning parameters for specific image types, tasks, species or condition, the model provides a first-order approximation to the spatiotemporal dynamics underlying revisiting of previous fixation locations. The key ingredients of the model leading to the universal properties of return fixations include an image feature extractor, bottom-up saliency, target similarity for visual search tasks, a finite inhibition-of-return memory, and a constraint on the saccade sizes. The ubiquitous and frequent nature of return fixations suggests that these model components can also provide important building blocks to build better neural network models of object recognition and visual search.

## Results
A typical eye movement sequence is shown in . The subject fixated at location 3 (red triangle), then made a saccade to location 4 (yellow circle), and quickly returned to location 5 (red circle), which overlaps with location 3. We refer to location 3 as a to-be-revisited fixation, location 5 as a return fixation, and to all other locations as non-return fixations. We used a threshold of one degree of visual angle (dva, approximately the resolution of our eye tracking system, ) to determine whether two fixations overlapped. Other examples of return fixations are shown in . We evaluated the pattern of return fixations in eight experiments schematically illustrated in (see for experiment details). These eight experiments encompassed different primate species (humans, and , and non-human primates, ), different tasks (free viewing, , and visual search, ), and different stimulus presentation formats (static images, , and free-moving recorded in egocentric videos, ). We characterized the prevalence of return fixations and their properties, and propose a biologically-inspired computational model that captures the main properties of return fixations.
 

## Return fixations are ubiquitous
We started by re-examining the fixation patterns of human subjects during three progressively more challenging visual search tasks in a dataset that we had studied previously [ ], which included object array images ( ), natural images ( ), and “Where is Waldo?” images ( ). Even though many computational models of visual search assume infinite inhibition of return (IOR)—that is, without possibility of returning to a previously visited location, we observed that humans made a large number of return fixations in all three cases: 11.8 ± 0.7% ( , here and throughout, mean ± SEM across subjects), 18.8 ± 0.6% ( ), and 15.6 ± 0.9% ( ), respectively. In all cases, the proportion of return fixations was higher than expected by a null model implementing random eye movements while respecting the distribution of saccade sizes (p < 10−5, two-tailed t-test, df = 14, ); this was consistent with previous studies [ , , , ]. Moreover, subjects returned to the same location not just once, but often multiple times. shows the proportion of cases where subjects made two return fixations.
 We reasoned that return fixations could be particularly relevant during visual search, especially in difficult tasks, where it is easy to miss the target and it may therefore be advantageous to revisit previous locations [ ]. To assess whether return fixations constitute a unique property of visual search tasks, we conducted a free-viewing experiment where there was no obvious incentive to revisit previous locations ( ). Under free-viewing conditions, subjects still made multiple return fixations ( ), 9.9 ± 0.8%, above the proportion expected by chance (p < 10−5, two-tailed t-test, df = 9). The free-viewing experiment in used the same images as the visual search experiment in and we can therefore directly compare the fraction of return fixations. There were nearly twice as many return fixations during visual search compared to free-viewing conditions.
To evaluate whether return fixations are unique to humans, we analyzed data from two additional free-viewing experiments in macaque monkeys ( ). Monkeys also demonstrated extensive return fixations: 20.7 ± 1.8% and 7.8 ± 1.0% ( ). In the free-viewing experiment 1, the proportion of return fixations was higher than expected by chance (p < 10−4, two-tailed t-test, df = 5). Consistently, the proportion of return fixations was also higher than chance for the two monkeys that participated in the free-viewing experiment 2 (we cannot report accurate statistics across individuals for this experiment with N = 2). The proportion of return fixations made by free-viewing monkeys was comparable or higher than the proportion by humans during visual search. It should be noted that image content, image sizes, and stimulus presentation times differed between the monkey and human experiments. Therefore, the different proportions of return fixations between humans and monkeys may reflect differences in stimulus conditions, rather than a true difference between species.
A large fraction of eye movement studies have focused on behavioral responses to flashed static images. Intrigued by the consistency of return fixations across visual search and free viewing of static images, we asked whether subjects also revisit fixation locations during more naturalistic conditions. To address this question, we extended the analyses to two egocentric video datasets where eye movements were tracked in free-moving subjects during a cooking task ( , reference [ ]), or a real-world visual search task ( , reference [ ]). In the cooking egocentric video dataset, subjects were asked to follow a sequence of steps on recipes to prepare a meal ( ). In the visual search egocentric video dataset, subjects were asked to navigate an indoor home, search for a list of commonly used items, such as a thumb drive, and put those items on a designated table ( ). To avoid the complexities of head movements and also to account for fixation locations that may disappear from the field of view, we focused on stable five-second segments ( , ). Under these conditions, subjects still made repeated return fixations: 30.3 ± 1.8% (cooking) and 8.1 ± 0.5% (visual search task) ( ). In both egocentric video datasets, the proportion of return fixations was higher than expected by chance (p < 10−13, df = 31, for video dataset 1 and p = 0.02, df = 43, for video dataset 2). During the cooking task, subjects manipulated kitchenware, foods, and the recipe in front of them and tended to make a large number of return fixations. In sum, return fixations were ubiquitous across tasks, species, and static images or free-moving conditions.
The total number of fixations varied across tasks and the proportion of return fixations depends on the total number of fixations in a non-linear way. We therefore evaluated the prevalence of return fixations during the first six fixations . We chose to examine the first six fixations because this number allowed us to incorporate most of the data, including those experiments that had few fixations per trial. Except for the visual search 3 experiment, the proportion of return fixations was above chance in all the experiments, even when considering exclusively the first six fixations in each trial.
In sum, return fixations are ubiquitous and are not restricted to visual search tasks. Subjects revisit certain locations within an image and during free movement, even multiple times, across a large variety of experimental conditions, tasks, and species.

## Return fixations are consistent across subjects
We asked whether the locations of return fixations were consistent across subjects in the first six experiments with static images ( and ). We omitted this analysis in the egocentric video datasets because the field of view in each frame could be different across subjects, making comparisons between subjects difficult to interpret. shows examples that illustrate consistent return fixation locations across subjects for the same image. For example, seven out of ten subjects made a return fixation to the location at “9 o’clock” in and five out of seven subjects made return fixations to the framed picture on the upper left in . To quantify the degree of consistency across subjects for a given image, we divided the image into a grid and calculated the probability of observing return fixations at each location ( , ). We summarized these probability distributions of return fixation locations by computing their entropy. An extreme case of perfect consistency would lead to a probability of 1 at a given location and 0 elsewhere, resulting in minimal entropy. In contrast, a complete lack of consistency would lead to an approximately uniform probability distribution, except for random overlaps, resulting in high entropy. The chance level was computed by considering the same total number of return fixations and distributing them at random locations in the image ( ). The entropy was lower than expected by chance in four of the six experiments, the exceptions being the visual search 3 experiment and the Free Viewing 2 experiment in monkeys, both of which showed the same trend but did not reach statistical significance ( ). In sum, in most experiments, different subjects tended to revisit the same locations.

## Subjects revisited return-fixation locations and lingered at those locations
We divided all fixation locations into the following three non-overlapping categories: to-be-revisited fixations, non-return fixations, and return fixations ( ). We calculated the offset between to-be-revisited and return fixations. In the two examples in , the return offset between fixations 5 and 7 was 1 (intervening location 6) and the return offset between fixations 3 and 6 was 2 (intervening fixations 4 and 5). A strong inhibition-of-return would imply that there should be a large return offset between to-be-revisited and return fixations. In stark contrast, in all the experiments, the distribution of return offsets showed a rapid decay ( ). The percentage of all return fixations with an offset of 1 ranged from 29.2% (humans, Free Viewing) to 84.4% (monkeys, Free Viewing 2) and the percentage of return fixations with a return offset less than or equal to 3 ranged from 56.8% (humans, Free Viewing) to 100% (monkeys, Free Viewing 2). Regardless of the species, experimental task or stimulus mode, subjects tended to move their eyes back to previously visited locations after a very short delay, often the minimum possible delay of one intervening fixation.
After returning their gaze to a given location, subjects tended to fixate longer at the return location, especially during visual search ( ). The difference between the return fixation durations and non-return fixation durations ranged from 36.8 ± 7 ms (Human Visual Search 1) to 79.6 ± 6 ms (Human Visual Search 2). The duration of return fixations was significantly longer than non-return fixations for all the visual search experiments and two of the free-viewing experiments. Intriguingly, in the egocentric video visual search experiment, fixation durations were longer for the non-return fixations (see ).
 Return fixation durations were also longer than to-be-revisited fixation durations, especially during visual search. The difference between return fixation durations and to-be-revisited fixation durations ranged from 23.8 ± 15 ms (Monkeys Free Viewing 1) to 70.7 ± 7 ms (Human Visual Search 2). The duration of return fixations was significantly longer than to-be-revisited fixations for all the visual search experiments and the first two free-viewing experiments. There was no consistent relationship between the duration of to-be-revisited fixations and non-return fixations. Therefore, the increased lingering at return locations could not be simply ascribed to a specific content property of the image (by definition, the image content at to-be-revisited and return locations is very similar).
We further categorized return fixations depending on whether they were at target or non-target locations during visual search. The return fixation durations were longer at target locations compared to non-target locations ( , p = 0.01 in the Visual Search 1 experiment; and p < 0.001 in the Visual Search 2 and 3 experiments). This observation further suggests that return fixations may be associated with the requirements for object recognition during visual search.
Saccade sizes preceding return fixations were generally smaller than those preceding non-return fixations. The difference in saccade sizes ranged from 0.7 ± 0.2 dva (Monkey Free Viewing 1) to 4.3 ± 0.6 dva (Human Videos 2) ( and ). The visual search on object arrays experiment did not show this effect, perhaps because subjects tended to fixate on the objects, which were isolated with no background, and thus there was only a limited repertoire of possible saccade sizes given the geometry of the display. There was also no difference in saccade sizes in the Monkey Free Viewing 2 experiment.
Another important aspect to assess return fixations was the turning angle across three consecutive fixations. We computed two distributions of turning angles based on whether the third fixation was a return fixation or a non-return fixation ( and ). If subjects looked at location A, continued to look at B and then immediately returned to look at A (a return offset of 1), the turning angle would be 180 degrees. Since we observed that subjects promptly revisit return fixation locations with an offset of 1, we would expect the distribution of turning angles to peak around 180 degrees. Indeed, there was a strong peak at 180 degrees in all experiments for return fixations ( and ) The turning angles for non-return fixations showed a slight U-curve shape with slightly more prominent turning angles of 0 degrees (continuing along the same direction), and 180 degrees (reversing directions) ( and ). The prominence of 0 degrees turning angles may reflect inertia of eye movements [ ]. Additionally, saccade sizes are positively correlated with the turning angles [ ] (also see ). Subjects tend to make shorter saccades when they move their eyes forward.
 In sum, return fixations were distinct from non-return fixations and also distinct from to-be-revisited fixations. Subjects tended to remember previously visited locations, reverse eye movement direction, and revisited locations shortly after their first encounter, typically after making a shorter saccade, and generally spending an additional ∼50 milliseconds the second time around.

## Subjects returned more often to salient locations and to locations more similar to the target during visual search
Beyond the proximity to recently explored locations, we asked whether features in the image had an impact on the locations of return fixations. The consistency between subjects described in and suggested that there were special locations in the image that tended to be revisited more often. In addition, the distribution of all return fixation locations was not uniform, further suggesting that there are spatial biases that impact the return fixation locations ( ). For example, there was a center bias, especially during free-viewing tasks for both humans and monkeys ( ), and the return fixation locations were skewed towards the bottom part of the image in egocentric videos ( (G-H)). To test whether these location biases are specific to return fixations or general to all fixations, we plotted the spatial biases for both return fixations ( (A1-H1)) and non-return fixations separately ( (A2-H2)). We compared the spatial distribution of return versus non-return fixations using the Kullback–Leibler divergence (KLD, which has a value of 0 for two identical distributions and a large value when the two distributions are very dissimilar). To accommodate the sparsity in the fixation distribution and to account for the resolution of the eye tracker, we quantized the fixation locations with a 2D grid of resolution 1 dva, and computed the KLD between return and non-return fixations. The KLD values show that the return fixation distribution tended to be more spatially biased than non-return fixations.
Previous studies have shown that fixations tend to cluster in locations with high bottom-up saliency, such as regions of high contrast changes [ , , ]. Therefore, we asked whether return fixations were distinct in terms of their bottom-up saliency. We used low-level image features, including edges, contrast, intensity, and color, defined in reference [ ] to calculate the bottom-up saliency at each location in each image and compared the bottom-up saliency at return fixation locations versus non-return locations. In all experiments except for Visual Search 1, saliency at return fixation locations was higher than at non-return locations ( ).
 Although saliency was higher at return fixation locations, the difference in saliency seemed to be too small to fully explain the pattern of return fixations, especially during visual search conditions. In particular, in the visual search experiment 1, return fixations could not be distinguished from non-return fixations in terms of their bottom-up saliency. We hypothesized that the decision-making process driving return fixations during visual search might also incorporate top-down information, leading us to investigate how the task demands impacted the locations of return fixations. First, we separately considered the sought target location versus non-target locations. In the three visual search experiments ( ), there were more frequent return fixations to target locations than to non-target locations ( ). In the visual search experiments in (but not in the object array experiment in ), subjects had to use the computer mouse to click on the target location. Therefore, return fixations to target locations most likely imply that subjects fixated on the target but were unaware that they had found it, moved their eyes to other locations, and then returned to the target location, became aware that they had finished the search, and clicked the target location with the mouse.
Even though returning to the target location makes sense in terms of the task goals, subjects also returned to non-target locations. In all three visual search experiments, the proportion of return fixations was higher than expected by chance both for target and non-target locations ( ). In particular, we compared the Visual Search 2 and Human Free Viewing tasks, which used the same images. The proportion of non-target return fixations in the Visual Search 2 task was larger than the proportion of return fixations in the Human Free Viewing task (p < 10−4, two-tailed t-test, df = 23). Subjects revisit more locations during visual search compared to free-viewing conditions, even when those locations do not contain the target.
A simple hypothesis of why subjects may return to non-target locations is that those locations may share some degree of visual similarity with the target, based on the previous visual search work [ ]. To test this hypothesis, we designed an experiment to assess the degree of visual similarity between different fixation locations with the sought target ( ). Subjects were presented with the target image plus two options and were asked to choose the image that was most visually similar to the target ( ). The subjects participating in these two psychophysics experiments on target similarity were different from the ones in the two original visual search tasks. To ensure that subjects performed the task as directed, we included two controls where one of the options was identical to the target (control 1), or one of the options was a different exemplar from the same category (control 2). As expected, subjects chose the control images over non-return fixations ( ). In the test condition, one of the images was a non-target return fixation and the other one was a non-return fixation. Subjects indicated that the return fixations were slightly more similar to the target than non-return fixations 55.8 ± 1.25% of the time in the visual search experiments 1 (p = 0.002, one-sample t-test comparing to chance, t = 4.45, df = 9) and 56.3 ± 1.57% of the time in the Visual Search 2 experiment (p = 0.003, one-sample t-test comparing to chance, t = 3.99, df = 9). In sum, subjects returned more frequently to salient locations, to locations containing the target, and to locations resembling the target in visual search experiments.

## A generalist computational model of eye movements revealed return fixations
To further understand the mechanisms that give rise to return fixations, we developed an image-computable model capturing the basic observations in Figs – . A schematic diagram of the model is shown in . The starting point was the neurophysiologically-inspired invariant visual search network (IVSN) [ ]. IVSN consists of a “ventral visual cortex” module, implemented by a pre-trained deep convolutional neural network (the VGG-16 network, [ ]), and a “prefrontal cortex” module. The visual features from the target image are temporarily stored in prefrontal cortex and modulate the features of the search image in a top-down fashion, creating a target feature similarity map, Msim ( and ). The IVSN model uses this map to generate a sequence of fixations. The model does not have any mechanism to process motion information or integrate temporal information across video frames; therefore, we focus here on modeling the results of the first six experiments on static images ( ).
 Several modifications were introduced into the IVSN architecture. First, to produce a sequence of eye movements during free-viewing conditions, we incorporated the possibility of having uniform top-down modulation [ ] and introduced a bottom-up saliency map [ , ], Msal ( and , ). The saliency map (Msal) depended exclusively on the image contents, while the similarity map (Msim) additionally depended on the target during visual search. Of note, the weight parameters used for extracting visual features for Msim and Msal were neither trained with any of the images used in this study, nor were they trained to match human performance: all the weights in the VGG-16 architecture were pre-trained using the ImageNet dataset in a visual recognition task [ ].
Second, we incorporated a constraint on saccade size [ , ]. The distribution of saccade sizes in humans and monkeys is not uniform ( ): eccentricity-dependent sampling and oculomotor constraints imply that there are few large saccades and the saccade sizes follow an approximately gamma distribution [ ]. Therefore, for each fixation t, we included a saccade prior map, Msac,t, computed from the current fixation location and an empirical saccade size distribution for each task ( and ) Figs. Thus, in contrast to the previous two maps, Msac,t does not depend on the image content.
A third and critical modification is the introduction of a memory decay function for previous fixation locations [ , , ]. Many visual search models, including the initial implementation of IVSN include an infinite inhibition-of-return mechanism that prohibits fixations to revisit previous locations. Instead, we introduced a memory decay map Mmem,t that contained information about previously visited locations ( and ) Figs. The map Mmem,t does not depend on the image contents but rather it is calculated from the eye positions at all the previous fixations 1, …, t.
The model linearly combines the four maps, Msim, Msal, Msac,t and Mmem,t, producing a final attention map, Mf,t. ( , ). The linear combination involved two scalar weights, wsac and wmem, which control the relative importance of the Msac,t and Mmem,t maps. We set values for wsac and wmem based on the Visual Search 2 experiment. These two parameters were then fixed and used to test all the datasets. The location of the next fixation for the model is dictated by the maximum of Mf,t ( ). The saccade and memory maps are updated after each fixation (the similarity and saliency maps are fixed), and a new fixation is generated. During visual search, the model decides whether the current fixation contains the target or not by using the ventral visual cortex to extract visual features in the current fixation and comparing those features to the stored target features ( , ). The process is iterated until the target is found in visual search tasks or for a fixed number of steps in the free viewing tasks.
An example sequence of fixations produced by the model in the free-viewing experiment is shown in , right. The model makes one return fixation denoted by the red triangle, which is close to the location of a return fixation made by the monkey in the same experiment. In this example, both the monkey and the model revisited a location within the face (note that the model has no special bias towards faces and follows features extracted from the image by the ventral visual cortex module). Further visualization examples for each of the six datasets are shown in .
 Similar to the results shown for humans and monkeys in , the model made more return fixations than expected by chance in all six experiments ( , p < 10−3, bootstrap 1000 resamples), with a proportion of return fixations ranging from 5.5 ± 0.4% in the human Free-Viewing experiment to 25.3 ± 1% in the human Visual Search 2 experiment. The proportion of return fixations was higher in the visual search tasks ( , columns 1–3) compared to the free-viewing tasks ( , columns 4–6, p < 10−3, bootstrap 1000 resamples).
Consistent with the results shown in , even though the model does not explicitly incorporate any target location information, the model tended to produce a higher proportion of return fixations at the target locations than at non-target locations in the Visual Search 2 and 3 experiments ( ), but not in the Visual Search 1 experiment.

## The computational model captures key properties of return fixations
Next, we compared the properties of return fixations between humans/monkeys and the model. Consistent with the results in humans and monkeys ( ), most of the return offsets for the model tended to be small and the return offset distribution showed an approximately exponential decay ( ).
The model does not have any notion of fixation duration and therefore we cannot plot the equivalent to . The overall distribution of saccade sizes for the model was similar to the one for humans and monkeys (compare versus ). In the Visual Search 2 and 3 tasks, the saccade sizes preceding a return fixation for the model tended to be larger than those preceding non-return fixations ( , columns 1–3), which is different from the trend observed in humans in . In the human and monkey free-viewing tasks, the saccade sizes preceding return fixations for the model tended to be smaller ( , columns 4–6), consistent with the results in humans and monkeys .
Image properties also influenced the probability of making a return fixation to a particular location in the model, as shown by the increased bottom-up saliency at return fixations compared to non-return fixations ( , compare to ). The model also captured the sharp peak of 180-degree turning angles (compare Figs and ; see also ). In the case of non-return fixations, the model is also qualitatively similar to human and monkey behavior (compare Figs and ; see also ).
 It is important to emphasize that there were no free parameters in the model tuned to reproduce the properties of return fixations in the experimental data. In sum, without any task-specific training, the model approximated most of the basic properties of return fixations in humans and monkeys.

## Ablations highlight the relevance of each model component to capture return fixation properties
To gain further insights about the model design choices and their impact on return fixations, we conducted ablation studies, separately removing either the similarity/saliency module (Ablated similarity/saliency), the memory module (Ablated memory), or the saccade distribution module (Ablated Saccade Distribution). Details about the implementation of the ablated models are described in the section. For each ablated model, we recomputed the proportion of return fixations ( ), the return offsets ( ), the saccade size distribution ( ), the turning angles ( ), and the saliency at fixated locations ( ). summarizes the key ablation results.
 As expected, ablating the memory module led to large increase in the proportion of return fixations ( , ). Conversely, and trivially, a model with infinite inhibition of return demonstrates no return fixations [ ].
Removing the similarity/saliency module led to more random fixations and to a large reduction in the proportion of return fixations ( , ). During the visual search experiments, saccade locations are largely dictated by the similarity to the target rather than bottom-up saliency. Conversely, during free viewing, saccade locations are largely dictated by saliency. The distribution of turning angles for return fixatons was also severely distorted in the absence of the similarity/saliency module ( , ). As expected, the image patch saliency at fixated locations was reduced when this module was ablated ( , ).
The saccade size constraint had a lesser impact on the overall proportion of return fixations ( ), but removing this constraint led to a much more uniform distribution of saccade sizes, which is inconsistent with the experimental data ( , ). Removing this constraint also led to longer return offsets than observed experimentally ( , ).
In sum, altering each of the modules led to worse correspondence to the experimental properties of return fixations. These ablation studies suggest that return fixations in humans and monkeys are orchestrated by multiple interacting mechanisms.

## Discussion
We examined and modeled 44,328 return fixations out of a total of 217,440 fixations (20.4%). In contrast to previous studies focusing on a single task and specific conditions in humans, here we studied eight experiments monitoring eye movements across a wide range of tasks and experimental conditions in humans and monkeys ( ). Return fixations were ubiquitous across visual search tasks of different complexity levels, during free-viewing conditions, in humans and monkeys, and also during naturalistic freely moving behaviors ( ). Return fixations tended to occur shortly after the first visit to a given location, in many cases with the minimum possible offset of one intervening fixation ( ). Return fixations lasted ∼50 ms longer ( ), often following small saccades ( ) and a shift in the saccade direction ( ). The locations of return fixations were consistent across subjects ( and ) and tended to cluster around regions of higher bottom-up saliency ( ) as well as towards regions that resemble the target during visual search tasks ( ).
We developed an image-computable neural network model that simulated the universal properties of return fixations (Figs and and ) in multiple tasks from multiple species. The proposed model has five key components: (i) an image feature extractor, (ii) a saliency map, (iii) a target similarity map, (iv) a constraint on saccade sizes, and (v) a finite inhibition-of-return with an approximately exponential memory decay function ( ). The first two components depend exclusively on the image contents. Salient locations include spatial changes in color, orientation, and texture, among other properties. There is extensive literature documenting the role of salient locations in attracting eye movements [ , ]. The target similarity map, which is only relevant during visual search tasks, makes image locations that resemble the target especially attractive for fixations [ ] ( and ). We used convolution neural networks to extract image features. These neural networks preserve spatial locations when extracting visual features, and that helps us easily align and combine the different attention maps, and ultimately apply the Winner-Take-All mechanism. In the brain, there could be multiple maps in different neural circuits and with different resolutions [ ], raising the question of how these different maps are combined.
The third model component is based on the observed distribution of saccade sizes ( ), which favors small saccades. The avoidance of large saccades is likely to be due to a combination of eccentricity-dependent sampling and constraints imposed by the eye movement musculature itself [ – , ]. This constraint also makes it more likely to revisit recent locations ( ), but previous work has shown that the saccade size distribution is not sufficient to account for the frequency of return fixations [ ] ( and ).
The fourth model component is memory decay, which approximates finite inhibition-of-return (IOR). The strength of IOR plays a central role in balancing curiosity towards new locations (stronger inhibition of prior fixations enhances foraging of novel image locations) versus scrutiny of known locations (weaker inhibition facilitates return fixations). The proportion of return fixations is lower than what would be expected by a memoryless system [ ] ( ), which can be explained by a finite IOR. Although a finite IOR has been partially attributed to memory capacity limitations, it can also bring benefits in biological vision. Because recognition during rapid saccades in complex and cluttered environments can be imperfect, it may be advantageous to return to previous locations. Furthermore, it may also be useful to frequently inspect important or high-risk areas, such as regions where predators are likely to hide. Similarly, in real-world, dynamic environments, the environment is continually updated as items move, the subject navigates and takes action, and regions become occluded or revealed. Finite IOR allows the subject to review previously-visited locations that may have dynamically changed. As an initial approximation, the computational model assumes that the finite IOR function is fixed and independent of the task, species, or experimental conditions. Differences in the return fixation properties across tasks are thus accounted for in the model by the integration of the four components.
Task demands can play an important role in determining the frequency and duration of return fixations. For example, during the cooking task when the subject is cutting carrots ( ), the eyes are constantly drawn to the knife and carrot, thus increasing the number of return fixations. Under these conditions, there is no need to process extensive information at each fixation and the fixation durations are shorter. In contrast, during the Waldo search task ( ), there is a stronger incentive for exploring novel locations, thus reducing the frequency of return fixations, yet each return fixation lasts longer as the large amount of clutter makes the target recognition decision harder. Task instructions are also likely to alter the frequency and properties of return fixations. For example, if subjects are instructed to fixate each location for a long time (on the order of seconds), there may be less incentive to return to this location and the return offset might be longer.
It is interesting to speculate that return fixations may be especially linked to an imperfect visual recognition machinery. In an extreme case where the visual recognition machinery achieves perfect performance in interpreting the contents at the fovea in every fixation, there would be little incentive to revisit locations to gain further insights. Multiple studies have praised the virtues of fast recognition in approximately 150 ms after flashing a stimulus [ – ]. However, many of those studies have focused either on isolated objects or large objects with minimal clutter. Under more natural conditions and especially for smaller objects embedded in clutter, subjects make many recognition mistakes [ , ]. Indeed, a strong example of recognition errors is the case of return fixations to the target during visual search ( ; see also discussion in [ ]). Consistent with the link between return fixations and imperfect recognition during a single fixation, several studies have argued that return fixations allow re-inspection of incomplete or dynamic regions in scenes [ ], recovery of lost information [ – ], and rehearsals of visual working memory [ , ].
The proposed model is deliberately founded on using pre-trained neural networks and has very few free parameters. The weights to extract image features in the ventral visual cortex module are pre-trained on an independent visual recognition task using the ImageNet dataset and are not fine-tuned for any of the images or tasks in the current study. The saccade size constrain, the IOR memory decay function and the relative weight of those two components are derived from experimental data. Specifically, they were tuned using the Visual Search 2 experiment. All of those parameters were fixed thereafter, and the results for all the other datasets shown throughout the text do not use any type of data fitting. The model does not always quantitatively match the observations in humans and monkeys (e.g., compare versus , versus , versus ). Fine-tuning the model for each dataset would improve the quantitative fitting to each experiment, allow to incorporate task-specific instructions, and also to capture differences between individual subjects. However, the purpose of the model was to provide a conceptual proof-of-principle demonstration of the key ingredients underlying return fixations rather than an attempt at fine-tuning multiple parameters to fit the experiments. Thus, without any explicit training or data fitting, the computational model makes testable predictions about viewing behavior across many complex tasks and species.
Most eye movement studies have focused on flashing two-dimensional images on a computer screen. This paradigm as a surrogate for natural vision has been criticized for lacking depth information, natural spatiotemporal statistics, and natural head and body movements. Egocentric videos provide a more naturalistic venue to study first-person viewing behaviors where subjects interact with physical objects while freely moving their eyes, heads and bodies. Despite the notable experimental differences to flashing images, in terms of return fixations, subjects revisit previously fixated locations during naturalistic behaviors like visual search and cooking, in a similar fashion to the behavior observed in static images. Task demands and natural behaviors may impose additional constraints. Several studies have shown that the egocentric gaze in a natural environment requires the combination of gaze direction (the line of sight in a head-centered coordinate system), head orientation, and body pose [ – ]. For example, during the cooking task, the gaze point tends to fall on the object that is currently being manipulated. This constraint results in a higher proportion of return fixations compared with the other tasks.
The amount of time devoted to visual processing during a saccade has been used as a proxy for the computational demands of given tasks [ , ]. Consistent with this notion, the average fixation duration during free viewing (259.7 ± 0.9 ms) was shorter than during visual search (297.9 ± 0.9 ms). Interestingly, return fixations showed longer durations ( ). A possible interpretation of this observation is that the brain tags these locations as return fixations, perhaps acknowledging the difficulties in visual recognition during the first pass, and devotes additional computational time to improving recognition the second time around.
Even though the model captures essential properties of return fixations, the model does not behave exactly the way humans and monkeys do. First, the model shows constant acuity over the entire visual field, which is clearly not the case for primate vision where acuity drops rapidly from the fovea to the periphery [ ]. Second, humans and monkeys have a better recognition system to decide whether the target is present or not at the current fixation ( ). Third, humans and monkeys may capitalize on contextual information integrated over multiple saccades to decide whether a return fixation is warranted or not [ ]. For example, the object relations in the environment might attract primates to check back for relevant objects. Fourth, there is no learning in the current model, but humans and monkeys can adapt and change their strategies in a task-dependent manner. Fifth, the model does not capture the duration of each fixation or saccade; nor does the model account for the momentum carried from a previous saccade, which also plays an important role in constraining primate eye movements.
Despite these limitations, the model provides a simple, reasonably good, and plausible mechanistic account of the key components responsible for return fixations: bottom-up saliency, top-down task goals such as target similarity, a constrain on saccade sizes, and a finite memory. The model shows return fixations and reproduces the fundamental properties of return fixations, including their frequency, offsets, turning angles, and preferred image locations. The model can capture these properties across different tasks, different species, and different experimental dynamics and conditions, without any retraining or parameter fitting in each condition. Given the ubiquitous presence of return fixations, these computational efforts open the doors to help build better models of active scene sampling via eye movements during visual search and visual object recognition.

## Methods

## Ethics statement
All the human psychophysics experiments were conducted with the subjects’ written informed consent and according to the protocols approved by the Institutional Review Board at Boston Children’s Hospital. All animal research procedures were approved by the Harvard Medical School Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, and the Washington University School of Medicine Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, and conformed to NIH guidelines provided in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.

## Datasets
We evaluated return fixations on eight datasets ( ), individually described below.

## Visual search on static images
We evaluated eye movements during three visual search tasks with increasing level of difficulty, reported in reference [ ]: object arrays (Visual Search 1, ), natural images (Visual Search 2, ), and Waldo images (Visual Search 3, ). Forty-five naive observers (19–37 years old, 15 subjects per experiment) participated in these tasks. Subjects had to fixate on a cross shown in the middle of the screen for 500 ms, a target object was presented followed by another fixation delay (object arrays and natural images), a search image was presented, and subjects had to move their eyes to find the target. In the natural images (Visual Search 2) and Waldo images (Visual Search 3), subjects had to indicate the target location via a mouse click. If the clicked location fell within the target, subjects went on to the next trial; otherwise, subjects stayed on the same search image until the target was found. If the subjects could not find the target within 20 seconds, the trial was aborted and the next trial was presented. For further details about the images, the eyetracking experiment setup, and the tasks, see reference [ ].
In these visual search experiments and also in the free-viewing experiments described next, the participants’ eye movements were recorded using the EyeLink 1000 plus system, sampling at 500 Hz and <1 dva resolution (SR Research, Canada). All participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision. Participants were compensated for participation in the experiments. All the human psychophysics experiments were conducted with the subjects’ written informed consent and according to the protocols approved by the Institutional Review Board at Boston Children’s Hospital. Stimuli were presented in grayscale on a 19-inch CRT monitor (Sony Multiscan G520) occupying full screen (1024 × 1280 pixels, subtending 25 × 30 degrees of visual angle (dva)). Observers were seated at a viewing distance of 66.4 cm.

## Human free viewing
To compare human eye movements during visual search versus free viewing, we conducted an experiment with 10 subjects (18–37 years old, 5 female). We used the same 240 natural images from the Visual Search 2 task, described above. Subjects had to first fixate on the center cross for 500 ms and then freely move their eyes to explore the image for 4500 ms ( ). The stimulus presentation duration of 4500 ms was chosen because subjects were able to find the target in 90% of the trials within this time during the visual search task (Visual Search 2) [ ], therefore providing us with an approximately comparable number of fixations. Subjects were instructed to look at the images, without any other task demands.

## Monkey free viewing
To compare eye movements under free viewing conditions across species, we analyzed eye-tracking data from free-viewing monkeys ( ). These two data sets were initially collected for other experiments with the goal of studying neuronal responses during free viewing; the neuronal responses are not discussed here. These two experiments were not designed to specifically match the conditions in the previous experiments. The purpose of introducing these experiments in the current study is not to quantitatively assess whether humans make more or less return fixations than monkeys, which would require matching the experimental conditions. Rather, the purpose here is to qualitatively assess the properties of return fixations in different species and to evaluate whether the model can capture those properties. Six monkeys (5–13 years old, all male) from one lab were tested in the Monkey Free Viewing 1 experiment. Two monkeys (both 7 years old males) from a second lab were tested in the monkey Free Viewing 2 experiment. Procedures were approved by the Harvard Medical School Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (Monkey Free Viewing 1), and the Washington University School of Medicine Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (Monkey Free Viewing 2), and conformed to NIH guidelines provided in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.
In the Monkey Free Viewing 1 experiment ( ), each trial of the experiment did not start with a center cross. Instead, the initial fixation of a trial could start anywhere on the screen. The presentation duration of each trial vary from 1,000 ms to 2,000 ms. There were 121 images in total with repeated presentations in random order. In our analysis, we focused on fixation sequences longer than 1,500 ms during only first stimulus presentations. We discarded other fixation sequences in repeated presentations due to concerns about the impact of memory across trials on return fixations. The trial sequence intermixed both natural images and images containing salient visual features, such as other monkeys or body parts. There were 36 images out of 121 containing faces. To ameliorate the center fixation bias in each trial, the image location was randomly jittered relative to the original image in a [-3:1:3] dva grid. For example, in , the stimulus was shifted to the left; with the vacant space shown as grey background. Monkeys were seated at a viewing distance of approximately 57–58 cm away. All images were presented in color on a monitor screen (635 × 635 pixels, subtending 16 × 16 dva).
In the Monkey Free Viewing 2 experiment ( ), monkeys were trained to first look at the center fixation for 500 ms, followed by the stimulus presentation for 1000—1500 ms. There were 1,761 images in total with 1,380 natural images from the MSCOCO dataset [ ], around 240 images that contain either monkey faces or their body parts, and around 140 pictures of local laboratory staff and animal shelters. As in the Monkey Free Viewing 1 experiment, to eliminate the center bias, all the images were shifted randomly in a 2-degree radius circle. Monkeys were seated at a viewing distance of approximately 57–58 cm away. All images are presented in color on a monitor screen (596 × 596 pixels, subtending 15 × 15 dva).

## Human egocentric videos
While the majority of eye movement studies have focused on static images, here we also considered a more naturalistic setting where subjects could move freely and interact with physical objects while eye positions and first person videos were recorded (Egocentric videos, ). We used two existing egocentric video datasets [ , ]. In both cases, subjects wore an SMI mobile eyetracker (iMotions, Denmark) with a sampling rate of 30 Hz and precision of ≈ 0.5 dva.
The egocentric video dataset 1 (Humans, Videos 1) consisted of eye positions in 86 videos showing the field of view captured from a fist-person perspective [ ]. In these videos, 32 subjects performed cooking activities. Each video clip lasted 20 minutes and was captured at 24 frames per second and 960 × 1280 pixels (corresponding to ≈ 46 × 60 dva). In the beginning of each cooking task, subjects were instructed to follow the steps on a recipe. There were 10 recipes, such as northern American breakfast, pizza, and turkey sandwich. Each recipe entailed a sequence of meal preparation steps. shows example video frames and their corresponding fixations overlaid on the last frame of each video clip (yellow circles).
The egocentric video dataset 2 (Humans, Videos 2) consisted of eye positions in 57 videos showing the field of view captured from a first-person perspective [ ]. In these videos, 44 subjects performed a visual search task. Each video clip lasted around 15 minutes and was captured at 24 frames per second and a resolution of 960 × 1280 pixels (corresponding to ≈ 46 × 60 dva). The experiment site was a fully furnished and functional model home including a master bedroom, children’s room, living room, open kitchen, dining area, study room, recreational room, bathroom and exercise area. Each subject was asked to search for a list of 22 items commonly used in daily life (including thumb drive, shampoo, etc.) and move them to the designated packing location (dining table). shows example video frames and their corresponding fixations overlaid on the last frame of each video clip (yellow circles).

## Psychophysics experiments on target feature similarity for return fixations
In , we asked whether the return fixation locations were visually similar to the sought target during the visual search tasks. To answer this question, we conducted two psychophysics experiments on Amazon Mechanical Turk (Mturk). We recruited 20 subjects (10 subjects for the object arrays task and 10 subjects for the natural images task).
Subjects were presented with a target object and two alternative images. Subjects performed a two-alternative forced choice task indicating which of the two options was more similar to the target object. The images remained on the screen until the subjects made a choice. The two image options were randomly mapped onto choice A or B. The images were fixation patches obtained by cropping the search image. In the main test condition, one of the options always corresponded to a return fixation patch and the other option corresponded to a non-return fixation patch, where return and non-return were defined based on the eye movement data independently obtained from different subjects in reference [ ]. For each trial, the return and non-return fixation image patches were extracted from the same image and trial. In the object array experiment ( ), the patch encompassed the entire object (subtending about 3.6 dva). In the natural images experiment ( ), the patch encompassed a square box of size 156 ×156 pixels, subtending 3.6 dva and centered at each fixation. We collected 412 pairs on object arrays and 1,041 pairs on natural images.
As a sanity check to evaluate the quality of the online results from Mturk, we introduced two control conditions that were randomly intermixed with the test trials. In control 1 (3% of the trials), the two options were a non-return fixation patch versus the actual identical target. We (obviously) expected subjects to indicate that the identical target was more similar to the target than the non-return fixation locations. In control 2 (3% of the trials), the two options were a non-return fixation patch versus an object belonging to the same semantic category as the target object but showing a different exemplar, different rotation and scaling. We expected subjects to indicate that the exemplar from the same category was more similar to the target than the non-return fixation locations. We set an exclusion criteria for subjects that made more than 3 errors in the control trials, but all 20 subjects satisfied these two controls and none were excluded from the analyses.

## Computational model to predict return fixations
We first provide a high-level intuitive outline of the proposed computational model, followed by a full description of the implementation details ( ). The model is based on the previously published architecture for invariant visual search (IVSN [ ]). The current model incorporates many modifications, most notably the prediction of eye movements during free viewing conditions when there is no target to search for, the incorporation of multiple maps discussed below, and finite inhibition-of-return.
The output of the model is a sequence of fixations. During visual search tasks, there are two inputs to the model: the target image (IT) and the search image (IS). During free viewing tasks, there is only a single stimulus input (IS). The model posits an attention map Mf,t at each fixation time t by integrating four components: a bottom-up saliency map Msal, a target visual feature similarity map Msim, a saccade prior map Msac,t dependent on the previous fixation location, and a visual working memory map Mmem,t dependent on the location of previous fixations ( ).
In the visual search tasks, both the target image (IT) and the search image (IS) are processed through the same deep convolutional neural network, which aims to mimic the transformation of pixel-like inputs through the ventral visual cortex [ – ]. The target feature similarity map (Msim) indicates the similarity between the target image and each location of the search image. Msim is computed using the same procedure described previously [ ]. Briefly, feature information from the top level of the visual hierarchy provides top-down modulation, based on the target high-level features, on the activation responses to the search image. The target feature similarity map depends exclusively on IT and IS and does not change with each fixation. During the free viewing tasks, there is no target image, and we therefore remove the top-down modulation, and use the same deep convolutional neural network to extract the high-level features of the stimulus IS, aggregating all the feature maps into one saliency map Msal.
Inhibition-of-return refers to the observation that previously fixated locations tend to be inhibited [ ]. Many models of visual search, including the initial version of IVSN [ ], assume infinite inhibition-of-return. Under these conditions, there cannot be any return fixations since these models remember perfectly the previously visited locations and never look back. Modeling return fixations requires a finite memory. Many studies [ , – ] have capitalized on return fixations to study visual working memory. Here we introduced a memory decay function to keep track of previous visited locations and constantly update the visual working memory map Mmem,t over all past fixations from 1 to t−1 ( ). Mmem,t depends only on the previous fixations and is independent of the content of IT or IS.
Researchers have also shown that oculomotor biases constrain the saccade sizes (e.g., subjects are more likely to make two 10 dva saccades than one 20 dva saccade, [ ]). Together with eccentricity-dependent sampling [ ], this oculomotor constraint can also impact the frequency of return fixations [ ]. To take saccade size constraints into account, the model incorporated a saccade prior distribution map Msac,t. Msac,t depends only on the previous fixation t−1 and is independent of the content of IT or IS.
The final attention map Mf,t integrates Msim, Msal, Mmem,t and Msac,t. A winner-take-all mechanism selects the maximum local activity as the location for the next fixation at t + 1. During visual search tasks, if the model recognizes the target at the current fixation location, the search stops. Otherwise, the maps are updated and the model produces a new fixation. During the free viewing tasks, the model stops when it reaches the average number of fixations made by humans or monkeys in the corresponding datasets.
The model was always presented with the exact same images that were shown to the subjects in all the tasks. We focus here on modeling the results for only the first six experiments on static images for several reasons. First, the model does not have any mechanisms for processing motion information or integrate temporal information across video frames. Second, the model does not have any mechanism to incorporate specific task information such as following a recipe in the cooking task. Third, a model of the egocentric videos would require constructing a memory map in 3D.

## Target feature similarity map
The computation of the target feature similarity map Msim follows the IVSN model in reference [ ]. Of note, this is a zero-shot model which does not require training on any eye movement data. We describe the computation of Msim briefly here and refer the reader to reference [ ] for further details. The “ventral visual cortex” module builds upon the basic bottom-up architecture for visual recognition [ , , , – ]. We used a deep feed-forward network, implemented in VGG16 [ ], pre-trained for image classification on the 2012 version of the ImageNet dataset [ ]. The same set of weights, that is, the same network, is used to process the target image IT and the search image IS. The output of the ventral visual cortex module is given by the activations at the top-level (Layer 31 in VGG16, ϕ31(IT, W), and the layer before that (Layer 30 in VGG16), ϕ30(IS, W), in response to the target image and search image, respectively. The top level activation is stored in a “pre-frontal cortex” module. We use the activations in layer 31 in response to the target image to provide top-down modulation to layer 30’s response to the search image ( and ). This modulation is achieved by convolving the representation of the target with the representation of the search image before max-pooling:
 Msim=f(ϕ31(IT,W),ϕ30(IS,W))
(1)
where f(⋅) is the target modulation function defined as a 2D convolution operation with kernel ϕ31(IT, W) on the search feature map ϕ30(IS, W).

## Saliency map
The saliency map Msal is computed using the same ventral visual cortex module (without any weight changes or retraining). We obtained the activations of size C30 × W30 × H30 at the top-level (Layer 30 in VGG16) where C30 is the number of channels, W30 and H30 are the width and height respectively. We take the average over all channels. In other words, ϕ30(IS, W) gets uniformly modulated by an all-ones matrix of size Cl × 1 × 1.
 Msal=f(JCl×1×1,ϕ30(IS,W))
(2)

## Saccade prior map
Humans and monkeys make relatively small saccades, probably due to a combination of eccentricity-dependent sampling [ , ] and oculomotor constraints [ , ]. We used the empirical distribution of saccade sizes to constrain the saccade sizes for the model. Specifically, we plotted the saccade size distribution of the subjects on the corresponding datasets and interpolated to create a 2D map Msac,t centered at the tth fixation. plots the empirical saccade size distributions of all fixations over all trials and subjects for each dataset and their corresponding 2D saccade maps when the fixation is at the center. The saccade prior map is updated after each fixation. shows example visualizations of saccade priors over fixations.

## Memory decay map
Humans and monkeys have limited memory capacity and finite inhibition of return [ , , ]. We added a finite memory module to the model where the 2D memory map at the th fixation keeps track of memories at all the past fixation locations . From the th back to the 1st fixation locations, the memory value at at the tth fixation location gets degraded using the following memory decay function:
 at={αt˜-t,ifαt˜-t≥ββ,otherwise
(3)
where we set memory decay parameter α = 0.92 and clipping threshold β = 0.5. shows the plot of memory value at as a function of fixation number t when . The model’s memory decays for the most recent fixations and maintains a low memory level for the rest of past fixations. To avoid sparseness of the 2D memory map Amem,t for the tth fixation at (xt, yt), we applied Gaussian filtering centered at that fixation location:
 Amem,t(xt,yt)=atexp-(x-xt)2+(y-yt)22σ2
(4)
where σ is the standard deviation of the Gaussian. The value of σ controls how much the model remembers adjacent pixels centered around fixation location (xt, yt). We set σ = 0.08 on object arrays (Visual Search 1) and σ = 0.02 in the other datasets. The different σ is because in object arrays, each object stands alone, and the choice of the Gaussian memory mask is large enough to cover the complete object on the arrays. To avoid overfitting, we optimized α, β and σ
only on the Visual Search 2 task, and fixed those parameters for the rest of the tasks.
After updating Amem,t(xt, yt) for each fixation t, the model predicts the final memory map by taking the largest memory value across Amem,t(xt, yt) for all previous fixation locations . shows visualization examples of the memory map . When there is a return fixation, by taking the largest memory value across Amem,t(xt, yt), the memory value at the revisited location overwrites the decayed memory value at the “to-be-revisited” location.

## Integration of feature maps
The model predicts the final attention map Mf,t by taking the weighted linear combination of Msim, Msal, Mmem,t and Msac, t, after normalizing them to [0, 1] ( ).
 Mf,t=wmemMmem,t+wsacMsac,t+wsimMsim+wsalMsal
(5)
In the visual search tasks, wsim = 1 and wsal = 0 and in the free viewing tasks wsim = 0 and wsal = 1. We fit the 2 weights wmem and wsac to approximate the return fixation properties only on the Visual Search 2 experiment with natural images. We used the following weights: wmem = −0.93, wsac = 0.2346. These weights are fixed throughout the experiments and do not depend on t. The model takes the maximum in the attention map Mf,t as the location of the t + 1-th fixation.

## Object recognition
In the visual search tasks, given a fixation location, the model needs to decide whether the target was found or not (in a similar way that humans need to decide whether they found the target after moving their eyes to a new location). The model performs visual recognition to decide whether the target is present at the fixated location. We used a simplified visual recognition mechanism consisting of four steps: (1) we cropped a patch of 1 dva centered at the current fixation; (2) we used the same deep feed-forward architecture described above to extract the activations in the last classification layer of VGG16 in response to the cropped patch; (3) we similarly extracted the activation in the last classification layer of VGG16 in response to the target image IT, and (4) we computed the cosine similarity distance between the activations for the image patch and the target image.
We computed Mrecog for each location in the image. At each fixation location, the model retrieved the cosine similarity distance in Mrecog. We empirically set a hard threshold for cosine similarity distance (0.5 for object arrays and Waldo images; 0.3 for natural images). If the distance between the current fixation patch and the target image is below the threshold, the model decides that the target is found and the search trial stops; otherwise, the model continues the visual search process by updating the four maps and the overall attention map ( ).
In the free viewing tasks, there is no target image to recognize. Instead, we stop the model after it generated Nc fixations, where Nc is the average number of fixations by humans or monkeys in the corresponding dataset.

## Ablated models
We assess the model components by testing the following ablated models in all the six experiments.
Ablated target feature similarity map. In the three visual search experiments, we removed the target feature similarity map by setting wsim to be zero in . Since the ablated model now predicts image feature-agnostic attention maps for all the images, selecting the maximum of the attention map as the location for the next fixation would result in generating the same sequence of fixations for all the images. Thus, we introduced stochasticity to the winner-take-all mechanism by sampling the next fixation location from the attention map Mf,t so that the model outputs different sequences of fixations for different images.
Ablated saliency map. In the three free viewing experiments, we removed the saliency map by setting wsal to be zero in . Similar as Ablated target feature similarity map, we introduced stochasticity to randomly sample the next fixation location from Mf,t.
Ablated saccade prior map. We enforced wsac to be zero in . The winner-take-all mechanism selects the maximum of the attention map as the location for the next fixation.
Ablated memory decay map. This model considered the possibility that prior location does not effectively get added into the memory. This defective memory module was implemented by randomly assigning a value between [-1,0] to wmem in .

## Null model
We compared the model performance against a null model that made random eye movements. Similar to reference [ ], the null model is memoryless: it does not have any history dependency during prediction of the next fixation location. The only constraint that the null model has is the saccade size, ensuring that the null model can also make return fixations by selecting random locations in the vicinity of the current fixation. Thus, the null model randomly samples the next fixation location from the saccade amplitude distribution Msac,t. We used the same stopping criteria for the null model as the one described in the previous paragraph. We ran simulations generating at least 25,000 random sequences of fixations and reported their proportion of return fixations for all datasets in , and . These random sequences of fixations have the same length as the average number of fixations per trial for each dataset. Similarly, the number of return fixations also impacts the entropy value ( ). In order to calculate the chance level for the between-subject consistency analyses, we used the number of return fixations collected from all subjects in each trial (that is, each image) to randomly generate an equal number of random return fixations and computed the entropy for these random return fixations. We repeated this process 100 times for every trial per dataset.
In the null model described above, we do not take bottom-up saliency map into account. An alternative null model would be to incorporate Msac,t, Msim and Msal with Mmem,t removed. Without Mmem,t, Msal would dominate the final attention map Mf,t. Hence, such an alternative null model would fixate back and forth between the maximum and the second local maximum on alternating Mf,t and Mf,t + 1. This would result in strong exploitation of those two locations without any exploration.

## Data analyses

## Fixation extraction and calibration
In the visual search tasks, we used the fixations from the previous work [ ]. In the human free viewing task, we used the fixation clustering function from [ ], implemented in MATLAB. During all the human eyetracking experiments on static images, if a fixation was not detected during the initial fixation window in each trial, the experimenter re-calibrated the eye tracker.
In the Monkey Free Viewing 1 task, there were 3–5 re-calibrations. We minimized the number of times for checking re-calibrations in order to maintain the monkeys’ attention. The checking process was only activated if the monkeys failed 3 times or more to complete a trial. We used two eyetrackers (four monkeys using ISCAN, 60 Hz sampling rate and <1 dva resolution, and two monkeys using Eyelink 1000 Plus, 1000 Hz sampling rate and <1 dva resolution) to record monkeys’ eye positions. In the Monkey Free Viewing 2 task, calibration was conducted in the beginning of each session. We used the ISCAN eyetracker to record the monkeys’ eye positions. We used the built-in Monkeylogic 2 graphics library [ ] to monitor eye movements on MATLAB.
In the two egocentric datasets [ , ], calibration was only performed once before each experiment. In a natural environment the resulting egocentric videos represent a combination of head pose and gaze position. Different from static images, both foreground and background objects move with respect to the egocentric coordinate. This implies that the coordinates of a fixated object on the current video frame might be shifted with respect to the next frame or even disappear in the next frame due to abrupt large head motions. To avoid the complexities of using optic flow to track coordinates across frames, we simplified the analyses by considering short segments with minimal head motion. We uniformly split the long egocentric videos into short 5-second video clips. To approximate head motion, we calculated the Euclidean distance between the first frame and the last frame of the video clip at the pixel level and normalized the Euclidean distance by the total number of pixels on each frame ( ). We only considered video clips if the normalized Euclidean distance between the first frame and the last frame was ≤ 0.4.
The field of view of the camera capturing the egocentric videos was limited to 46 × 60 dva while the field of view for human eyes is at least 120 dva. Thus, we could have cases when the eye tracking data goes beyond the size of the video frame, leading to missing fixations in some video frames. Missing eye tracking data could also arise as a consequence of large head rotations. The coordination between head and gaze movements results in an early movement of eye gazes to the anticipated direction of what subjects intend to look at before the head rotates such that subjects can re-position the object of interest in the center of the field of view [ ]. Therefore, in addition to the constraint based on the normalized Euclidian distance, we also discarded from analyses those video clips with more than 14 consecutive frames with missing fixations. Fourteen consecutive frames at 24 frames per second corresponds to about 3 fixations. For the rest of the video clips with fewer missing fixations, we performed linear interpolation to estimate eye positions in frames with missing data. After all these pre-filtering steps, we ended up with 8,468 video clips in the cooking egocentric videos ( ) and 1,186 clips in the visual search egocentric videos ( ). Despite these efforts to remove large head motion, we could still have video clips with small head movements, which would lead to inaccurate analyses of return fixations. Therefore, for the egocentric videos, we relaxed the threshold in the definition of return fixations to 1.5 dva overlap, instead of 1 dva overlap as used in all the other datasets.

## Evaluation of object recognition during visual search
During visual search, subjects can fixate on the target object without realizing that they have found the target and continue searching (there are multiple examples of this phenomenon and discussion in reference [ ]). We refer to these cases of missing the targets as “false negatives” in visual recognition ( ). To compute the false negative rate for humans, we counted the total number of fixations on the targets without mouse clicks and divided it by the total number of fixations for all the trials ( ).
Conversely, there could also be cases when humans are not looking at the target but rather they are fixating on a distractor; yet, they misclassify the distractor as the target by clicking the mouse at the wrong location. We refer to these failure cases as “false positives”. We computed the false positive rate as the number of trials when false clicks happen within that trial, normalized by the total number of trials ( ).
In the object array experiments, subjects were not asked to click the target location with the mouse and therefore we cannot compute false positives or false negatives. Thus, we only reported false positive and false negative rates in the Visual Search 2 and 3 datasets (natural images and Waldo). The model similarly makes false positives and false negatives, also reported in ( ).

## Evaluation of return fixation properties
Definition of return fixations: A fixation location was considered to be a return fixation if it was within one degree of visual angle (dva) of a previous fixation location (Figs and ). One dva is approximately the resolution of the eye tracking data in the experiments reported here. The original fixation is referred to as a to-be-revisited location. All other fixations are referred to as non-return locations. This definition is consistent with criteria previously used in the literature (e.g., [ ]). In the egocentric video datasets ( ), we relaxed the degree of overlap to 1.5 dva to account for the alignment imprecision introduced by potential head movements.
Throughout the manuscript we used 1 dva as the criterion threshold to define a location as a return fixation and 1.5 dva in egocentric videos (Figs and ). To assess the robustness of the results to this definition, we repeated all the analyses using a threshold of 2 dva, 3 dva, or 4 dva ( ). The qualitative conclusions about the patterns of return fixations in humans, monkeys, and the model are not changed with different thresholds. The quantitative values do change; for example, trivially, the proportion of return fixations increases dramatically as the radius is enlarged. Moreover, there is an even better model-experiment consistency when using larger thresholds ( ). We keep the definition of 1 dva because this is approximately the resolution of the eye tracker, therefore providing a good reference to indicate that two fixations actually correspond to the same location.
Proportion of return fixations: The proportion of return fixations is defined as the number of return fixations normalized by the total number of fixations in each trial. reports the proportion of return fixations for every subject and reports the proportion of return fixations for the model. In the visual search tasks, we further divided the return fixations based on whether they landed on the target objects or non-target locations ( ). The proportion of return fixations at target locations was calculated as the number of on-target return fixations divided by the total number of on-target fixations per trial. Similarly, we calculated the proportion of non-target return fixations. We omitted the division of on-target and non-target return fixations on the egocentric visual search dataset because of the lack of annotations of target object locations in each video frame.
Return offset: The return offset was defined as the number of intervening fixations in between a to-be-revisited location and a return fixation. For example, in the return offset between to-be-revisited location 3 and return fixation 6 is 2. shows the distributions of return offsets for all experiments and shows the corresponding distributions for the model.
Saliency: To study whether return fixations correlate with saliency, we evaluated saliency maps using Graph-based Visual Saliency (GBVS), which is a bottom-up saliency prediction algorithm in computer vision using low-level visual features, such as color, orientation, and contrast [ ]. We computed the average of all saliency values for each fixation patch, defined as a squared region covering one dva and centered at the fixation location. shows saliency for all the experiments and shows saliency for the model.
In the case of egocentric videos, it is not justifiable to establish a one-to-one mapping from an extracted fixation (lasting approximately 250 ms) to a single video frame (about 42 ms, 24Hz video frame rate). The fact that one fixaiton involves many frames implies the need for further assumptions to calculate the saliency value for a fixation. Assuming that we have little head motion for the selected video clips, we approximated the saliency value for a fixation by projecting all the fixations within a video clip back to the last frame, and computed saliency using GBVS on the last frame.
Mouse clicks: In the Visual Search 2 and Visual Search 3 experiments, subjects were asked to use the mouse to click on the location of the target. We asked whether there were additional return fixations at the end of each trial which were related to this testing procedure. For example, subjects may find the target, then look for the mouse position, and then make a second saccade to the target. We conducted two additional analyses to evaluate this possibility. First, if subjects look back for the mouse pointer, the fixation preceding the return fixations should overlap with the mouse pointer location. Subjects were instructed not to move the mouse during visual search, except when the target was found at the end of the trial. We computed the proportion of fixations preceding return fixations that overlapped with the mouse pointer location with respect to the total number of return fixations in both experiments. There were only 1.5% and 1.3% of preceding return fixations overlapping with mouse pointer locations in the Visual Search 2 and 3 experiments, respectively. Second, to further quantify the effect of looking for mouse pointers, we examined the first 6 fixations in each trial ( ). In both experiments, it took subjects much more than 6 fixations to find the target [ ]. During the initial 6 fixations, it is unlikely that the subjects were looking for the mouse pointer. During the first 6 fixations, the proportion of return fixations was significantly above chance in the Visual Search 2 experiment, but not in the Visual Search 3 experiment. In sum, the presence of return fixations in the visual search experiment 1 (where subjects did not use the mouse), combined with the presence of return fixations during the first 6 fixations in the Visual Search 2 experiment, and together with the low fraction of return fixations where subjects look for the mouse pointer before making a return fixation, suggest that the majority of return fixations cannot be ascribed to subjects searching for the mouse pointer.

## Between-subject consistency in return fixation locations
To evaluate between-subject consistency ( and ), we performed the following steps: (1) we mapped all return fixations from all subjects on each image to a uniform 2D grid of size 32 by 40 ( ); (2) we computed the proportion of subjects that showed a return fixation at location l, with l = 1, …, 32 × 40; (3) computed the entropy H for this distribution over L locations using the following equation:
 H(L)=-∑l=132×40pllog(pl)
(6)
For the entropy calculation, we took the following measures to avoid singularity and take into account sparsity. First, to avoid singularity where the probability value is 0, we set the 0 probability values to be 10−10. Second, to take into account the sparsity of the fixation positions, we applied Gaussian blur on the 2D histogram to soften the probabilistic distribution.
An extreme case of perfect consistency would lead a probability of 1 at a given location and 0 elsewhere, leading to minimal entropy, whereas a complete lack of consistency would lead to an approximately uniform probability distribution except for random overlaps, resulting in high entropy. We omitted this analysis in the egocentric video datasets because the field of view in each frame could be different across subjects, making comparisons difficult to interpret.

## Model-subject consistency in return fixation locations
To evaluate the model-subject consistency in — , we introduced the Similarity Index (SI) for each property per experiment:
 SI=1-(S-M)/(S+M)
(7)
where S and M are the property values of the average subject (S) and the model (M), respectively. The property value refers to the proportion of return fixations ( ), return offset ( ), saccade size ( ), saliency values ( ), and turning angles ( ). If a model follows the return fixation patterns of primates for a given experiment, it will have a high Similarity Index.

## Statistical analyses
In each experiment, we calculated the average for each subject and performed statistical analyses across subjects using two-tailed t-tests (Figs , and , and ). For the model, two-tailed t-tests were computed across fixations for all properties, except for the proportion of return fixations in which statistical significance was determined using bootstrapping (resampling with replacement) with 1000 resamples. These methods were used to evaluate differences between conditions and also to compare experimental results against chance levels.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## Proportion of fixations that revisit the same location twice.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Fig

## Extraction of fixations on egocentric videos.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Fig

## Proportion of return fixations among the first six fixations.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Fig

## Return fixations are consistent across subjects.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S5 Fig

## Example of return fixation consistency across subjects.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S6 Fig

## Distribution of saccade sizes.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S7 Fig

## Saccade sizes and angles for primates.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S8 Fig

## Return and non-return fixation locations.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S9 Fig

## Calculation of bottom-up saliency map, target similarity map, and recognition map in the computational model.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S10 Fig

## Memory decay function and 2D empirical distribution of saccade sizes.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S11 Fig

## Visualization examples of attention maps for the model.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S12 Fig

## Example return fixations in model predictions.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S13 Fig

## The model makes more return fixations at target locations than non-target locations in visual search.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S14 Fig

## The model makes shorter saccades at return fixations than non-return fixations.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S15 Fig

## Saccade sizes and turning angles for the model.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S16 Fig

## Model ablations reveal critical model components.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S17 Fig

## Effect of model ablations on return offset.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S18 Fig

## Effect of model ablations on saccade size distribution.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S19 Fig

## Effect of model ablations on turning angles.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S20 Fig

## Effect of model ablations on saliency at fixated locations.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S21 Fig

## False negative and positive rates for humans and the model in Visual Search 2 on natural images (A) and in Visual Search 3 on Waldo images (B).
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S22 Fig

## Effect of threshold to define return fixations.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S23 Fig

## Primates and our model tend to make longer saccades with larger turning angles.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S24 Fig

## Return fixation durations are longer for target compared to non-target locations.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.

We thank Jeremy Wolfe for helpful discussions and advice, Pranav Misra for help with the datasets, Yin Li, Miao Liu and Keng Teck Ma for helping with the egocentric video datasets. We thank the BPRC, Rijswijk, The Netherlands, for providing images for our study.
 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010654.r001Decision Letter 0
EinhäuserWolfgangSection EditorFaisalAldo AAcademic Editor© 2022 Einhäuser, Faisal2022Einhäuser, Faisalhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0

## Transfer Alert
This paper was transferred from another journal. As a result, its full editorial history (including decision letters, peer reviews and author responses) may not be present.

30 Jan 2022

Dear Prof. Kreiman,
Thank you very much for submitting your manuscript "Look twice: balancing exploration and exploitation in eye movements" for consideration at PLOS Computational Biology.
As with all papers reviewed by the journal, your manuscript was reviewed by members of the editorial board and by several independent reviewers. In light of the reviews (below this email), we would like to invite the resubmission of a very significantly-revised version that takes into account the reviewers' comments. I note that we see this in light of the reviewers comments as substantial effort is required as concerns extend as far as the presence of sufficient innovation and relevance.
We cannot make any decision about publication until we have seen the revised manuscript and your response to the reviewers' comments. Your revised manuscript is also likely to be sent to reviewers for further evaluation.
When you are ready to resubmit, please upload the following:
[1] A letter containing a detailed list of your responses to the review comments and a description of the changes you have made in the manuscript. Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.
[2] Two versions of the revised manuscript: one with either highlights or tracked changes denoting where the text has been changed; the other a clean version (uploaded as the manuscript file).
Important additional instructions are given below your reviewer comments.
Please prepare and submit your revised manuscript within 60 days. If you anticipate any delay, please let us know the expected resubmission date by replying to this email. Please note that revised manuscripts received after the 60-day due date may require evaluation and peer review similar to newly submitted manuscripts.
Thank you again for your submission. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive so far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Aldo A Faisal
Associate Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
Wolfgang Einhäuser
Deputy Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
***********************
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Authors:

Please note here if the review is uploaded as an attachment.

Reviewer #1: Zhang et al. 2021
In this report, Zhang et al. provide both a detailed empirical description of and computational model of return fixations in humans and monkeys across a variety of visual tasks. The authors show that return fixations are quite common and not unique to specific stimulus configuration or task instructions. They show that a model of visual processing, which incorporates stimulus salience, task relevance of features, along with working memory and constraints on eye movements can produce fixation sequences that also predict that return fixations would also occur. Together, the authors suggest that return fixations can be considered in a framework related to the balance between exploration and exploitation.
In general, I found the paper to be well written and to provide a comprehensive study of the phenomenon of "return fixations". To the extent that the paper's aim is to demonstrate the ubiquity of these I think it succeeds. I do have concerns that in the present form that the modeling component does not add as much to the story as it could. In particular, despite the clear methodological description of the model itself in the latter parts of the manuscript, the impact of the model in terms of providing key insights or conceptual advances is modest. Tied to this concern is the potentially interesting connection to "explore and exploit". But here again, I expected the model to make particular predictions about this balance. Instead, from my reading, the model is essentially used to show that a combination of constraints (admittedly including some elements not present in basic saliency models) would predict that return fixations should occur. But again there seem to be no real key insights about what the model predicts about behavior more generally. I think the paper falls somewhere between an empirical paper and a computational paper, but doesn't effectively merge these as well as it potentially could.
From the Introduction, I think it would be helpful to include some "significance" to the last paragraph. The authors write: "We show that both monkeys and humans make frequent return fixations with few intervening saccades, especially but not exclusively during visual search..." And then they say that they want to "gain insights into the mechanisms", they look to their refined model. But what are the key takeaway insights? Are there ways to characterize optimal return fixations proportions based on parameters of the model or manipulation the likelihood of their occurrence? If subjects were guided to slow down their eye movements, e.g., would this reduce the proportion of return fixations observed?
As an example of a question that seems appropriate for the model to address, and for which the empirical data might provide guidance, would be the degree to which different parameters could effect the likelihood of return saccades. In particular, it seems like the memory component in the model is one place the authors might consider including the possibility that the prior location doesn't effectively get added into the memory. As opposed to a global decay, is it not plausible that specific locations fail to get added (perhaps as a function of something else, like stimulus complexity or fixation duration). In any case, while I can't say I have specific hypotheses about the relative contributions of the target similarity factor or the memory decay, it would make the inclusion of the model stronger if it did more than predict that inclusion of the extra terms led to return saccades.
Regarding the model fit, the assessment of the quality of the model fit seems a bit arbitrary. For example, in Figure S10 the caption reads "The distribution of saccade sizes in the model matches the one from humans and monkeys", but the first in 2-6 don't seem good at all (and the distribution in 1 is highly unusual?). In any case, the loose use of the term "matches" would seem to undermine the inclusion of the model as anything more than a vague proof of concept.
I think the comparison of return fixations across task is a positive, but I'm a little confused about how to think about return fixations in a dynamic video? As an extreme case, would we be surprised to show that drivers make return fixations when driving (as they repeated look at the controls on the dash?). The cooking video would seem to fall into this camp.
There is also a missed opportunity to consider the dynamics of this process, which seems so critical to this problem (this is noted by the authors on page 9). In the Introduction, the suggestion is made that "return fixations could constitute a useful strategy during visual search, especially in difficult tasks" (p. 3) but it's not clear that "useful strategy" is the best term here? It seems like the issue is more of a mismatch between fixation duration and the inability to extract relevant information in time, so the system is required to overcome these misses? It may be a semantic thing, but does seem to highlight the possibility of exploring how the proportion of return saccades depends on saccade rate.
Specific comments
Analysis: It's not clear what the authors are actually comparing in the reported statistical tests (I do see the short description on page 21). For example, on page 3: "the proportion of return fixations was higher than expected by a null model implementing random eye movements while respecting the distribution of saccade sizes (p < 10�15, two-tailed t-test, t < �16, df = 1, 598, Methods)". Where are these degrees of freedom coming from and is a t-test really appropriate here? For these analyses it seems like all fixations are just collated into a single large analysis. I would have thought a more appropriate analysis would have been to use each subject's average as a datapoint? To that end, the bar charts in Fig 3 (and S1, S2, and S4) could be composed on single points from each subject, which would provide a more robust analysis of these data, demonstrating that all subjects make return saccades (which I suspect is the case).
Methods: why is the eye tracker introduced in the "Human free viewing" section and not the "Visual search on static images" above?
Methods: The choice of 1dva for defining a return saccade seems reasonable, but as this entire paper depends on this parameter, it would have been nice to see that the entire analysis pipeline would lead to the same conclusions with different choices for this value.
p. 8 "oculomotor" is misspelled "occulomotor"
Reviewer #2: The manuscript describes experimental and modeling studies on return fixations during eight image (or movie) exploration/search tasks.
The choice between fixating new locations and returning to an old fixation location is conceptualized as a trade-off between
exploration of new information and exploitation of previously encountered, but potentially uncertain information. While this trade-off
makes intutitve sense, the manuscript does not present compelling evidence for it. Instead, fixation locations in the different tasks are
compared to a null model of random fixations. It is found that fixations are not random, which is unsurprising. Furthermore, even when there is
no explicit incentive to return to a previously fixated location in the free-viewing tasks, return fixations are still abundant (page 3, 'return fixations are ubiquitous'), which seems to contradict the exploration/exploitation trade-off explanation. Further results are the consistency of the return fixations across subjects, the more frequent returns to salient locations, and locations similar to the target in the search tasks.
These observations inspire an image-computational model, which is the most interesting and novel aspect of the manuscript in my opinion. Feature maps are computed with a pre-trained 'vental stream' model (VGG-16). These feature maps are used to compute a saliency map and a similarity map (in case of the search tasks). Furthermore, to incorporate IOR a memory map is added to the model, which makes the return to a very recently added location unlikely. Additionally, a 'saccade size constrain' map ensures that the generated saccades match observations without having to implement a complete oculomotor system. While there are plenty of attention models based on saliency and task-relevant information, the addition of a memory map and saccadic size constraints constitutes a novelty, whose importance to the field could be appreciated even more if it was more rigorously evaluated.
Major comments:
- The idea of viewing novel vs. return fixations as 'exploration vs. exploitation' is interesting, but I was not able to find compelling evidence for this distinction in the experiments or the model. On the experimental side, I would have expected reward manipulations to demonstrate that return fixations are indeed exploitative. On the modeling side, a reinforcement learning component to the model might have helped in substantiating this claim. I would like to ask the authors to add data/models to this end, or reconsider the metaphor.
- The model deserves more quantitative evaluation before it can be considered for publication. As the authors themselves point out, more relevant null models than a random fixation model could be easily constructed from the computational model, e.g. by removing the memory map and/or the target similarity map. Quantitative model comparison scores for relevant aspects of the paper (Hit rates, return offsets etc.) between humans/monkey and model should then be computed, to demonstrate the benefit of the proposed model architecture over standard saliency models.
Reviewer #3: Review on “Look twice: balancing exploration and exploitation in eye movements” by Zhang et al.
Overall evaluation
The manuscript investigates return fixations in scene viewing and visual search across tasks and species. Results are interpreted from the perspective of exploration vs. exploitation. In the modeling part, an activation-map based framework is proposed which uses concepts of attention, memory decay, and inhibition of return. While implemented as a numerical model, the current modeling work is on a qualitative level to demonstrate basic properties of return fixations. I am in favor of the manuscript which clearly adds to the literature, the innovation, however, is rather limited when compared to previous experimental as well as modeling work. Critically, the reader might want to see more analysis of data and model as well as statistical model inference in a computational biology journal.
Comments
1) Abstract: The most important topic of the abstract, return fixations, has been studied intensely before, across series of experiments. What should be highlighted in the abstract are the new aspects, i.e., the experiments across tasks and species. Also, the computational model rather preliminary in its current form and some aspects lag behind already published work.
2) p. 2: Attention and IOR maps: Dynamical activation-based maps have been proposed as a biologically-inspired modeling framework before (SceneWalk model), published first by Engbert et al. (2015, Journal Vision), with likelihood-based parameter inference by Schütt et al. (2017, Psychological Review), and most recently in an advanced version with attentional processes around the time of saccade and fully Bayesian inference by Schwetlick et al. (2020, Communications Biology). I understand that there are differences between theses previous works and the current work, however, these previous papers should be discussed and compare with the current model. Also, I feel that a numerically implemented model w/o statistical parameter inference might be difficult to publish in a computational biology journal.
3) p. 2: Exploration vs. exploitation: The author should make clear that the paper by Malem-Shinitski et al. [11] tried to build a model within the same framework.
4) p.2: In the last paragraph, the author discuss the new aspects of the manuscript, related to generalizations across tasks and species. I recommend to extend this part throughout the manuscript, but I have questions related to data quality and number of experimental subjects below.
5) Results: A general comment on the Results is that little citations are given here; the author condensed almost all references to the introduction, however, in such a format, the details of the previous studies cannot be related to the specific results discussed here. So, while I am aware that Results is not Discussion, the reader needs more comparisons to previous work in the Results as well to appreciate the findings.
6) p. 3: Return fixations are ubiquitous: The basic finding reported in this part is not new, which should be explained to the reader. The comparison between species and tasks should be addressed more deeply.
7) p. 5: Subjects promptly revisit return fixations: I am not convinced about the interindividual differences results, which should be addressed in a statistically adequate way (e.g., linear-mixed effects modeling with task and subject as random factors to provide statistical evidence for stability of individual viewing behaviors).
8) p. 5: The authors state that there was “no consistent relationship between the duration of the to-be-revisited fixation and non-return fixation.” One would see a bit more details in this direction. For example, Schwetlick et al. (2020, Communications Biology, Fig. 5 + 6) demonstrate that there is systematic relation between turn angles and saccade amplitude as well as fixation durations. This has implications for the modeling part as well (see my next point).
9) p. 7: A computational model: Because of the complex coupling between fixation durations and saccade amplitudes to saccadic turning angle, the proposed model should be investigated with respect to such statistics. Even if the author would like to stay at a qualitative level (which is OK with me), a model that cannot reproduced basic statistics such as the distribution of turning angle would not be acceptable when it is used as a qualitative tool to explain return fixations.
10) p. 8: The assumption that of constant acuity over the entire visual field is hard to accept in a biologically inspired model (see also last para of the Discussion on p. 11). Other papers (e.g., on the SceneWalk model) try to implement limited attention by a Gaussian attentional aperture, which naturally explains the saccade-size distributions. The arbitrary assumption of a fixed Gamma-type distributed should be avoided. Also, the author should visualize the saccade-size distribution of the model in comparison to the experimental data. I think the idea that oculomotor limitations [51, 52] provide the answer to this question is experimentally falsified, at least this is no longer a theoretically motivated argument.
11) p. 10: “… has very few parameters”: I agree, but this is precisely the reason why one would believe that statistical parameter inference is possible and should be investigated. Important questions are related to this point, e.g., the question whether the model could explain interindividual differences via parameter variation.
12) p. 11: “return fixations showed longer fixation durations”. See also Rothkegel et al. (2019, Scientific Reports, Fig. 7C). The bottom line from my comments is that the reader needs more details/visualizations/analyses on the data and model output to understand the results.
13) Methods: The presentation times were quite different across the different experiments. I would be surprised if this does not have an impact on the results. Please comment based on additional analyses.
14) p. 13: The use of a 30 Hz eye tracker with low spatial resolution is possible, however, role of smaller saccades will not be addressed in this case. Here, the main sequence and overall saccade amplitude distribution should be plotted and investigated to emphasize the reliability of the results.
15) p. 16: The Gaussian in Eq. (4) needs a negative exponent.
Typos:
- “occulomotor” throughout the manuscript
EOF
**********

Have the authors made all data and (if applicable) computational code underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?

The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data and code underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data and code should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data or code —e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No

Figure Files:

While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org.

Data Requirements:

Please note that, as a condition of publication, PLOS' data policy requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions outlined in your manuscript. Data must be deposited in an appropriate repository, included within the body of the manuscript, or uploaded as supporting information. This includes all numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.. For an example in PLOS Biology see here: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5.

Reproducibility:

To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010654.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
9 Jun 2022

AttachmentSubmitted filename: CompBio_ReviewPointByPoint.pdf
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010654.r003Decision Letter 1
EinhäuserWolfgangSection EditorFaisalAldo AAcademic Editor© 2022 Einhäuser, Faisal2022Einhäuser, Faisalhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
10 Aug 2022

Dear Prof. Kreiman,
Thank you very much for submitting your manuscript "Look Twice: A Generalist Computational Model Predicts Return Fixations across Tasks and Species" for consideration at PLOS Computational Biology. As with all papers reviewed by the journal, your manuscript was reviewed by members of the editorial board and by several independent reviewers. The reviewers appreciated the attention to an important topic. Based on the remaining reviewer and discussions here, we are likely to accept this manuscript for publication, providing that you modify the manuscript according to the review recommendations. We believe the clarifications requested by the reviews will help strengthen the manuscript and should be possible to turn around in reasonable time.
 
Please prepare and submit your revised manuscript within 30 days. If you anticipate any delay, please let us know the expected resubmission date by replying to this email.
When you are ready to resubmit, please upload the following:
[1] A letter containing a detailed list of your responses to all review comments, and a description of the changes you have made in the manuscript. Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out
[2] Two versions of the revised manuscript: one with either highlights or tracked changes denoting where the text has been changed; the other a clean version (uploaded as the manuscript file).
Important additional instructions are given below your reviewer comments.
Thank you again for your submission to our journal. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive so far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Aldo A Faisal
Associate Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
Wolfgang Einhäuser
Deputy Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
***********************
A link appears below if there are any accompanying review attachments. If you believe any reviews to be missing, please contact ploscompbiol@plos.org immediately:
[LINK]
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Authors:

Please note here if the review is uploaded as an attachment.

Reviewer #1: In this revised ms, Zhang and colleagues have nicely addressed my primary concerns. In general I think the authors provide a broad set of convergent data highlighting properties of return fixations during visual search and scene viewing tasks in humans and monkeys. Their computational model, which naturally extends existing models for object processing and salience demonstrate that the inclusion of multiple maps with complementary functions (memory, salience, similarity) can lead to model performance that shares some of the properties found in real saccade data. In this way, the paper does a nice job of focusing on a problem that has not received extensive attention but which is part of real world vision. That said, the universal properties and the model configuration do not really provide novel or deep insights about the nature of return fixations. This is a result of the desire to look across multiple tasks that prevent detailed comparisons of controlled experimental manipulation and the desire to show that the simple combination of feature maps and the WTA architecture are enough to generate this pattern of behavior.
As indicated above, I am satisfied by the responses provided by the authors, as most of my comments were focused on considerations of aspects of the tasks or model that might be worth addressing in the introduction or discussion. These were addressed, and the "ablation" approach does address the relatively importance of the different modules. If there were one thing I think might still be missing in the general discussion of the model is the simplicity with which space is being treated. This makes sense for CNNs, where all the images can be magically aligned and the WTA operation is simple enough. Perhaps some comment about how this simplification has only the vaguest support from existing neuroscientific studies, as these maps appear to exist in some forms, but they are spread across different brain areas and the registration of space is hardly a solved problem.
While I think the paper make a valuable contribution and appreciate the effort put into the revision, I do have a couple of remaining issues/questions.
1. The authors suggest that they have set aside the explore/exploit viewpoint, but the idea is still introduced in 59ff and it's not really tied to anything that follows.
2. The ablation approach and the conclusions are highlighting on page 10, but all of the figures are buried in the supplementals. I'd think it might be worth somehow creating some figure that highlights the take home message from these and then referring to the supplemental data figures for the nitty gritty details? For the Null model, it is a little awkward that this couldn't be framed as a totally ablated model or put into this framework. I see the argument presented in 932ff, but it would seem more parsimonious to connect these.
3. There is also no main figure for the consistency analysis (181ff)?
4. 180 degree turns. It's not clear how this metric is not confounded by the "offset" measure. I still don't understand how a 1 offset return saccade doesn't, by definition, require a 180-turn?
5. Between subject consistency (1079ff): For the entropy metric are there enough data to make sure this measure can be made reliably? It seems like there will be many cells in the grid with very few points?
6. Figure 4: Return fixations tend to follow smaller saccades and last longer. First, given the figure caption, A and B (or the caption) could be reversed. But more critically, the duration argument is really driven by the search tasks, and it's not clear if the returns are to the to be found target so that the duration is more a function of the recognition part of the task and not really a "universal" property of return saccades?
Reviewer #2: The authors have done a good job of addressing my previous comments. The motivation, model evaluation and comparison to behavioral data are much clearer and compelling now than in the previous version
**********

Have the authors made all data and (if applicable) computational code underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?

The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data and code underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data and code should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data or code —e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes: Prof. Dominik Endres, PhD
Figure Files:
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org.
Data Requirements:
Please note that, as a condition of publication, PLOS' data policy requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions outlined in your manuscript. Data must be deposited in an appropriate repository, included within the body of the manuscript, or uploaded as supporting information. This includes all numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.. For an example in PLOS Biology see here: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5.
Reproducibility:
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
References:
Review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript.

If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.

10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010654.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
23 Aug 2022

AttachmentSubmitted filename: CompBio_ReviewPointByPoint_Round2.pdf
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010654.r005Decision Letter 2
EinhäuserWolfgangSection EditorFaisalAldo AAcademic Editor© 2022 Einhäuser, Faisal2022Einhäuser, Faisalhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
13 Oct 2022

Dear Prof. Kreiman,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'Look Twice: A Generalist Computational Model Predicts Return Fixations across Tasks and Species' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Computational Biology.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us now if you or your institution is planning to press release the article. All press must be co-ordinated with PLOS.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Computational Biology. 
Best regards,
Aldo A Faisal
Academic Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
Wolfgang Einhäuser
Section Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
Jason A. Papin
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Computational Biology
Feilim Mac Gabhann
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Computational Biology
***********************************************************
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Authors:

Please note here if the review is uploaded as an attachment.

Reviewer #1: The authors have addressed my few remaining comments in this latest revision. Congratulations on an interesting addition to the literature!
Reviewer #2: thanks for the revisions, I am happy with the paper as is.
**********

Have the authors made all data and (if applicable) computational code underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?

The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data and code underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data and code should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data or code —e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes: Dominik M Endres
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010654.r006Acceptance letter
EinhäuserWolfgangSection EditorFaisalAldo AAcademic Editor© 2022 Einhäuser, Faisal2022Einhäuser, Faisalhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
7 Nov 2022

PCOMPBIOL-D-21-01364R2 
Look Twice: A Generalist Computational Model Predicts Return Fixations across Tasks and Species
Dear Dr Kreiman,
I am pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Computational Biology. Your manuscript is now with our production department and you will be notified of the publication date in due course.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. 
Soon after your final files are uploaded, unless you have opted out, the early version of your manuscript will be published online. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
Thank you again for supporting PLOS Computational Biology and open-access publishing. We are looking forward to publishing your work! 
With kind regards,
Anita Estes
PLOS Computational Biology | Carlyle House, Carlyle Road, Cambridge CB4 3DN | United Kingdom ploscompbiol@plos.org | Phone +44 (0) 1223-442824 | ploscompbiol.org | @PLOSCompBiol