3829phesageBuilding Services Engineering Research & TechnologyBuild Serv Eng Res TechnolPMC9760526976052697605263860325410.1177/01436244221137995Measurement and rapid assessment of indoor air quality at mass
gathering events to assess ventilation performance and reduce aerosol
transmission of SARS-CoV-2
Malki-EpshteinLiora AdzicFilipa RobertsBen M HathwayElizabeth Abigail IddonChristopher MustafaMurat CookMalcolm DwyerTimRaslanRokia1Department of Civil, Environmental
and Geomatic Engineering, University College
London, London, UK2Building Energy Research Group, Loughborough University, Loughborough, UK3Department of Civil and Structural
Engineering, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK4University of
Nottingham, Nottingham, UK5University of the West of
England, Bristol, UK✉Liora Malki-Epshtein, Department of Civil,
Environmental and Geomatic Engineering, University College London, Chadwick
Building, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK. Email:
l.malki-epshtein@ucl.ac.uk
16122022442113113–13319122022© The Author(s) 2022This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) which permits
any use, reproduction and distribution of the work without further
permission provided the original work is attributed as specified on the SAGE
and Open Access page (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).

## Abstract
To assess risk factors for COVID-19 transmission and address the closure of mass
gathering events since March 2020, the UK Government ran the Events Research
Programme (ERP), following which it reopened live events in sports, music, and
culture in July 2021. We report the rapid post-occupancy evaluation of Indoor
Air Quality (IAQ) and associated long-range airborne transmission risk conducted
in the Environmental Study of the ERP. Ten large venues around the UK were
monitored with CO2 sensors at a high spatial and temporal resolution
during 90 events. An IAQ Index based on CO2 concentration was
developed, and all monitored spaces were classified in bands from A to G based
on their average and maximum CO2 concentrations from all events. High
resolution monitoring and the IAQ Index depicted the overall state of
ventilation at live events, and allowed identification of issues with
ventilation effectiveness and distribution, and of spaces with poor ventilation
and the settings in which long-range airborne transmission risk may be
increased. In numerous settings, CO2 concentrations were found to
follow patterns relating to event management and specific occupancy of spaces
around the venues. Good ventilation was observed in 90% of spaces monitored for
given occupancies.
Practical applications: High-resolution monitoring
of indoor CO2 concentrations is necessary to detect the spatial
variation of indoor air quality (IAQ) in large mass gathering event venues. The
paper summarises COVID-19 ventilation guidance for buildings and defines a
methodology for measurement and rapid assessment of IAQ during occupancy at live
events that can be implemented by venue managers. Comparisons of the
CO2 concentrations measured during the events identified the
spaces at high risk of long-range transmission of airborne pathogens. Building
operators should be mindful of the ventilation strategies used relative to the
total occupancy in different spaces and the occupant’s activities.
Keywords: COVID-19, indoor air quality, post-occupancy, CO2 monitoring, infection control

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoIssue date 2023 Mar.

## Introduction
In the course of the COVID-19 pandemic, there was a need for guidance on the
operation of large buildings during mass gathering events to limit the transmission
of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2); this guidance
remains necessary, still, to mitigate against future outbreaks. This was a primary
concern due to several well publicised “super-spreading” events and after it was
shown that mass gathering events encouraged the spread of SARS-CoV-2 due to
crowding – 
and due to insufficient ventilation of uncontaminated air into the space. , However, knowledge of
ventilation provision and indoor air quality data from such buildings was limited
and previous studies usually did not address whether there was a risk due to lack of
ventilation. Mass gathering events, which might include music festivals, theatre
performances, and spectator sports, are places where large numbers of people will
come into close contact. As such, the suspension of mass gathering events was an
early pandemic mitigation measure and was considered especially useful before
pharmaceutical countermeasures, such as vaccines, were available. It is vital,
however, that mass gathering events are enabled, due to the positive contribution
they make to the economy and the mental wellbeing of the populace.
Some pathogens, such as SARS-CoV-2, SARS, MERS, rhinovirus, and
parainfluenza, are transmitted between people via airborne routes: either
long-range (virus-laden aerosols) or short-range (a combination of virus-laden
droplets and virus-laden aerosols), which emanate from the respiratory tract of
infected people. SARS-CoV-2 has been shown to remain viable in air
samples. , Aerosols, due to their small size and mass
(<50 µm) may stay suspended in the indoor air for several hours,
moving long distances throughout the space where they can be inhaled by room
occupants, before depositing or dispersing. 
Short-range airborne transmission occurs when an infector and susceptible person are
in close proximity (1–2 m). For susceptible people sharing air in a space with an
infector, long-range (i.e., beyond the range of 1–2 m) aerosol-based or, long-range
airborne, transmission is possible, and this is exacerbated by poor ventilation.
Ventilation, which introduces uncontaminated air into a space, is an important
mechanism to disperse and dilute the concentration of aerosols in the air and with
these, any potential airborne pathogens. There are several examples of
“super-spreading events” of transmission occurring in poorly ventilated indoor
environments, e.g., a restaurant, an apartment
building, and in a church hall. Provision of sufficient
ventilation is therefore a key long-range airborne transmission mitigation
measure. 
There have been a number of studies that have explored the correlation between
CO2 concentrations and exhaled breath and the risk of exposure to
airborne diseases and this paper does not attempt to review all of these. Notably,
Morawska et al. demonstrated that physiological processes such as breathing,
talking, and coughing produce large numbers of very small aerosols and larger
droplets in varying concentrations and Morawska and Milton speculated that these
aerosols may lead to transmission by inhalation. Rudnick and Milton proposed a
model of airborne infection transmission based on the rebreathed fraction, the
fraction of inhaled air that has been exhaled previously by someone in the building,
using CO2 concentration. They considered CO2 concentrations
above outdoor values as a surrogate for exhaled breath, and thus as a marker for
exhaled breath exposure, because most buildings do not contain other indoor sources
of CO2. An attempt to correlate CO2 to aerosols experimentally
in a real-world scenario relevant to the events sector was made by Schade et
al., who attempted to correlate aerosol dispersion and
CO2 concentrations produced by a mannequin “breathing” realistically
in an empty concert hall and have found some correlation between the two parameters,
under a specific ventilation regime of 3 air changes per hour. However, this and
similar studies normally only address a single infector in a single-person occupied
space. In a realistic situation where there are multiple people exhaling
CO2 and possibly only a handful of infected people present, the
CO2 concentrations would not be expected to correlate to virus-laden
aerosols in the same manner. Further studies are reviewed in our previous
paper. 
Some field studies have monitored indoor CO2 concentration during the
COVID-19 pandemic to assess ventilation effectiveness in a variety of building types
and sometimes attempted to assess actual transmission risk based on CO2
concentrations. Our previous paper, Adzic et al., reported on ventilation
effectiveness in theatres measured using high-resolution CO2 monitoring.
Vouriot et al. investigated the likelihood of transmission in school
environments by monitoring CO2 concentration in 45 classrooms in the UK
over several months, finding the risks to be higher in January compared with July.
Tang et al. 
used CO2 as a proxy for SARS-CoV-2 transmission risk in an office and
concluded that along with CO2 concentrations in the space, the occupants’
location and exposure time affects individual transmission risks, however, the
uncertainty in their infection risk assessment was not quantified. Jones et
al. 
developed a Relative Exposure Index (REI) which calculates the relative difference
in inhaled dose of a comparator and reference scenario enabling an estimate of
personal relative risk if sharing a scenario with an infector. As it is a relative
metric, the uncertainties in infector viral emission rate cancel, but it does not
give an indication of the absolute magnitude of the long-range transmission risk.
Many of the risk-based models assume well-mixed spaces and therefore high-resolution
CO2 monitoring in large spaces can be a valuable tool in identifying
the distribution of risk.
There are limitations to attempts to link transmission risk based on ventilation
rates directly to levels of CO2 concentrations and this is an intractable
problem, however monitoring CO2 remains the most pragmatic and rapid
method of assessing ventilation effectiveness in real-world occupied buildings and
identifying spaces that pose a higher risk. The Scientific Advisory Group for
Emergencies-Environmental Modelling Group (SAGE-EMG) and the Independent Scientific
Pandemic Insights Group on Behaviours (SPI-B), both of which are scientific advisory
groups for the UK Government, emphasised the importance of ventilation and
CO2 monitoring during the pandemic and made a series of
recommendations for guideline CO2 concentrations. , Although not
a direct quantitative indicator of SARS-CoV-2 transmission risk, CO2 is
in exhaled breath and is an effective proxy for occupancy relative to the
levels of ventilation, a parameter that does relate to the risk of
long-range aerosol transmission in indoor spaces. 
In 2020, the UK Government suspended all culture, sports, music, and entertainment
events. One year later, the UK Government ran the Events Research
Programme (ERP). The ERP is, to date, the largest research programme of its kind
worldwide. It aimed to explore how mass gathering events could reopen
post-COVID-19 by conducting a series of pilot events from April to June
2021. Events were run under realistic pre-pandemic conditions, e.g.,
mask-wearing and physical distancing were not required. During the events, an
evidence base was gathered to understand the influencing factors in SARS-CoV-2
transmission and how to minimise these. Other studies of events were conducted at
similar times in other countries, but not on the same scale or with the same
realistic conditions, i.e., most were “staged” events without normal attendees, or
were retrospective studies (e.g. , ).
Examples include an indoor music concert in Germany which used a series of
experimental “staged” events with three different hygiene and crowd movement
strategies to examine the number of close contacts made between attendees, and CFD
simulations to investigate the effect of ventilation on aerosol
transmission. The study highlighted the importance of adequate
ventilation, however, the actual indoor air quality during the three experimental
events was not measured. An indoor music concert in Barcelona, Spain, was monitored
in December 2020 and found that rapid antigen tests were a suitable SARS-CoV-2
transmission prevention strategy alongside adequate ventilation and mask-wearing by
attendees. 
The ERP Environmental Study examined the risk of long-range airborne transmission
indoors based on indicators of indoor air quality. CO2, an indicator of
potentially poor ventilation, was monitored as a proxy for exhaled breath and
exhaled aerosols that potentially contain virus particles, at numerous locations
throughout the venues of the study. The study evaluated the ventilation relative to
crowd density and long-range airborne transmission risks at ten indoor and hybrid
indoor/outdoor venues of different types, functions, sizes, and layouts. The
following paper and our previous papers , present the methodology that
was developed, for rapid, high-resolution measurement of indoor air quality (IAQ)
during live mass gathering events in large venues and provides evidence-based
information on some factors for building operators to consider, to limit the
airborne transmission of SARS-CoV-2 and other airborne viruses. To the author’s
knowledge, there was no previous published research around the world that presented
significant IAQ data from mass gathering live events, during normal operations, so
it had previously been difficult to create formal guidance on how venue ventilation
schemes should be operated to maintain an acceptable level of transmission risk. The
findings of the ERP Environmental study enabled such guidance to be produced for the
sector and ultimately influenced Government policy around the scale and timing of
reopening mass gathering events. , Therefore, the UK Government
ERP Environmental study represents a uniquely valuable field trial presenting
evidence on IAQ during realistic building operations. This, and the rest of the
evidence generated from the ERP, enabled most events to return to normal operations
on 19 July 2021, having been closed since March 2020.
The following paper reports on the Environmental Study of the ERP. We begin by
reviewing ventilation guidance for COVID mitigation, describe the methods of the
study which include CO2 monitoring, classification of spaces and
development of an IAQ Index with bands between A to G, and list all the events
monitored by the study. We report results of the overall air quality at all events,
the variability in different spaces around large venues, and identify types of
spaces that are prone to poorer IAQ. We report on the impacts of occupancy,
distribution of ventilation systems and discuss ventilation strategies found around
the various venues, reporting results from settings such as theatres, nightclubs,
sports, and music arenas.

## COVID-19 ventilation guidance
The risk of disease transmission is highly variable depending on the infectiousness
of the infector, their aerosol-generating ability, aerosol generation activity, and
the susceptibility of people sharing the space. However, evidence from past
outbreaks and modelling work suggested that it is the very
poorly ventilated spaces that are at greater risk, and those spaces that are
ventilated to current UK building regulation standards pose a much lower risk of
transmission and hence it may be more pragmatic to focus on improving those spaces
that are at highest risk as the highest priority for interventions. , 
Approved Document F of the building regulations and CIBSE Guide A provide a
range of suggested airflows for various indoor space types that typically range from
5-10 L/s/person. These values originate from studies on occupant comfort to
“stuffiness” (the general release of bioeffluents from occupants), where it has been
determined that a high level of comfort in occupied spaces can be delivered with
8 L/s/person and therefore 10 L/s/person has often been chosen as a reasonable
figure to provide occupant comfort, whilst balancing the energy requirements to
deliver outside air. At the time of the ERP, many countries were recommending
CO2 concentrations of 800–1000 ppm (equivalent to 10–12 L/s/person)
as an appropriate target for ventilation rates. In the UK, guidance from SAGE-EMG
and CIBSE recommended that spaces with CO2 consistently above 1500 ppm
should be improved. , 
During the early months of the COVID-19 pandemic CIBSE, REHVA, and ASHRAE released
guidance to ensure that ventilation was improved in buildings as a means to reduce
the risk of infection transmission by long-range aerosols. – In particular, the CIBSE
COVID-19 Ventilation Guidance version 1 and version 2 recommended maximising the
ventilation rates but noting reasonable limits of occupant comfort. , These first
versions of the CIBSE COVID-19 Ventilation Guidance were written in the context of
spring and summer of a temperate climate, and in October 2020, version 4 of the
document adds more emphasis on reasonable over-ventilation considering occupant
thermal discomfort, humidity, and energy use in preparation for the autumn and
winter seasons. Version 4 recommended that the ventilation strategy should at
least achieve the equivalent minimum ventilation rate for the space over the
occupancy period as defined in current standards. This was the context of CIBSE
guidance at the time of the ERP.
In July 2021, version 5 of CIBSE COVID-19 Ventilation guidance contained more detail
on moderating energy demand and consideration of occupant comfort. As of
September 2022, ASHRAE guidance also recommended that at least required minimum
outdoor airflow rates for ventilation as specified by applicable codes and standards
are provided and maintained, as well as increasing
ventilation to 100% outdoor as conditions permit. REHVA version 4.1 general
advice is to supply as much outside air as reasonably possible, encouraging natural
ventilation window opening regimes even if it results in occupant thermal
discomfort. This version of the REHVA guidance has no specific mention of
considering the energy penalty of overventilation. COVID-19 ventilation guidance
documents that recommend minimum ventilation flow rates, as in current standards,
enable building operators to utilise the most relevant guidance for their building
scenarios. This could include recommended flow rates in CIBSE Guide A, ventilation
guidance in EN16798, ASHRAE 62 or local workplace
regulations e.g., regulation 6 in Workplace (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations
1992. For England and Wales, the HSE has provided an approved code of
practice and guidelines for meeting this requirement. 

## Methods
Exhaled breath accumulates due to insufficient ventilation, high occupancy of the
space (whether temporarily or consistently), or sometimes both factors. Thus,
CO2 concentrations indicate the fraction of the indoor air that has
been exhaled by its occupants. Room steady-state concentrations increase with the
number of occupants, their respiratory activity, and their body mass, and the rate
of removal is solely dependent upon the ventilation rate. Hence, the risk of
long-range airborne transmission was examined in this study, at numerous locations
in different venues, based on indicators of indoor air quality
(CO2), but without attempting to correlate risk
directly to CO2 values as this direct correlation is
impossible in the settings of live events with numerous occupants.

## Monitoring methods
The sensors used were Senseair Explora CO2, wireless, unobtrusive,
battery-powered loggers that monitor concentrations of CO2,
temperature (T), and relative humidity (RH). The sensors were installed in all
identified indoor spaces in the venues and in some sheltered outdoor spaces. At
a sampling interval of 2 min, the data logged was then encrypted and securely
transmitted wirelessly via LoRaWAN (Long Range Wide Area Network) to a 4G hub
from where data were sent to the cloud. The CO2 sensors in the
loggers were non-dispersive infrared (NDIR), capable of measuring within a range
of 400–5000 ppm at an accuracy of ±30 ppm (±3% of reading). These CO2
sensors have a built-in auto-calibration algorithm that tracks minimum
CO2 values over eight-day intervals and compares them to a
zero-point mark of 400 ppm. To ensure auto-calibration was reliable and there
were no CO2 data drifts, sensor baseline values were checked at times
when venues were unoccupied, at night, when CO2 readings are expected
to match outdoor levels. The minimum CO2 values during events
monitored were also checked for any unreliable data. The logged data was
accessed and downloaded from an online database and also viewed in real-time on
a dashboard. In total, 385 sensors were used in the study and the number of
sensors deployed at each venue is shown in . At the Download Festival
venue, the semi-outdoor nature of a large, circus-style tent meant that incoming
rain could damage the sensors and there was no suitable place for the 4G hub to
be connected to mains power. Therefore, battery-powered Hobo MX1102A sensors
(also NDIR CO2 sensors with accuracy ±50 ppm/±5% which logged
CO2, T and RH and stored data locally on the device) were used.
These were calibrated in outdoor air, away from sources of CO2 such
as busy roads, before installation and were otherwise operated identically to
the Senseair sensors and their data were analysed in the same way.
 Sensors were installed in numbers as appropriate to each venue and in
consideration of the geometry of the venue spaces, practical restrictions on
wall fittings, and the need to place them discreetly. Several loggers were
placed in each space, on walls at a height of 1.6–2.3 m, away from vents, doors,
or windows, and/or under auditoria seats, as appropriate. These heights were
chosen so as to be within the breathing zone, assuming that occupants would be
standing except in theatre auditoria, sports stadia seats, or in restaurants.
The Institute for Air Quality Management and CIBSE have recommended sensors
being placed within the breathing zone at heights of 1.1–1.7m. Sensor
height of 1.5 m from the floor is suggested in the British Standard. The
British Standard also suggests placing sensors 1–2 m from walls, although this
was not possible in many venues as there were limited alternative fixing points
aside from the backs of fixed chairs (in the theatre auditoria) and under guard
rails (in the Crucible Theatre), or on walls where there was the risk of the
sensors being tampered with by the attendees.
At the nightclub event, sensors were encased in cages with a large open grid to
prevent accidental or intentional interference by a large and unstructured
crowd. In some venues, sensors were placed higher from the floor to understand
if stratification of air was occurring in the space and to measure
CO2 concentration outside of the breathing zone, e.g., eight
sensors were placed at 2.7 m at the Bramley Moore Dock Warehouse, 12 sensors
were attached to the lighting gantries in the ACC auditorium, and two sensors
were placed at 5.6 m, attached to speakers suspended from the roof in the
Download Festival tent.
The number of devices depended on the size of the room but as a minimum rule, 1–2
sensors were used in every space, to provide redundancy. Depending on the space
size, either 1 to 4 sensors were placed, or up to 50 in a larger auditorium
space, to detect the spatial variation of ventilation effectiveness at
high-resolution. An example of this is shown in , which depicts one typical
installation at the Ascot Racecourse. The individual spaces monitored in this
section of the venue, a restaurant and three private boxes, are highlighted in
yellow and the sensors installed are marked on the drawing with red circles.
 

## Space classification
The first investigation found that ventilation strategies and space utilisation
varied widely across the venues, and the majority of venues were observed to
have a mixture of different spaces with different uses within them. For example,
an outdoor stadium will typically have indoor concession stands, private boxes,
bars, and toilets. Large venues have dedicated ingress and egress zones and
these sometimes also serve as unstructured standing-only food and drink areas,
or have shops and other concession stands in them, so some attendees may end up
spending substantial time in various areas of the venue even though these are
not officially designated as “spectator” zones. These types of spaces were often
found to become “pinch point” areas of high concentration and restricted flows
of both people and air, posing a higher risk for disease transmission from close
contacts, droplet inhalation, and/or poor air quality with risk of aerosol
transmission. Thus, all venues were divided into various spaces based on the
space classification system described in below, which classifies spaces
based on ventilation strategy, and usage by attendees, where “structured”
activities are more likely to involve allocated seating or event management
(e.g. sports event with allocated seating, or theatre event), and “unstructured”
events allow attendees to spend time throughout the venue as they prefer (e.g.,
race or music festival). In total, 179 individual spaces were monitored across
10 sports, music, and theatre venues, over 90 events ( ).
 Mechanically ventilated systems were identified at the O2 Arena, the ACC
Liverpool, The Grange festival auditorium, the Crucible Theatre, Piccadilly
Theatre, and Leeds Playhouse, some of which had installed or recently improved
modern mechanical ventilation systems in the spectator or social areas.
Mechanical ventilation was also in use at some restaurants at the Ascot
racecourse, and with some exceptions, in most of the indoor spaces and
restaurants at Wembley Stadium. It should be noted that although all venues were
allowed to operate at full capacity, this was not achieved during the ERP. Some
naturally ventilated systems were also identified, at Ascot, Wembley Stadium,
the Bramley Moore Dock Warehouse nightclub and Download Festival.

## Air quality classification and IAQ index
For the purpose of the ERP Environmental Study, it was assumed that all
CO2 present indoors above a standard baseline outdoor value of
400 ppm has been exhaled by people in the space. An international standard on
energy-efficient delivery of occupant comfort, BSEN16798, provided
4 levels of IAQ level of expectation based on occupancy ( ). The categories are related
to the level of expectations the occupants may have. A normal level for an
office space would be “Medium”. A higher level may be selected for occupants
with special needs (children, elderly, persons with disabilities, etc.). A lower
level will not provide any health risk but may decrease comfort and satisfaction
with the space. Interestingly this standard is also most likely referring to the
psychological discomfort of exposure to general bio-effluents from occupants,
rather than the emission of pathogens from occupants, and neither standard
considers the risk posed by poor ventilation, of exposure to indoor air
pollutants emitted from building materials and furnishings, or to the increased
risk of exposure to pathogens such as viruses and bacteria.
 Following from existing standards and COVID recommendations as outlined in
COVID-19 ventilation guidance above and following SAGE-EMG
recommendations, presents the Indoor Air Quality Bands from A to G that were
developed to form the basis for the analysis in this Environmental Study. For
each space, an average performance was determined based on the average (mean)
CO2 concentration for all events monitored in this space, where
the CO2 concentrations were only considered during occupied times in
the duration of an event, with the understanding that this represents
performance under various typical occupancy scenarios. For each space, the
maximum CO2 concentration recorded at all events was also identified,
usually occurring during times of maximum occupancy. The spaces were then
classified into Average and Maximum IAQ bands ( ).
 

## Results

## Overall air quality across the board: ERP Phases I, II & III
For mitigation of COVID-19, indoor spaces where aerosol-generating activities
occur (such as singing, aerobic activity or dancing) are encouraged to adopt a
ventilation strategy capable of maintaining CO2 values at or below
800 ppm, or, in the ERP Air Quality bands A or B. shows the spatial
CO2 average in given spaces calculated over the duration of
events. The study finds that across the board, in Phases I, II and III of the
ERP, average air quality was in bands A or B in 171 out of 179 monitored spaces,
at almost all venues ( ). Maximum CO2 values varied more than this: 10% of
spaces were in air quality in bands F to G at peak times and at peak
occupancies, the highest of which was found at a very large venue at around 75%
occupancy. Time series of the data for these spaces revealed that these peak
values were sometimes observed to persist for more than an hour or two, as will
be discussed in the next sections.
 

## Air quality distribution in large venues across different spaces
Results from the O2 Arena and Wembley Stadium events held on 11 May and 15 May
2021 respectively, with occupancy of about 20% venue capacity, are presented
below to illustrate the variation of average and maximum CO2
concentrations across a number of different spaces at the same event.
The O2 Arena is a multi-purpose arena located in South-East London, inside the O2
Centre complex.
Spectator areas in the O2 Arena are the stalls, level 1 and level 2 seating.
During the Brit Awards event, stalls were reserved for performing artists and
stage installations, so spectators had access to level 1 and level 2 seating in
the arena bowl, as well as concessions/bars in the arena concourse. The O2 has a
capacity of 20,000, and 3,312 attendees attended the Brit Awards event. For the
Brit Awards in the O2 Arena, 24 individual spaces were monitored, out of which
the majority were indoors and mechanically ventilated.
Wembley Stadium is located in Northwest London and has a capacity of 90,000, with
18,720 spectators attending the FA Cup Final event on the 15 May. Spectator
areas are stretched over five levels and are all outdoors. Although the main
activity areas of Wembley Stadium are outdoors, the majority of spaces such as
private boxes, restaurants, and bars are indoors, and their ventilation
strategies vary depending on the space. For the FA Cup Final at Wembley Stadium,
20 individual spaces were monitored.
In both venues, spaces monitored included main activity areas (spectator
seating), private boxes, standing and seated bars, concessions and restaurants,
dwelling areas and toilets, lifts, and corridors. highlights the main activity
areas where maximum CO2 concentrations never exceed 1000 ppm. This
was expected at Wembley Stadium, as the main activity areas are outdoors in the
stadium bowl and the average CO2 recorded is equivalent to the
outdoor levels of approximately 400 ppm. The O2 Arena, although being an indoor
space, had high ventilation rates in the seating area for the observed
occupancy. However, in the O2 Arena, increased average, and maximum
CO2 values were recorded in dwelling areas, bar concessions,
private boxes and toilets and stairwells. Similar observations were made from
monitoring Wembley Stadium bars, restaurants, boxes, and toilets.
 

## Types of spaces more prone to poor air quality
An example of spaces more prone to poor air quality are toilets, corridors,
lifts, stairwells which are normally not designed for high ventilation rates as
their occupancy is transient and low.
However, these spaces should be considered if long queues occur at events, as has
been found to be the case: in particular around women’s toilets in the O2 Arena,
as shown in above. In below, 23 toilets, corridors, lifts, and stairwell spaces
monitored in six different venues over 72 events, are shown in aggregate (as 385
individual episodes). Spatial average and maximum air quality bands over the
events duration were calculated and these are presented in terms of frequency of
occurrence. The average air quality in these small, enclosed spaces is most
frequently in A class (76%), but maximum air quality bands vary; these are most
frequently in B class (40%) and are often in bands D and above. To understand
this in further detail, an example is shown in of time-series for a single
toilet space from a high occupancy (almost full capacity) event at Wembley
Stadium in July 2021. The figure indicates very high concentrations of
CO2 persisting for an hour at a time, with sharp peaks and steep
decay rates. Moreover, CO2 values above 2000 ppm were observed for
46 minutes in total over the duration of the event. The longest continuous
interval of CO2 above 2000 ppm was recorded just before the event
started, and this lasted 36 minutes.
 

## The impact of occupancy, ventilation distribution and strategy
Results from the Crucible show clearly the impact of increasing occupancy on the
resulting CO2 ( ). The low occupancy (30%) events given in show values
of around 600 ppm. During higher occupancy ( ), the CO2
concentrations increase rapidly with the average peaking at >1000 ppm, then
reducing to around 900 ppm as demand-controlled ventilation increases. However,
the results demonstrate the space is not well mixed, with CO2
concentrations varying by nearly 400 ppm from the back row to the front of the
auditorium. The back row of the theatre peaks at nearly 1400 ppm and stays above
1000 ppm for the entire event in high occupancy events given in .
 The combination of a less effective ventilation strategy and high crowd density
(3,000 attendees per event but mostly clustered around a limited space within
the event venue) at the Bramley Moore Dock Warehouse nightclub events
contributed to the highest indoor CO2 concentrations observed in the
Events Research Programme pilots in Phase I. The nightclub events were hosted in
a unique venue: a 34,000 m3 Victorian-era warehouse. The building was
naturally ventilated via six large warehouse door openings (49 m2)
that were distributed along one side of the building at regular intervals. In
one half of the building there was a bar, at the other end there was a
dancefloor and stage. At the bar end, the three large openings were fully open.
At the dance floor end, the openings were restricted by metal shutters and
hanging vertical plastic strip curtains, “butchers screens”, to reduce noise
egress from the venue. However, this endeavour lowered the supply of ventilation
to the dancefloor. It was in this area that the crowd density was highest, due
to clustering of people around the stage. The activities of the crowd: singing,
dancing, shouting, etc., further increased the CO2 emission in this
area compared to the more sedentary behaviour of those standing at the bar.
For air quality class analysis, the nightclub was divided into four zones:
dancefloor (front), dancefloor (middle), dancefloor (rear), and bar ( ). The
dancefloor (front) was classified as AQ band E, but the maximum values were in
band G, compared to the air quality band target for ventilation of areas with
enhanced aerosol generation of band B. It is evident that where an event
attendee is located in the nightclub venue, modifies their exposure to exhaled
breath. Those at the front, near the stage, were exposed to CO2
concentrations at times 1624 ppm higher than those in the bar area, indicating
very poor ventilation, which significantly increases the risk of long-range
airborne pathogen transmission.
 Ventilation effectiveness, i.e., the ability for the incoming air to be
homogeneously distributed within the indoor space, was identified as poor in the
nightclub venue. By comparing the CO2 concentrations closest to and
furthest from the ventilation openings ( , dashed lines versus solid
lines) it can be observed that CO2 concentrations were generally
lower closest to the door, especially in the area closest to the stage
(dancefloor (front), compare sensor 164 and 167). This indicates that the
incoming outdoor air was particularly poorly distributed further from the door
area. The greatest difference was seen at the dancefloor (front) perhaps because
this is the door people were most frequently using (and opening the butchers
screens as they exited). This can also be seen at Event 2 ( ) where at 17:30, 18:30, and
20:30 (the points at which a DJ ended their set and a new one began) the
CO2 concentrations in the area close to the door decreased as
large numbers of people exited the venue to the outdoor area and in doing so
both increased the size of the ventilation openings and reduced the
CO2 emissions. Crucially, this reduction in CO2
concentration was not detected further from the door, which indicates that any
airborne pathogens in this area would not be diluted or removed due to the poor
ventilation effectiveness.

## Discussion

## IAQ index
The study developed a detailed IAQ Index that was used to classify spaces based
on both average and maximum values of CO2. For this study, there was
a need to rapidly investigate a large number of venues to provide an overall
indication of performance at a wide set of venues that broadly represented the
sector and identify the potential for long-range airborne transmission. The
detailed IAQ Index allowed a nuanced understanding of the levels of exhaled
breath that spectators or employees may be exposed to in different parts of
venues over the entire duration of an event, and also to detect variability in
the peak concentrations.

## Overall IAQ across the venues monitored
Overall, the spaces monitored had good average air quality in bands A or B,
consistent with CO2 concentrations below 800 ppm and with very good
ventilation for the spaces and the occupancies. The average air quality shown in
 was the
spatial average air quality, which is also a temporal average during the entire
event. Not all spaces were occupied at all times during the events, and this
means that the averages do not present the full picture, hence maximum air
quality bands helped identify spaces that had on occasion presented with high
CO2 episodes that posed, temporarily, an increased risk of
exposure to airborne diseases. It was found across the board that 18 of the 179
spaces presented maximum recorded CO2 concentrations above 1500 ppm,
which indicated that in those spaces sometimes there was insufficient
ventilation relative to the occupancy.

## Distribution of IAQ around spaces and implications for the evaluation of
building performance in large buildings with multiple occupants
The approach to space classification and IAQ classification allowed the study to
identify that average and maximum CO2 concentrations varied
significantly: between venues, between types of events, between different events
at the same venue run at different occupancies, and also among spaces within an
event throughout a venue. This variability reflects the movement of occupants
throughout a venue following event management patterns, as well as building
design guidelines for different types of spaces. The variability in exposure
within different locations at a single venue can be as significant as the
variability between event types and venue types, leading to significant
differences in exposure to exhaled breath and potentially to infection, amongst
attendees within the same venue.
Localised ventilation strategies were very significant, especially in hybrid
indoor-outdoor venues, and the nature, size, and organisation of an event are
key to the outcomes in terms of IAQ throughout. This may be an important feature
of other buildings with large occupancies that are in constant flux such as
public transport hubs, schools, universities, and hospitals and would be worth
further research.

## Types of spaces prone to poor IAQ and the value of space
classification
A database of spaces was created for all venues and this allowed exploration of
common types of spaces such as theatres or restaurants, which were investigated
in depth outside the scope of this paper, and to identify types of spaces that
are particularly prone to high CO2 concentrations. Such high
concentrations were observed for prolonged periods in spaces such as toilets,
corridors, lifts, and stairwells, as shown in . These were found mainly in
relation to high occupancy and high crowd density, which may have been outside
of the original specification of the mechanical ventilation systems, even though
these were most probably designed to deliver good ventilation performance on
average for these spaces. In a minority of cases, not presented in this paper,
high CO2 concentrations were observed where ventilation systems were
found to be faulty or poorly maintained or where the ventilation strategy was
not providing sufficient outdoor air. In these cases, feedback was provided to
venue managers and was acted upon to provide immediate improvements.

## Ventilation effectiveness and impact of ventilation strategy
Several examples were found where the distribution of ventilation appeared less
effective, for example, both in the Crucible auditorium ( ), and in the nightclub ( ), a distribution
of CO2 can be noted, resulting in hot spots of poor IAQ even if
average values throughout the venue were acceptable. This presents occupants of
these venues with a very different experience with a wide range of potential
comfort outcomes and a variable risk of exposure to airborne pathogens. Poor
mixing of air cannot be observed if a low number of CO2 sensors is
used, or if a CO2 sensor is only installed at the extract to control
ventilation in a large space. Furthermore, the high resolution enabled the study
to challenge the assumption that all indoor spaces are well-mixed with
homogeneous indoor air quality.

## Impact of occupancy
Although the exact number of occupants in individual spaces is not analysed in
this paper, venue and event operators provided insight into how the spaces were
used during monitored events. This, and the field studies conducted by the
research teams on site, helped quickly identify time intervals where individual
spaces would most likely peak in occupancy to identify spaces that needed
monitoring. In numerous settings, CO2 concentrations were found to
closely follow patterns relating to event management and to relate to the local
number of occupants and their distribution in time and space, as seen for
example at the Crucible in and at the Wembley toilets via the time series in . This
presents an opportunity to improve local IAQ and reduce risks of transmission
during future outbreaks by modifying event management strategies. This points to
there being other available mitigations besides introducing costly and energy
intensive modifications to ventilation systems. For example, time series from
events where main activities occur indoors show a rapid drop in CO2
concentrations during intervals. Introducing more intervals where ventilation is
not effective is recommended so that the space can be cleared of
contaminants.
Event managers and venue operators should also have in mind that occupancy should
be kept short in spaces prone to poor air quality such as toilets, lifts, and
corridors. Long queues outside toilets at particular times during the events can
increase the risk of both short- and long-range airborne transmission. Anecdotal
evidence during the ERP showed that queues were sometimes deliberately created
in order to prevent too many people from crowding in one space, but this
strategy can backfire if the queue is simply displaced into another, even more
risky space.

## High resolution monitoring
The method of high-resolution monitoring in space and time has proven to be very
worthwhile and has generated valuable insight. The use of a large number of
sensors enabled the study to identify spatial variations in CO2
within the venues, and thus comment on the ventilation effectiveness and
variable exposure of occupants to exhaled breath in different parts of the same
venue. The use of sensors that had been logging data at 2-min intervals and
storing of the data on a central database also allowed for temporal changes in
occupancy to be detected through the observed changes in CO2
concentration. Examples of this are during short breaks between theatre
performances (intervals) as seen in ; or as can be seen in , at the
nightclub event as attendees exited between DJ sets and temporarily opened the
door coverings, which were otherwise closed, introducing ventilation into the
space.
Long-term monitoring may not be appropriate for every building and may not always
be feasible due to the cost and lack of expertise of the occupants. Our study
demonstrates that useful lessons can be learned from a rapid, temporary
installation, and from monitoring carried out in real-world conditions and at
realistic occupancy levels. These lessons can be used to inform venue building
managers, operators and event managers quickly and robustly about areas that may
need improvement in ventilation, and under which operational scenarios these
improvements might be necessary.

## Limitations of the study
The monitoring and the subsequent analysis presented in this paper was intended
to provide rapid evidence to the Events Research Programme for a representative
selection of venues and events. The authors highlighted to the ERP the
importance of monitoring a substantial selection of indoor auditoria and
theatres, and the importance of understanding that “outdoor events” comprise
many indoor spaces and that these must be monitored. Final case studies were
selected by the ERP based on a wide variety of factors such as availability of
venues and were not under the control of the authors.
The exact number of occupants in each space was not analysed for the purpose of
this publication, although for some events these data are available. The total
number of attendees at the events was used in the analysis to highlight the
occupancy effect on CO2 concentrations ( ), or to compare events of
similar venue attendance as a percentage of capacity ( ). Future work will focus on
showing links between precise occupancy and IAQ as well.
It was assumed that all indoor CO2 concentrations recorded above
average ambient levels (400 ppm) were attributed to human exhalation. On one
occasion, however, in the Crucible Theatre, a “ticker tape” cannon was used at
the end of the event at the winner announcement. This device uses CO2
as a propellant to eject confetti and temporarily increased the CO2
concentration. Thus, the exposure to exhaled breath in this instance may have
been lower than the CO2 concentrations suggest in that short period.
Theatrical smoke was also used at the Bramley Moore Dock Warehouse nightclub,
however this did not artificially elevate the CO2 concentrations
because a heated combination of glycol and water was used to create the smoke
not dry ice.
Some events such as the nightclub, The Brit Awards, and the Piccadilly Theatre
events, were run at significantly reduced occupancy. Conclusions cannot be made
with certainty on what the air quality would be if events were to be run at full
capacity. For example, the nightclub event was half full with around 3,000
attendees. It is likely that the air quality would be worse if the event was
operated at full usual capacity of 6,000 attendees without any changes to the
ventilation strategy.

## Ventilation guidelines: balancing energy and comfort with IAQ targets
Ventilation is a vital mitigation measure against COVID-19 transmission and the
scale of the pandemic has only emphasised the need to ensure that the indoor
built environment is designed and maintained with health outcomes in mind.
Outside of the membership of CIBSE, there is less understanding in the wider
community of what ventilation is, and how it is achieved effectively. Energy
saving has rightly dominated targets for ventilation and building performance
for many years, but the unintended consequences of this have resulted in
increasingly airtight indoor spaces where ventilation and air conditioning
systems are set to recirculate stale air, leakage from outdoors is minimised,
and occupants have very little control of their environment or understanding of
how it works.
The quality of ventilation across the entire UK building stock is not fully
understood at present. There is growing evidence from a number of sectors that
suggests that a wide range of building types may not always be adequately
ventilated, especially in the winter months; this may be due to the operation,
maintenance, design, or refurbishment and repurposing of existing buildings in
operation. Additional consideration of the ventilation requirements in UK
building regulations may be needed in future with a view to improve
post-occupancy indoor air quality and build resilience to future infectious
diseases. The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the vulnerability of the built
environment to infectious disease transmission in indoor air via the long-range
airborne route.
Initial COVID-19 ventilation guidance was focused on introducing as much outdoor
air as possible into indoor environments and these have been updated over time
to recommend that indoor spaces should not be over-ventilated in winter, as an
energy-conscious approach with thermal comfort in mind, as well as sufficient
outdoor air provided, is preferable. Our monitoring shows that most spaces had
very good IAQ and in many situations there was potential to even lower
ventilation rates, especially under reduced occupancy scenarios. To reduce
energy costs and yet still improve performance for health, demand control
ventilation and intelligent continuous monitoring of buildings may be reliable
solutions.

## Conclusions
Results of the Environmental Study of the UK Government’s Events Research Programme,
the largest IAQ monitoring programme worldwide of mass gathering venues during live
events to date, were presented in this paper. A method was developed to rapidly
deploy and measure CO2 concentrations, both spatially and temporally, at
high resolution in each venue, to store data on an online database for further
analysis, and to classify spaces based on usage and ventilation strategy, and
determine their performance against an IAQ Index.
Overall, the spaces monitored had good air quality in bands A or B on average,
consistent with CO2 values below 800 ppm and with very good ventilation
for the spaces and the occupancies. Around 10% of spaces presented maximum recorded
CO2 values above 1500 ppm, requiring improvement of ventilation for
the occupancy in those spaces some of the time.
Some typical problem areas, with higher CO2 concentrations, were
identified by the study, such as toilets, stairwells, and corridors, that may not
have been designed for prolonged occupancy and are therefore more poorly ventilated,
yet for disease transmission may become high risk areas when the occupancy is
increased due to, e.g., long queues.
The high-resolution monitoring has highlighted some situations that led to variable
and sometimes poor air quality in space and in time throughout the large venues. It
revealed that for the purpose of infection control, ventilation strategies need to
be based on realistic occupancy scenarios which include a variation of occupancy in
time and space.
Although on the whole there was good to excellent IAQ at the events monitored, some
spaces were under ventilated some of the time and some may have been overventilated
for the occupancies, at the expense of increased energy demand if the space is
heated or cooled. Future guidelines for ventilation may need to consider more
intelligent and demand driven controls so that variations in occupancy and in
ventilation targets can be catered for, with a view to balancing thermal comfort,
ventilation, IAQ, and energy use in an optimal manner around the year.

## Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank all the venues and event organisers that participated in
the ERP for their immense cooperation, their practical help on site installations
and for supplying detailed event and venue information without which this study
would not have been possible. Neil Parkes and Dean Sanham, Technical Staff at the
School of Architecture, Building and Civil Engineering, Loughborough University, are
acknowledged for their support in affixing sensor cages to the walls at the Bramley
Moore Dock Warehouse. We wish to thank Oliver Wild at University College London for
his support with installation of the sensors and ensuring continuous data readings,
Steven Jubb at the University of Sheffield who supported the work at some venues, as
well as Dr Joe Heffer, also at the University of Sheffield for setting up the
database for recording sensors data for further analysis. We would like to thank all
our colleagues on the AIRBODS consortium for discussions and advice and for
participation in other aspects of the Environmental Study of the ERP, and especially
to acknowledge the members of the Science Board of the ERP for invaluable feedback
on the study and their support throughout the programme and beyond.

## Note
a. Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers.

## Footnotes
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding: The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: The CO2
monitoring study was funded by the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and
Sports, who also arranged access to the venues and events; the subsequent
analysis was done by AIRBODS consortium, which is funded by EPSRC grant
EP/W002779/1.

## ORCID iDs
Liora Malki-Epshtein https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7587-1471
Filipa Adzic https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2107-6613
Ben M Roberts https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6542-0650
Elizabeth Abigail Hathway https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6626-1033
Christopher Iddon https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8958-5484
Murat Mustafa https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3190-5086
Malcolm Cook https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7102-8778

## References