3829phesageJournal of Interactive MarketingJ Interact MarketPMC9988632998863299886323860333710.1177/10949968231156530Will Social Distancing in Service Encounters Affect Consumers’ Value
Perception During the COVID-19 Pandemic? The Role of Servicescape, Self-Efficacy, and
Technological Intervention
FengYingMengJie BenvenutiMartinaScarpiDanieleZarantonelloLia✉Ying Feng is a doctoral student in digital
marketing, Institute for Digital Technologies, Loughborough University London, UK (email:
y.feng@lboro.ac.uk). Jie Meng is Senior Lecturer of Digital Marketing
Analytics, Institute for Digital Technologies, and Director of MSc Digital Marketing
Program, Loughborough University London, UK (email: j.meng@lboro.ac.uk).

332023582-3167167–184832023© The Author(s) 2023This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which permits
non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work without further permission
provided the original work is attributed as specified on the SAGE and Open Access page
(https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).

## Abstract
This study investigates how physical and psychological distance from one's surroundings
may influence one's perception of connectedness with the servicescape and, ultimately,
perception of value. It also examines the effect of consumers’ techno-psychological
differences and interaction modes on this distance–closeness relationship. The researchers
develop and test a conceptual framework of how personal cognitive traits and technological
intervention may alter consumers’ perceived connectedness to the servicescape and
influence their perceived value in different service settings. Via a quasi-experiment
design in three service scenarios, this research shows a synthetical effect of contactless
technology in the distancing setting that may work more effectively on high
self-efficiency customers to change their perceived closeness to the servicescape and
further change their evaluation of the service. The findings reveal the practical
implications of social distancing for different types of consumers in service encounters
during or after the COVID-19 pandemic.
Keywords: technological intervention, digital agents, social distancing, servicescape, physical distance, psychological distance, consumer value, self-efficacy

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoCollection date 2023 May-Aug.

The COVID-19 pandemic had a devastating impact on almost all high-contact service sectors,
particularly when various countries enforced social distancing measures to curb the spread
of the virus. Public health administrations urged service providers to follow the 2-meter
social distancing rule to maintain service operations at minimal cost to public health.
Studies have shown that social distancing measures significantly affect consumers’ behavior,
cognition, emotions, and psychological state, along with altering how they evaluate services
( ; ; ). Numerous sociologists and
consumer psychologists have used social and behavioral sciences to tackle the pandemic's
repercussions. They have provided insights on balancing self-interests with public
well-being ( ),
reducing loneliness, and improving quality of life ( ; ). They have also
attempted to align human behavior with the recommendations of epidemiologists and public
health experts while safeguarding consumer values.
Despite the resumption of daily activities two years after the first wave, people
voluntarily maintained a social distance in public spaces, following the 
guidelines. This has brought forth some questions: Does social distancing impact consumers?
How does it affect consumers psychologically? Does it create a distant sensation and
undermine intimacy? How do visible clues in the service sector (for instance, a new mode of
interaction) alter consumers’ perceived value? These questions have inspired researchers to
examine the interface between service design, consumer psychology, and consumers’ perceived
value. Therefore, this study investigates the psychological effects of social distancing on
consumer perceptions in specific service contexts. It examines whether the social distancing
policy changed consumers’ mindsets. Since consumers’ perceived value often relies on their
perceived physical and psychological distance, this study investigates whether their
distance perceptions affect their perceived value in service encounters via their perceived
connectedness with the servicescape.
This study investigates two practices representing the pandemic—social distancing and
machine-based interactions—for their unique contributions to shaping customer perceptions in
the pandemic's special context. Particularly, it examines how their seemingly opposite
effects in the service sector could have changed the way we perceive things. Social
distancing increases physical distance to ensure safety from the virus but at the cost of
sacrificing customers’ comfort. Meanwhile, machine-based interactions reduce physical
distance to increase psychological intimacy. The coexistence of these two practices may have
affected customers’ value perceptions. Thus, it becomes imperative to investigate this
possibility.
First, we propose that customers’ evaluation of a service depends on the context. Studies
on consumer value state that it is a multifaceted construct encompassing utilitarian,
hedonic, and social needs ( ; ;
 ).
According to value creation logic, consumers’ perceived value varies according to different
factors of a service encounter. Generally, it depends on the service's functionality ( ; ), the
appearance of the physical layout ( ), and the presence of social companionship ( ). However, these factors fail to
explain consumers’ value perceptions in dynamic service encounters in specific contexts.
After all, the pandemic caused an unprecedented need for safety awareness in public spaces,
considering COVID-19's high fatality rate and the psychological shadow it has cast on
society.
Second, we categorize the potential determinants of consumers’ perceived value in service
encounters into physical settings and psychological mechanisms. Social distancing protects
one from the virus, building one's confidence and ensuring safety. However, its social
consequences, such as isolation, loneliness, incapableness, inactiveness ( ; ), and frustration cannot be neglected. Similar effects arise from the adoption
of nonhuman interactions to reduce the bilateral contact risks of service systems.
Technological intervention reduces human contact as a tool to reinforce social distancing
rules ( ;
 ),
regardless of the pandemic's catalytic effect. Machine-based communications tools act as
substitutes for human contact, ensuring the level of responsiveness, interactiveness, and
personalization required for service encounters. However, these benefits may come at the
cost of sacrificing the psychological benefits of human interactions, increasing isolation
and discomfort ( ) and reducing empathy and engagement ( ). Despite the increasing interest
in the effects of social distancing and technological interventions, it remains unclear how
changes in physical distance and interaction mode affect consumers’ value perceptions.
Third, the degree of confidence and readiness to accept technology-based services and enjoy
human or nonhuman interaction differs between customers according to their individual
differences. In the context of consumer consumption, psychological research shows that an
individual's consciousness is sparked, and a different outcome is triggered when a stimulus
is presented subtly ( ). We intend to investigate how consumers trace different
psychological hints to develop their well-being in a fixed scenario. In the
distance-enforced environment, service providers offered different modes of contact in
service encounters. Considering consumers’ self-efficacy in pacing and controlling service
encounters, we incorporate cognitive diversity in our study to make our results more
generalizable.
Therefore, we intend to examine the effects of social distancing and technology-based
interactions in service encounters according to the individual differences of customers.
First, we examine how digital technologies empower customer interactions. Moreover, we
investigate how machine-reliant service delivery influences customers’ perceived value,
particularly its safety, utilitarian, hedonic, and social dimensions. Second, we analyze
consumers’ self-efficacy in the distance–closeness–value mechanism. We assume that
technological interventions can provide value as high as the value human-based services
provide. However, we intend to test whether consumers demonstrate different levels of
efficacy in handling service tools and how the equipment used alters their perceived
distance and value. That is, we explore how consumers’ self-efficacy in using innovative
tools influences their perceived value.
In the next section, we develop a conceptual model by reviewing the existing literature and
developing hypotheses. Then, we present the study's methodology. After the analysis, we
present our findings, discuss their implications, and highlight conclusions that shed light
on personalized consumer intervention in various service contexts.

## Literature Review and Hypothesis Development

## Social Distancing and Consumer Well-Being
Social distancing is an effective strategy that reduces one's chances of getting infected
via direct contact ( ). It completely changes the paradigm of interpersonal interactions. However,
despite its effectiveness, it can have some negative consequences. For instance, it can
make individuals feel distant from others, also known as a “distal” sensation that affects
people's mental health and increases disconnectedness ( ). Explanations for such
effects are complex. Biologically, the human brain's neurons are dopaminergic. Studies
have shown that forced social isolation can cause mental problems, such as loneliness,
anxiety, and depression ( ; ; ). It can also arouse biological responses, such as a craving for social
interaction, similar to how fasting induces food cravings ( ). Furthermore, it can induce
neural cravings from optical stimulation, depending on social rank ( ), and even contribute to dire health
issues such as heart disease ( ). Psychologically, forced social isolation results in reward
deprivation. Related studies show that social isolation is associated with negative and
positive emotions ( ) and that social contact addresses unmet social needs ( ). However, feelings
toward the surroundings may differ from person to person depending on geographical
psychology ( ).
Numerous studies have explored the relationship between “distance” and consumer behavior
( ; ; ). For instance, devised a new measure for social distance and showed that
consumers tend to avoid the stores they perceive as being socially distant from
themselves. Multiple dimensions of psychological distance (temporal and social distance)
have been applied to investigate consumers’ product appraisals ( ) and their responses to
peer recommendations ( ). Furthermore, the emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic has advanced the
research on consumers’ well-being and social distancing in recent years ( ; ). The underlying
mechanism of consumers’ psychology when exposed to a populated environment can be complex
( ). show that
crowding can hamper consumers’ perceptions of safety in service encounters, thus affecting
their patronage intentions. Studies have also discussed the relationship between social
distancing and consumer buying decisions ( ). However, rarely has
social distancing been explored to understand consumers’ psychology and subjective
evaluations in the service sector, particularly their perception of service quality,
satisfaction, and value ( ). More specifically, consumers’ perceived value has not been
explored as a dimension of consumer well-being in the context of social distancing in the
service sector. Therefore, we advance the understanding of social distancing and
consumers’ well-being from the perspective of their perceived value.

## Perceived psychological closeness versus physical distance
Studies have discussed the relationship between physical and psychological distance
( ; ). Generally, the concept of distance encompasses locational and
spatial characteristics. However, it has different interpretations in different
disciplines. For example, construal level theory (CLT) explains the concept of
psychological distance in the field of consumer behavior ( ). It explains how
individuals perceive people, objects, or events according to the psychological distance
between them and the entity ( ). Psychological distance is egocentric, such that it is a cognitive
separation of oneself from others in terms of temporal, spatial, social, or hypothetical
distance ( ). Notably, it affects individuals’ risk perceptions and preventive
behavior ( ; ; ; ). It is challenging to execute typical social functions, such as
maintaining valued relationships, during a pandemic. Social-cognitive perspectives
derived from CLT can offer insights into our unique interpersonal experiences and
suggest ways to cope healthily ( ). According to the dimensions of CLT, the essence of social
distancing is to maintain physical distance. Various studies have emphasized the salient
role of maintaining a suitable physical distance ( ). Spatial occupancy
is associated with a higher symbolic social status, representing power and identity
( ; ; ).
Psychological distance is also defined as the “subjective experience that something is
close or far away from the self, here and now” ( ). In other words, it is
the degree to which something is close to the mind. Research on consumer psychology
indicates that psychological distance has a subtle effect on consumers’ decision making.
Applying the concept of one's psychological distance to a specific organizational
setting, some associated concepts that emerge are a sense of belonging ( ),
consciousness ( ), and social interaction ( ). Thus, people tend to
have a positive perception of and accommodative behavior toward an object when the
psychological distance between the two is short. Moreover, psychological closeness may
encourage people to engage in actions that help solve an issue ( ) or make them
feel that they are a part of a community or an event ( ). Notably, consumers’
decisions are determined by their conscious inputs (such as the characteristics of
options in a choice set) and unconscious inputs (such as seemingly irrelevant
observations or tasks). The latter is more unpredictable and influential but understated
in the literature ( ). Therefore, psychological closeness can explain and measure consumers’
perceptions and cognition in service encounters.

## Evaluation of service experience: Perceived value and consumer well-being
Consumers’ perceived value is their perception of the utility of a product or service
they consumed ( ). Notably, it also influences their behavior ( ; ; ;
 ).
Therefore, it is a critical factor in understanding consumers in the service sector
( ) and transaction-specific value of the quality of life ( ). The
existing literature presents multiple dimensions of perceived value, such as social,
emotional, functional, and cognitive value ( ; ). Among these,
utilitarian, hedonic, and social values are the most common in the service marketing
literature ( ; ).
Following this trend, this study investigates four dimensions of perceived
value—utilitarian value, hedonic value, social value, and perceived safety—to evaluate
service experiences. Utilitarian value refers to the inherent attributes, practicality,
and functionality of a product or service ( ). Essentially,
economic aspects, quality, efficiency, and task-specificness determine a product's or
service's utilitarian value ( ; ). Hedonic value was defined as being “more subjective
than its utilitarian counterpart. It increases with fun and playfulness rather than with
task completion” ( , p. 646; ). The hedonic value of service experiences (or
products) is triggered by their uniqueness and the emotions they arouse. Furthermore, it
reflects entertainment, adventure, and other aspects of service experiences that arouse
spiritual enlightenment ( ; ). Communication makes people empathize, thus leading them to
recognize others’ existence and show them kindness and respect ( ). Also known as communication
value, social value is a common measure of consumers’ perceived value. Perceived safety,
a determinant of service experience, refers to consumers not perceiving risks or doubts
in their service experience.
Studies on perceived safety have focused on consumer satisfaction in the context of
e-commerce or e-service. Some have highlighted the role of perceived security on
consumers’ satisfaction in online consumption based on the perceived security of
payment, personal information, hardware, and software ( ; ). However, owing to the pandemic,
the perceived safety of offline service venues has also become a crucial factor in
service evaluations ( ; ). Some studies show that perceived security positively affects consumers’
intention to use mobile payments ( ; ). Moreover, safety messages
increased the competitiveness of small and independent restaurants during the pandemic,
serving as an effective sales promotion strategy ( ). However, few studies
explore perceived safety in the servicescape as a factor contributing to consumers’
perceived value. It inextricably influences consumers’ well-being, particularly in the
context of social distancing during the COVID-19 pandemic. Therefore, this study
incorporates perceived safety as a dimension of consumers’ perceived value to
investigate their well-being in the servicescape.
Essentially, we investigate how anxiety-reducing measures affect fulfillment of
consumers’ safety expectations and their value perceptions of the service encounter. We
also ascertain the optimal balance between reducing anxiety (safety value), delivering
functionality as expected (utilitarian value), enhancing the experience (hedonic value),
and ensuring satisfaction from interactions (social value) to make the servicescape
highly satisfactory. From these arguments, this study proposes the following hypotheses.

H1: Consumers’ perceived psychological closeness to the
servicescape positively affects their perceived value.
H2: Consumers’ perceived physical distance from the
servicescape positively affects their perceived value.

## Mediating Effect of Connectedness to the Servicescape
The servicescape can shape consumers’ experience and value expectations ( ; ). As stated
previously, in the context of consumer consumption, subtly presenting a stimulus sparks
consciousness and triggers a different outcome ( ). The servicescape
can consciously and unconsciously influence consumers’ choices in service encounters using
contextual cues ( ). Several service cues, such as physical layout ( ), fragrance, and music ( ), can
influence consumers’ value perceptions ( ). Furthermore,
special servicescapes of consumption venues also determine consumers’ value perceptions.
The concept of “third place” has often been applied to places where social interaction
happens. For example, a restaurant is an encountered space ( ), live sport events provide a
unique experience to fans ( ; ), and a café is a place where people can work or arrange
meetings ( ). Notably, many bookstores in the United Kingdom have been repositioned as
destination stores ( ).
Since the 1970s, scholars have used different terms to conceptualize the servicescape.
 , p. 50) termed
it “atmospherics” and explained it as “the effort to design buying environments to produce
specific emotional effects in the buyers that enhance their purchase probability.”
Emphasizing the role of the retailing atmosphere, , p. 48) stated that “in some cases,
the atmosphere is the primary product.” Owing to the atmosphere's “silent” language
(encompassing body, temporal, and spatial language), in-service communication can generate
tangible or intangible effects. Other studies show the importance of atmospherics (i.e.,
features of aesthetics, socialization, and family gathering) in purchase decisions ( ). introduced
the term “service encounter” to denote the interaction between consumers and service
providers. Service encounters are considered salient determinants of consumers’
satisfaction because consumer attitude evolves according to the service encounter ( ). The “physical
environment,” as introduced by , is a crucial feature of service encounters because services are produced
and consumed simultaneously. Meanwhile, believed that the “servicescape” (or
physical surroundings) affects consumers’ as well as employees’ behavior, thus influencing
the degree to which service transactions are executed successfully. Designing an effective
servicescape involves predicting employee and consumer responses to environmental
conditions and creating an appropriate environment for service encounters ( ). Therefore, we adopt
the term “servicescape” to investigate consumers’ perception in service encounters.
People exhibit supportive behavior and have a strong cognition of the servicescape when
the psychological distance between them and the servicescape is short ( ). Moreover,
psychological closeness positively influences participants’ intention in an event or
activity. It is represented by emotional connectedness and empathy toward people or the
servicescape ( ). From these arguments, we present the following hypotheses. 
H3: Consumers’ perceived connectedness to the servicescape
mediates the relationship between their perceived psychological closeness and
perceived value.
H4: Consumers’ perceived connectedness to the servicescape
mediates the relationship between their perceived physical distance and perceived
value.

## Interactive Effect of Self-Efficacy and Technical Embedment in the
Servicescape

## Technological intervention: Service delivery by digital agents
Various social distancing measures were implemented to combat the pandemic. However,
consumers could still feel anxious about contact with service providers and other people
in service encounters. Therefore, some studies examined the impact of employing
cutting-edge digital technologies in frontline services. They revealed that self-service
scanners and mobile payments can reduce direct contact ( ) and increase checkout
efficiency ( ). Moreover, artificial intelligence (AI) agents, such as service robots,
can improve frontline interaction and safeguard consumers and staff ( ; ).
Theories on human–agent and human–human interactions have been conflicting ( ;
 ). However,
considering digital agents similar to humans, an interpersonal framework can accommodate
these two types of interactions and their outcomes ( ). Agents are
intermediaries or independent entities that perform an additional role apart from that
of the service provider and recipient. Digital agents are computer- or
algorithm-controlled ( ; ), and they are categorized as functional (e.g.,
industrial and sweeping robots), social (e.g., chatbots, conversational agents), and
functional-social (e.g., virtual assistants, social robots) agents. Some attributes of
digital agents, such as social activity, interpersonal interaction, locus of control,
sensation seeking, and innovativeness, can link them to viewing behavior and perceptual
connection ( ). The existence of these attributes determines the sociability of digital
agents. Moreover, digital agents have a certain level of physiological, mental,
intellectual, or humanlike attributes. For instance, they have lineament and physiognomy
( ) or
face pareidolia ( ) that can function in service encounters. The presence of facial features
or expressions can induce consumers to form a humanlike connection ( ; ). Various digital agents have induced a high level of
sensation authenticity ( ; ), animacy ( ;
 ),
perceived power, control, risk judgment ( ), fairness ( ),
automation level ( ), moral concern ( ), enjoyment ( ), and positive affect
( ; ). Many have also reduced psychological distance ( ; ) and
loneliness ( ).
Employing technological artifacts in consumer interaction affects service result
perceptions ( ) and human cognition ( ). The service experience can be influenced by interactions
between those who exist and the environment as “others” that share the same atmosphere,
affection, or feeling ( ). In addition, interactions can establish collective engagement
( ) or
joint action ( ) and synchronize common behaviors, with an ideal spirit, fun,
excitement, and enthusiasm ( ). The future may bring even bigger developments in the
manifestation of AI, possibly ushering in the fourth industrial revolution.
Corresponding to such expectations, numerous researchers are beginning to explore the
current and potential impact of technological interventions on service theories ( ; ;
 ).
However, no study has examined the interactive effect of consumers’ individual
differences and technological interventions in the servicescape.

## Moderating effect of the interaction of self-efficacy and technology
intervention
While interacting with the servicescape, individuals are bound to be affected by their
surroundings and their own characteristics. Self-efficacy is a salient construct in
psychology ( ) and service marketing ( ). , ; ) defined it
as an individual's perceived capability of accomplishing a task. An essential aspect of
the social cognitive theory is individuals’ attitudes, cognitive skills, and
capabilities. Psychology also explains self-efficacy as a capability owned or earned by
oneself from specific activities ( ). It affects how an individual handles
tasks, the energy they invest, and their response to failure ( ). Studies have examined various types
of self-efficacy in the digital field, such as computer ( ; ),
internet ( ;
 ), social media ( ; ), and
digital game ( )
self-efficacy.
Tourism and service literature has extended the concept to interpersonal contexts, such
as service encounters ( ) or human–machine interactions, such as AI-aided
communication ( ; ). Those studies show that a low degree of self-efficacy hampers the usage
of digital devices ( ; ). reported that highly self-efficacious participants perform more
independently than low self-efficacious ones.
Based on the self and surroundings, self-efficacy enables the individual to take in and
successfully handle every possible stimulus the external environment presents in
self–external interactions. Therefore, one can hypothesize that individuals’
self-efficacy affects their perceived psychological and physical distance to the
servicescape when different interaction modes are present (human–machine interactions
and human–human interactions). Consequently, it affects their perceived value.
Therefore, we posit the following hypotheses: 
H5: In human–machine interactions, self-efficacy
strengthens the relationship between (a) perceived psychological closeness and
connectedness to the servicescape for highly self-efficacious customers
(γc_L-H2M < γc_H-H2M) and (b) perceived physical
distance and connectedness to the servicescape for low self-efficacious customers
(γd_L-H2M > γd_H-H2M).
Highly self-efficacious consumers rely heavily on their psychological perceptions
in service encounters. They tend to engage with the staff so that they can effectively
integrate into the environment. Conversely, low self-efficacious consumers tend to use
other cues (such as social distancing signs) to establish their preferences since they
do not know exactly what they want ( ). Therefore: 
H6: In human–human interactions, self-efficacy
strengthens the relationship between (a) perceived psychological closeness and
connectedness to the servicescape for highly self-efficacious customers
(γc_L-H2H < γc_H-H2H) and (b) perceived physical
distance and connectedness to the servicescape for low self-efficacious customers
(γd_L-H2H > γd_H-H2H).
 illustrates our
research model.
 

## Empirical Study

## Methodology

## Samples and procedures
A web-based experiment was conducted to test the proposed hypotheses. Respondents were
recruited from Wenjuanxing (https://www.wjx.cn/), a Chinese
professional online survey platform similar to Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) with more
than 2.6 million “crowdworkers” in its sample base. Through this survey service tool,
respondents were recruited in January 2021 to participate in this quasi-experiment
provided the criteria were met: 
Respondents lived in China during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Respondents could access an online link to fill out the questionnaire.
Before the experiment began, participants filled out a pre-experiment
questionnaire to measure self-efficacy. Participants were asked about their attitudes
toward social distancing policies before the investigation started and were prompted to
see an experimental scenario that required social distancing. The next step randomly
assigned the participants to one of the three experimental scenarios: a bookshop, a
café, and a sports stadium. Scenario texts and pictures were manipulated and presented
to the participants. At the end of the experiment, participants were asked to fill out a
postexperiment questionnaire on their perceptions and evaluations of the experimental
service scenario. Demographic information was collected at the end of the questionnaire.
The data collection lasted for two weeks. Invalid responses (e.g., responses with the
same answer for all items) were removed, and 546 valid samples were retained.
Nonresponse bias was checked by comparing the mean of all variables with the demographic
data of early and late respondents.

## Measurement
A five-point Likert scale (1 = “Strongly disagree,” and 5 = “Strongly agree”; 1 = “Very
low,” and 5 = “Very high”) was used to measure all items. The constructs included in the
research model (see ) were adapted from previous studies or were constructed by the researchers. The
“perceived psychological closeness” and “perceived physical distance” concepts were each
measured by a three-item scale, adapted from the existing literature ( ; ; ; ) and modified to fit the experimental design. “Connectedness to the
servicescape” is a reflective construct with a self-constructed six-item scale
constructed by the researchers. The “perceived value” construct contained four
components adapted and modified from (1 = “Very low,” and
5 = “Very high”). Self-efficacy was measured by an eight-item scale adapted from .
Since the data were collected in China, two bilingual researchers were invited to
translate the questionnaire into Chinese to ensure that the Chinese version retained the
same meaning as the English one.
 shows the sample
demographics: 45.6% of the respondents were male and 54.4% female. The age distribution
of respondents is relatively even, with over 64.1% of respondents aged 19–50 years.
Respondents had a high level of education, as most respondents (64%) had a diploma or
higher. Regarding household income per annum, 43.2% of respondents reported income below
80,000 yuan, 28.8% had income between 80,001 and 200,000 yuan, and 28% had income over
200,000 yuan.
 

## Analysis and Results

## Measurement model results
In three stages, several statistical analyses were conducted with the help of SPSS and
Amos software for structural equation modeling. The first stage used SPSS to test the
statistical validity and reliability of the measurement items. Then, the structural
model was examined, and H1–H4 were tested using Amos 27. Finally,
on the basis of the findings of the second stage, the moderating effects of interaction
modes and self-efficacy on the model were analyzed, and H5 and H6
were examined.
Using self-reported data in any study might lead to common method bias. To check for
common method bias, we carried out several statistical analyses. We first applied
Harman's one-factor test ( ) using the principal axis factoring method in SPSS. A
total of five factors accounted for 66.33% of the variance. However, only 29.11% of the
variance was explained by the first factor, indicating that common method bias was not a
significant issue in this study.

## Reliability and validity testing
Before the model was tested, the reliability and convergent validity of the measurement
scales were evaluated using exploratory factor analysis, followed by confirmatory factor
analysis. The results are reported in . All values of factor loadings of the
constructs exceeded the .7 threshold ( ). The
Cronbach's alpha values and composite reliability values of the measurement items were
all greater than the threshold of .7, indicating an acceptable reliability level ( ). In addition,
Kaiser–Meyer–Olkin values of the measurement constructs were all above .7, which exceeds
the threshold of .5 ( ).
 For convergent validity, the average variance extracted (AVE) values of the measurement
construct were above the threshold of .50, suggesting that the latent construct explains
at least 50% of the variance in the items ( ). According to the
evaluation criterion, all results revealed a high level of convergent validity ( ) and were
thus appropriate for structural equation modeling.
In addition, shows
the heterotrait–monotrait ratio of correlations. The values were below the cutoff of .9
( ), which indicated excellent discriminant validity of these constructs
( ).
 As shown in , a
multivariate normality test using maximum likelihood estimation was applied in Amos 27
to check that the data are distributed generally before the structural model was
created. All absolute skewness values of measurement items were lower than 2, and
absolute values of kurtosis were acceptable at less than 3 ( ). suggested
that when the critical region for the skewness does not exceed 7.0 and the sample size
is large (greater than 200), using maximum likelihood estimation is robust to kurtosis
violations of multivariate normality. Therefore, the results suggested a normal
distribution for each variable.
 

## Structural path results
We employed criteria similar to the measurement model to assess the structural model's
goodness of fit. As illustrated in , the structural model's results demonstrated a strong fit for the
data (χ2 = 115.103, d.f. = 98, χ2/d.f. = 1.175). The comparative
fit index (CFI = .996), goodness-of-fit index (GFI = .974), and adjusted goodness-of-fit
index (AGFI = .964) were all above .90. The root mean square error of approximation
(RMSEA = .018) and root mean square residual (RMR = .047) were lower than the threshold
of .08, suggesting a good model fit. The incremental fit index (IFI), normed fit index
(NFI), and Tucker–Lewis index (TLI) were .996, .972, and .995, respectively, providing
sufficient evidence to support the model.
 Perceived psychological closeness (βa = .247, p < .001)
and perceived physical distance (βb = .257, p < .001) had
a significant positive effect on perceived value. Therefore, H1 and
H2 were supported. These findings highlighted that the perception of
psychological closeness and maintaining a certain physical distance could directly
affect consumers’ perceived value of the service experience during the pandemic.
 shows that perceived
psychological closeness (γc = .275, p < .001) and
perceived physical distance (γd = .253, p < .001) were
both significantly related to the establishment of connectedness to the servicescape.
These findings suggest that consumers’ perception of psychological closeness and
maintaining an appropriate physical distance from the servicescape can positively impact
their perception of connectedness to the servicescape. In addition, a significant
relationship was found between connectedness to the servicescape and perceived value
(βe = .423, p < .001). The finding indicates that as
consumers establish more connections to the servicescape, they perceive the value of the
consumption more positively.

## Mediation test results
We further sought to quantify the mediating role of connectedness to the servicescape
on the relationship between perceived psychological closeness, perceived physical
distance, and perceived value. Following , this study adopted
the bootstrapping technique to determine the mediating effect in the structural model: a
bootstrap of 1,000 samples was performed, with bias-corrected 95% confidence intervals
(CIs).
The results (see )
indicated a significant standardized indirect effect of perceived psychological
closeness on perceived value (β = .116, t = 4.64, p < .01; 95% CI:
[.071, .169]). The total effect of perceived psychological closeness on perceived value
was significant (β = .363, t = 7.89, p < .01), and even with the
inclusion of connectedness to the servicescape as a mediator, the impact of perceived
psychological closeness on perceived value was still significant (β = .247, t = 5.26,
p < .01). The results indicate that the connectedness to the
servicescape partially mediates the relationship between perceived psychological
closeness and perceived value. Therefore, H3 was supported.
 The results also indicated a significant indirect effect of perceived physical distance
on perceived value (β = .107, t = 4.12, p < .01; 95% CI: [.057,
.161]). The total effect of perceived physical distance on perceived value was
significant (β = .363, t = 7.56, p < .01); even with the inclusion
of the mediator variable, connectedness to the servicescape, the impact of perceived
physical distance on perceived value was still significant (β = .257, t = 5.14,
p < .01). The results indicated that the connectedness to the
servicescape partially mediates the relationship between perceived physical distance and
perceived value. Thus, H4 was supported.

## Moderating effect of interaction modes and self-efficacy
A broad range of studies has examined the moderating effect of self-efficacy in
accepting human–machine interaction ( ; ; ; ). Robotic service
delivery is considered an effective measure because of the need to provide contactless
service for social distancing during the pandemic ( ; ). Since self-efficacy
is essential for consumers to perceive the value of services, it is necessary to compare
the moderating effect of self-efficacy in machine and employee service delivery.
To test the generalizability of the moderating effect, we randomly assigned
participants to one of three typical service scenarios for an empirical test: bookshop
service, café, and a sports event in a stadium. Each service scenario was randomly
embedded with two service interaction modes: human–human interaction and human–machine
interaction. Participants filled out a self-efficacy questionnaire before the
investigation began to verify the moderating effect of technical traits on the
experiment. Participants were divided into a high self-efficacy group and a low
self-efficacy group on the basis of mean value (M = 3.425).
As shown in , all the
scenarios were presented both textually and diagrammatically, controlled strictly by
presentation order and time of exposure. We supplemented each scenario in a specific
relational context using a paragraph of text description and a context-describing
picture to satisfy different kinds of information readers. Moreover, in the experiment
manipulation, the treatment of imposing social distancing measures was achieved by
displaying a “social distancing” sign outside the service venue.
 The total sample was divided into four groups based on the interaction modes
(human–human interaction vs. human–machine interaction) and self-efficacy (low vs.
high). The focus was on how different interaction modes within a service and differing
consumer self-efficacy in the interaction significantly impact the consumer's perception
of the service. To test the moderating effect, we employed a multigroup analysis.
The standardized coefficients of the constructs’ relationships for the four groups are
shown in by the
z-scores. According to the table notes, the z-scores, with the indication of
significance, illustrate the difference between low and high self-efficacy under two
interaction modes. For the results to be significant, the absolute value of the z-score
must be higher than 1.65 with a 90% confidence level or higher than 2.58 with a 99%
confidence level. Thus, H5a and H5b were supported, but
H6a and H6b were rejected.
 In human–machine interaction, there is a significant difference in the path
γc between low and high self-efficacy groups with a 90% confidence level
(z-score = 1.722, p < .10). The effect of perceived psychological
closeness on connectedness to the servicescape is significantly lower for the low
self-efficacy group (γc low self-efficacy = .123, n.s.; γc high
self-efficacy = .397, p < .001). These findings indicated
that the perception of psychological closeness had a more substantial effect on
establishing connectedness to the servicescape in the high self-efficacy group than in
the low self-efficacy group. However, there is a significant difference in the path
γd between low and high self-efficacy groups with a 99% confidence level
(z-score = −3.606, p < .01). The low self-efficacy group (γd
low self-efficacy = .553, p < .001) was found to be
receiving more potent effects of perceived physical distance on connectedness to the
servicescape than the high self-efficacy group (γd high
self-efficacy = −.017, n.s.). In contrast, consumers with high self-efficacy did
not rely on the perception of physical distance to establish a connection with the
servicescape, although the finding is insignificant. Thus, H5a and
H5b were supported, and self-efficacy and machine intervention moderated
the model. However, the relationship between perceived psychological closeness and
connectedness to the servicescape was lower in the low self-efficacy group than in the
high self-efficacy group (γc_L-H2M < γc_H-H2M), in contrast to
the relationship between perceived physical distance and connectedness to the
servicescape (γd_L-H2M > γd_H-H2M). This implies that when
building connections with the servicescape, consumers with high self-efficacy rely on
perceived psychological closeness, whereas low self-efficacy consumers rely on perceived
physical distance.
Regarding human–human interaction, both γc and γd are lower in
the low self-efficacy group (γc low self-efficacy = .235,
p < .1; γd low self-efficacy = .169, n.s.) than in the
high self-efficacy group (γc high self-efficacy = .252,
p < .01; γd high self-efficacy = .255,
p < .01). This implies that the positive impacts of perceived
psychological closeness and maintaining an appropriate physical distance on establishing
the connectedness to the servicescape were more substantial among consumers with high
self-efficacy than among those with low self-efficacy. However, the difference is not
significant. Thus, H6a and H6b were rejected.

## Discussion
This study was executed in a specific social context, where the pandemic necessitated the
adoption of social distancing measures and contactless service experiences. In this special
context, customers’ value perceptions regarding service encounters have extended from
utilitarian and hedonic value perceptions to social connection and safety considerations.
This extension implies that customers will rely more on the servicescape and clues to form
their value perceptions. Moreover, safety has become a vital determinant of service value.
This study does not focus on the relative weighting of the determinants of perceived value
as some studies do ( ; ). However, the multidimensionality of customers’ perceived value
substantially furthers the discussion on customer well-being. It shows service encounters
from the perspective of interaction attributes and connection with the environment over the
service's benefits. The findings of this study provide new insights into the determinants of
consumers’ perceived value. More specifically, social distancing measures and machine-based
interactions influence different components of service values, thus enhancing different
dimensions of perceived value and ultimately benefiting consumers’ well-being. It is
imperative to understand how consumers’ perceptions change in the scenario of technological
interventions. Interestingly, this study explores the interactive effect of technological
intervention and self-efficacy in service encounters, extending the body of knowledge on
human–machine interactions. The findings show the crucial role of self-efficacy in such
interactions. More specifically, low self-efficacious consumers consider physical distance
more vital than psychological closeness, but highly self-efficacious ones perceive the
opposite. That is, the latter group of consumers interacts with machines more independently
than the former, consistent with the findings of and . Thus, service marketers should
consider their target audience when deciding to introduce service machines. This study shows
that technology adoption in the market is contingent on tech-savvy customers. It also shows
that customers’ self-efficacy and interaction with machines influence their cognitive
distance, psychological connection, and overall perception of the service. For highly
self-efficacious customers, human–machine interactions will have a stronger effect in
reducing the psychological distance than enhancing the physical clues and building a
connection with the servicescape. This finding confirms the importance of considering
customer attributes when deciding between human- or machine-based interactions. In contrast,
traditional human-contact-based service delivery may seem more accommodating to different
types of consumers (out of a spectrum of capabilities) to trigger cognitive outcomes.
This study contributes to the existing literature in the following ways. First, it is a
pioneering attempt at investigating the indirect role of adaptation and connectedness to the
servicescape in influencing consumers’ perceived value. There was an absence of research on
how adaptations in the servicescape affect perceived value, and this study fills the gap.
Second, it presents a novel conceptual model that explains the relationship between
“distance perception” and “perceived value” with the mediation of “connectedness to the
servicescape.” Third, previous studies ( ; ) only examined the behavioral outcomes of perceived
distance. However, our study sheds light on the psychological pathway from consumers’
perceived distance to their perceived value. According to CLT, it reveals that consumers’
perceptions of psychological and physical distance positively relate to their perception of
value, consistent with the findings of and . Finally, one can
generalize this study's analytical framework and approach to distance-enforced settings to
examine customers’ mindsets during service delivery.

## Practical Implications
The results of this study suggest that marketers can boost perceived value by
incorporating both social distancing measures and machine-based interactions in service
design. Thus, service industries should integrate social distancing into the servicescape.
Moreover, they must examine consumer experiences under different segregation settings
(such as seat-taking instructions) via market research. Then, they should adapt the
servicescape's layout based on the findings to provide the highest possible quality in
services. In a distance-enforced environment, customers will rely on their perception of
the actual and psychological distance to the surroundings, as mediators, to determine the
value perceptions. Perceived psychological closeness and physical distance influence
perceived value both directly and indirectly (via connectedness to the servicescape). When
implementing different measures simultaneously, marketers must remember that each may
alter consumers’ perception of physical and psychological distance differently, thus
influencing their subjective evaluation.
The pandemic has altered the paradigm of service provision and consumption. Resultingly,
both consumers and service providers must adapt to the modified servicescapes. As a widely
accepted solution, digital intermediaries, such as service robots and kiosks, can replace
humans in high-contact services and upgrade the system of service industries. This move
will increase business opportunities for human–machine interactions in service sectors.
Moreover, robots and related technologies will usher in new developments to solve labor
issues and reduce social contact, especially after the pandemic ( ; ).

## Limitations
The limitation of this study lies in the external environment, such as the lack of
contrasting samples from pre- or postpandemic situations. Displaying a social distancing
sign can partially influence customers’ awareness of distancing and safety. Although most
samples could successfully recall the stimuli, our postexperiment test indicates that
nearly 5%–11% of the participants in our samples have a bias in either memory or item
selection when recalling what sign they had seen in the experiment. Furthermore, this
study does not show the situational factors in service consumption, such as the different
motives and occasions of service consumption (e.g., for individual, family, or business
motives). Broadening the spectrum of service types would increase the results’ external
validity.

## Acknowledgments
We thank the JNM review team for their valuable comments and suggestions
during the revision process.

## Footnotes
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding: The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.
ORCID iDs: Ying Feng https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6060-4899
Jie Meng https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0512-1704

## Special Issue Editors
Daniele Scarpi, Martina Benvenuti, and Lia Zarantonello

## References