4086medscieduMedical Science EducatorMed Sci EducSpringerPMC9947437994743799987413685238710.1007/s40670-022-01722-7Poster Presentations Abstracts, 26th Annual Meeting of the International Association of Medical Science Educators, June 4–7, 2022
232202332Suppl 12323–1232322023© The Author(s) under exclusive licence to International Association of Medical Science Educators 2023statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoCollection date 2022 Dec.

INTRODUCING PROFESSIONAL IDENTITY FORMATION TO STUDENTS AND COMMUNITY PRECEPTORS IN PRECLINICAL YEARS

Grace Park | Jo-Ann Archey | Holly Rosencranz
Carle Illinois College of Medicine | Carle Illinois College of Medicine | Carle Illinois College of Medicine
PURPOSE: Professional identity formation (PIF) is a socialization process in which students are exposed to experiences that guide them from their baseline to professional identity (PI). We aimed to determine if a student’s and preceptor’s confidence in their understanding and their role in the development of PI would increase through an intentional curricular change that provides early exposure to these concepts.
METHODS: Students and preceptors were introduced to a schematic of PIF then worked together over ten sessions. At quarterly intervals, students wrote reflections on various topics and how thecomse integrated into their PI. Two dedicated faculty led the students in a group discussion about the topics. The same faculty reconnected with the students at the end of their fourth year where they reread their previous reflections, and discussed how they viewed those same topics, having completed their clinical clerkships.
RESULTS: Thirty-five out of 48 students who participated in this activity responded to a survey at the end of their 4th year. The surveys had questions regarding confidence in their PI and helpfulness of PIF strategies. Confidence in identity as a physician increased from the first to the fourth year and the most helpful strategies were early clinical exposure, intentional time set apart to reflect, and facilitated discussions. Regarding clinical preceptors, 12 out of the 28 who participated responded to the survey. Preceptors were surveyed gauging helpfulness of background information on PIF and their confidence level in their role in a preclinical student’s PIF.
CONCLUSIONS: Intentional exposure to concepts of PI built into the curriculum improved the confidence level of students’ PI. Clinical preceptors’ confidence level in their role in the PIF process with preclinical students was high.

RAPID RESPONSE: USING A BOOK STUDY FORMAT TO INTEGRATE RACIAL DISCUSSIONS INTO AN EXISTING CURRICULUM

Jo-Ann Archey | Grace Park
Carle Illinois College of Medicine | Carle Illinois College of Medicine
PURPOSE: After many tragic events of racial violence that peaked in the summer of 2020 after the killing of George Floyd, there was a push for discussions on race in medicine. There was a need to rapidly integrate discussions on race into the curriculum and create a space where students could process and engage in conversations of how the racial issues in the country were intersecting with what they were learning in medicine.
METHODS: The University of Illinois College of Medicine (UIC) Anti-Racism Urgent Action Committee on Racial Justice selected Just Medicine as a book for discussion for all 4 of its campuses. The Urbana-Champaign campus chose to discuss the book with its 3rd year class in fall 2020 and 4th year students in Spring 2021. Each student selected a chapter to facilitate discussion during a 2-h book discussion in which they presented a synopsis of their chapter followed by a discussion facilitated by the student and faculty. Students were asked to reflect on their assumptions about Just Medicine before and after reading the book, as well as how reading the book would influence their interactions with others as they continue in their training.
RESULTS: Thirteen 3rd year and eleven 4th year students participated. Timeframe from idea to integration was 15 weeks.
CONCLUSIONS: Rapid integration of discussions of race or other topics is important for schools to do in times of changing culture and significant events that spark conversation at a societal level. Medical schools are integral in the socialization of students to become physicians and need to strive for their students to take part in conversations. A book study format was effective in terms of rapid integration. Further research could be done to assess if other topics could be integrated quickly using this format and assessing satisfaction from student and faculty perspective.

USING A BI-SEMESTERLY NEWSLETTER AS A “SUPPLEMENT” FOR MEDICAL SCIENCE EDUCATORS’ PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Jessica Rucker
Oklahoma State University Center for Health Sciences, Tulsa, OK 74107 U.S.A.
PURPOSE: With a growing abundance of research in medical education and resources for instructional effectiveness, staying up to date and making time for professional development can be a challenge for medical science educators. The Office of Educational Development at Oklahoma State University Center for Health Sciences started a faculty newsletter in November 2018 to provide key information and resources without demanding considerable time. This abstract describes the project, data collected thus far, and future directions.
METHODS: MailChimp was used to design and deliver the newsletter to a blended faculty and staff audience of 765 members, of which 190 are faculty. The newsletter is disseminated approximately twice each semester and once over the summer for a total of five times per year. Content typically consists of a curated compilation of recent and relevant medication education research articles and instructional resources tailored to faculty needs (as identified in our yearly faculty needs assessment and/or ongoing course support). Also included is a list of upcoming professional development events along with links to recordings of past events/modules.
RESULTS: Over the course of 12 newsletters disseminated since November of 2018, the average open rate is 34.8% and a click rate of 4.1%. Several faculty and staff members have commented in emails or personal conversations that they found the newsletter content helpful.
CONCLUSIONS: A faculty newsletter serves as a convenient means of filtering helpful medical education research articles and instructional resources to our faculty on a regular basis. Future research will be needed to parse out faculty-specific impact since the current audience blends faculty and staff members together.

INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGY INTEGRATED IN HUMAN BODY BLOCK TEACHING: SYSTEMATIC APPROACH FROM VIN UNIVERSITY

Thuy M. Ha, Duy M. Hoang, Chien D. Huynh, Stephen P. Schiffer
College of Health Sciences, VinUniversity
PURPOSE: Integrated curriculum has been demonstrated to promote the retention of knowledge, and break down barriers between basic and clinical courses. At VinUniversity, human body block incorporates clinical anatomy and related basic medical sciences. To ensure the learning outcomes achievement, systematic technology innovations have been deployed to enhance learning experiences and help to overcome the challenges during Covid-19 situation.
METHODS: The use of Pirogov Anatomy Table, Complete 3D Anatomy software, and plastinated cadavers is identified to facilitate teaching block-wide anatomy, physiology, and radiology. Histology and embryology are taught through a digital pathology platform called Pathcore, which ontains an enormous collection of images and slides. Overall learning flow is driven by the robust use of Canvas, a learning management system (LMS). All these platforms can be used remotely allowing con-current access from multiple devices.
RESULTS: Complete anatomy has revealed its advantages in promoting interactions of students using videos (self-made and ready-made) of human anatomical models, audios, quizzes, etc. Statistic reports after quizzes/assignments were found to be helpful to monitor students’ progress. The benefits of Pirogov Anatomy Table may include but not limited to virtual dissection, 3D atlas, and comparative images between normal and pathological anatomy. Plastinated cadavers currently have limited usage due to the social distancing measures. Pathological data within Pathcore can serve not only for teaching activities but also for research purposes. LMS (Canvas) has demonstrated its critical role in block delivery and management. Technology application might help institutions to adapt better to the new situation in response to the Covid-19 pandemic. However, not only an significant investment is required, but also human resources and time consumption to maintain and effectively integrate these technologies in designing curriculum.
CONCLUSIONS: It is essential to consider the roles of educational technologies and innovations in the twenty-first century. The lessons learnt from VinUniversity can benefit other institutions in considering both limitations and advantages of technology application in this challenging time.

IMPLEMENTATION OF RAPID CYCLE DELIBERATE PRACTICE (RCDP) AS A METHOD OF ACHIEVING AND LONG-TERM RETENTION OF CLINICAL MASTERY USING SIMULATION

Kirsten Kim Sawtelle
University of South Dakota
PURPOSE: Rapid cycle deliberate practice (RCDP) allows medical students to achieve master proficiency with clinical skills that is resistant to degradation over time.
METHODS: A 2-day airway management course was conducted using RCDP to teach endotracheal intubation to second-year medical students using Medical Students as Simulations Educators (MSASE) as instructors. On day 1, learners participated in 40-min training sessions using a 2:1 ratio of learners to educators for most groups to practice intravenous induction into anesthesia and endotracheal intubation and performance was assessed. Half the groups used a traditional RCDP approach while the other half used a modified RCDP approach. Day 2 was completed one week later using similar methods. Learners will participate in a 1-day simulation course in 6 months to assess retention.
RESULTS: Preliminary data have shown that using RCDP as a teaching method allowed students to achieve mastery of skills within a 40-min block. Different learners performed different numbers of intubation procedure during each 40-min block. Currently, the collected data have being analyzed. By the time of the IAMSE 2022, conference all data will be collected and analyzed.
CONCLUSIONS: RCDP is an affective teaching method to achieve mastery with performing this clinical skill. RCDP relies on the immediate focused feedback and multiple iterations of the task until mastery is achieved. The recommended learner vs instructor ration is 2:1 or higher. For the educators with limited experience with RCDP, additional faculty development is required.

HUMAN CADAVERIC ORBIT, ORAL CAVITY AND NASAL CAVITY DISSECTION; A STUDENT-TO-STUDENT PERSPECTIVE

Adam Berry | Kevin Seely | Colby Adamson | Jordan Jones | Amanda Troy PhD
Rocky Vista University | Rocky Vista University | Rocky Vista University | Rocky Vista University | Rocky Vista University
PURPOSE: Cadaveric dissection has long been a central component of medical school curricula in both allopathic and osteopathic training. However, presumptive and lengthy dissection instructions in commonly used laboratory guides are among the limiting factors in foundational dissection experiences, causing a steep learning curve. This educational project aims to produce a more precise and practical dissection guide for the historically difficult dissection of the human head, including the orbit and oral and nasal cavities.
METHODS: Four medical students with minimal dissection experience were selected to participate in a dissection of the cadaveric orbit, oral cavity, and nasal cavity. After completing one guided and one independent dissection, the students synthesized their experience into a dissector which incorporated photos of the dissection, clinical correlations, helpful tips from a beginner’s perspective, and osteopathic considerations.
RESULTS: The students’ contribution is currently being incorporated into a full dissector along with sections completed by other students in a similar fashion. This dissector will provide future students with a dissection guide that meets them at their level, while showing them what is possible for them to accomplish with their limited time and experience.
CONCLUSIONS: As the students involved in the creation of this work, we learned many valuable lessons regarding the formulation of educational materials. It is hypothesized that a full dissector manual written for students by students will aid in osteopathic medical students’ foundational dissection experiences.

PERFORMANCES ON THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM AND RENAL SYSTEM COURSE ARE THE MOST IMPORTANT PREDICTORS OF COMLEX LEVEL 1 AND LEVEL 2-CE SCORES IN PRECLINICAL YEARS

Qing Zhong | James Small
Rocky Vista University | Rocky Vista University
BACKGROUND: Osteopathic Medical Licensing Examination of the United States (COMLEX-USA) Level 1 (COMLEX-USA Level 1) and Level 2-Cognitive Evaluation (CE) are board examinations that each medical student in an osteopathic medical school must pass as part of the licensure requirements. Numerical scores on Level 2 CE are also important in the competitive residency match.
OBJECTIVES: Our goal is to find the earliest predictors for performances on COMLEX Level-1 and Level 2-CE.
METHODS: Data from six cohorts of medical students matriculated at Rocky Vista University College of Osteopathic Medicine from 2012 to 2017 were collected, including independent variables of performances on each course from the first 2 years, and the dependent variables were the scores on COMLEX Level 1 or Level 2-CE. Predictive models were built with multiple linear regression and backward stepwise regression using SPSS. Predictive models for COMLEX Level 1 were based on performances of the first three semesters’ courses, and for COMLEX Level 2-CE were used performances on the first four semesters’ courses.
RESULTS: We found that the performances of third-semester Renal System II and Cardiovascular System II courses had the highest correlation with the scores of COMLEX-USA Level 1 (r = 0.7), and Level 2-CE (r = 0.64–0.65), respectively. Performance on either Renal System II course or Cardiovascular System II course explains 49% of the variance in COMLEX-USA Level 1 scores, and 41–42% of the variance in COMLEX-USA Level 2 scores. The predictive regression models confirmed that scores of Renal II and Cardiovascular II are significant predictors of performances on COMLEX Level 1 and 2-CE.
CONCLUSIONS: Students who perform poorly in third-semester Renal System II and Cardiovascular System II courses are at high risk of lower performance or failure on COMLEX Level 1 and 2-CE. The results may allow earlier interventions to improve students’ learning and performances.

ASSESSMENT OF PERCEIVED COMPETENCE IN BREAKING BAD NEWS AMONG RESIDENT DOCTORS AT MOI TEACHING AND REFERRAL HOSPITAL/MOI UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE

David Chumba
Moi University
PURPOSE: Giving unfavorable information to patients about their illness is a common task by clinicians and competence in this important task is a requirements by accreditation bodies. Medical education curriculum was designed to equip doctors with skills, knowledge and attitudes in dealing with such situations. Globally, standardized specific guidelines have been developed to assist doctors to fully disclose such diagnosis. The increasing burden of cancer in Sub Saharan Africa necessitates relooking at training of these skills among doctors. It is in view of this that the study sought to find training needs and constraints experienced by residents in breaking bad news with a view to fill the gaps.
METHODS: Multiple methods, utilizing complementarity strategy of data collection. Surveys used to collect data on perceived competence and quasi experimental research designs used to collect data on the effectiveness of additional training. Convenience sampling used to select 80 from 240 residents who were divided into two groups for comparison.
RESULTS: Content specific for breaking bad news in the MBCHB curriculum only 33% covered, didactic and small group discussions the training methodologies utilized, only 18.7% of the respondents received training, competence varied on three aspects, self-efficacy 92.4 (normed = 69) empathy scores 84.6 (n = 115) physicians beliefs scores 115.4 (n = 72). Additional specific training significantly improved all aspects of competence; self-efficacy t test p = 0.000, empathy t test p = 0.003 and physician beliefs t test p = 0.010 from pre-test to post-test.
CONCLUSIONS: Teaching in breaking bad news is inadequate. Perceived competence varied according to the three aspects of competence self-efficacy was very good empathy and physician beliefs demonstrated a score below normed value. Specific additional training improved all aspects of competence in breaking bad news (self-efficacy, empathy and physicians beliefs)

HOLISTIC REVIEW: BECOMING PART OF THE WHOLE PICTURE

Elissa Love | Kathleen Thompson | Elizabeth Elliott
Baylor College of Medicine | Baylor College of Medicine | Baylor College of Medicine
PURPOSE: Providers who match individual patient characteristics contribute to a provider-patient relationship that is more successful. Selection for admission to physician assistant (PA) programs has not ensured applicants’ experiences and attributes, outside of traditional metrics, are part of the evaluation. Holistic review encompasses three core principles: broad selection criteria of multiple domains, balance of applicant experiences to create a diverse pool, and training for all involved in the admissions process. The purpose of this research was to expand diversity of incoming classes using mission-aligned holistic review.
METHODS: Changes to the admissions’ process included removal of metrics from the subjective evaluation, modification of current evaluation tools to be mission-aligned, and introduction of new domains into the modified evaluation tools. Mandatory training was implemented to include virtual platforms and multi-dimensional instruction. Demographic data of matriculants, pre- and post-implementation of holistic review, was evaluated.
RESULTS: Pre-intervention data revealed inconsistent positive trends in the areas of first-generation college graduates (1GCG), underrepresented minorities (URM), and military experience with consistent trends in age and overall grade point average (GPA). Post-intervention data revealed positive and consistent trends in the areas of 1GCG, URM, military experience, and male gender. When comparing pre- vs post-intervention data, all diversity categories trended positively while maintaining overall GPA.
CONCLUSIONS: Following holistic process implementation, enrollment of 1GCG, URM, male gender, and military applicants increased over time. Changes in average metrics (such as GPA) are often worrisome for those implementing holistic review. Data from this study did not suggest any variation in metrics. Holistic review is achievable but requires the institutional culture to support the program’s efforts.

EVALUATION OF AMCAS ESSAYS FROM OLDER (40–50 YEARS OLD) MEDICAL STUDENT APPLICANTS. A QUALITATIVE STUDY

David Douglas Grier
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine
PURPOSE: First year medical school matriculants 40 years old and older comprise only 0.3% of matriculated medical students from 2000 to 2020. No study has looked at content and themes of American Medical College Application Service (AMCAS) essays in this small group of medical school applicants. This study documents the common and recurring themes in medical school AMCAS essays written by applicants 40–50 years of age.
METHODS: AMCAS essays, with personal identifiers removed, were received from all applicants to the University of Cincinnati School of Medicine for the 2020–21 admissions cycle. The data was sorted by age and applicants that were between the ages of 40–50 were selected (n = 20). Using textual analysis/coding, categories were developed based on the themes that were identified in the essays.
RESULTS: Three major themes emerged that were not typically seen in younger medical school applicants. These themes involved the reason the applicant did not apply to medical school earlier in life (79% of applicants), the motivation to change established careers and lifestyles and apply to medical school (74% of applicants), and the experience of being an older pre-medical student (21% of applicants).
CONCLUSIONS: Review of applicant AMCAS essays between the ages of 40–50 showed common themes that are not found in more “traditional” (i.e., younger) applicants. These themes are developed from years of life experience that have accrued since their early twenties. Further work is required to examine these themes.

DREAM TEAM PRESENTS: A COMPREHENSIVE INTERPROFESSIONAL DIABETES CURRICULUM

Joy Moverley
Touro University California
PROBLEM: How to implement an interprofessional diabetes curriculum.
PURPOSE: The Touro University California Diabetes, Research, Education And Management (DREAM) Team offers didactic training in diabetes mellitus to students in the College of Osteopathic Medicine, School of Nursing, Joint Master of Science in Physician Assistant Studies/Master of Public Health Program, and College of Pharmacy since 2018. Known on campus as “Diabetes Week,” students participate in a combination of didactic lectures, laboratories, and case-based learning in both traditional classroom and small interprofessional groups. For Diabetes Week 2021, students from the programs above participated in a completely virtual diabetes week. Students watched at minimum 8 h of required pre-recorded lectures and then participated in three live virtual events in small interprofessional groups including (a) managing patients with diabetes, (b) in-patient management of hyperglycemia and diabetic ketoacidosis, and (c) an integrated case. The integrated case approaches a patient with diabetes over a period of time.
METHODS: Using Qualtrics to administer the survey, this matched pairs pre- and post-study included demographic information and 20 Likert-type questions.
RESULTS: Of the 190 students who participated in Diabetes Week, a total of 121 pre/post surveys were received, with 64% response rate. Using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test, there was a statistically significant (p < 0.00001, alpha = 0.05) difference after diabetes week relating to students’ self-perceived competencies working with colleagues from other professions. Students agreed participating in Diabetes Week “promoted effective communication among an interprofessional (IP) team,” “actively listened to IP team members’ ideas and concerns,” and “expressed my ideas and concerns without being judgmental.”
CONCLUSIONS: The virtual format allowed for continued small group interprofessional education in diabetes mellitus. Next year, we hope to include the Master of Public Health program at our institution. Inclusion of the MPH faculty will bring to forefront the multiple health inequities that influence diabetes care.

GETTING GROUNDED REFLECTION: THE REFLEXIVE HUMANISM FRAMEWORK

Beth West
University of Bridgeport and Nuvance Health, Bridgeport, CT 06604 U.S.A.
PURPOSE: An lesser known element of the Hippocratic Oath is its conclusion: “May I long experience the joy of healing those who seek my help.” Yet the joy of healing can be difficult to find for the busy practicing clinician educator, who struggles with unsustainable workloads driven by work relative value unit (wRVU) compensation models, endless electronic health records, and academic responsibilities. Burnout is a serious problem affecting many US physicians. The Getting Grounded Reflection (GGR) helps busy clinician educators reconnect with their deeply personal motivations for pursuing a career in medical education and mitigates symptoms of burnout.
METHODS: The GGR is one curricular component of the Patricia A. Tietjen, MD Teaching Academy. Selected scholars attend nine monthly modules in cohort, complete asynchronous coursework individually, and present a final scholarly project. Following each live, 3-h Academy session, scholars complete the GGR. Housed within a free Learning Management System (LMS), Teaching Academy scholars respond to a series of writing prompts that is the GGR. Developed by the author, the GGR explores Miller and Schmidt’s (1999) Reflexive Humanism Framework: Identify Multiple Perspectives, Reflect on Possible Conflicts, and Choose Altruism. Its intentional inclusion reinforces throughout the Academy curriculum the most admired qualities (humanism, self-awareness, empathy) of the late Dr. Tietjen for whom this Teaching Academy was named.
RESULTS: The GGR helps busy clinical educators reconnect with deeply personal, humanistic motivations for choosing a career in medical education. Reductions in symptoms of burnout are reported. Increased application of humanism in medical education, ultimately improving patient care and reducing symptoms of burnout.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinical educators who were enrolled in a Teaching Academy and engaged in the GGR are more likely to exhibit humanism in their day to day work as clinical educators.

ESCAPE FROM THE HOSPITAL: AN INTERPROFESSIONAL COMPLEX GERIATRIC DISCHARGE ACTIVITY (IN PROGRESS)

Grace Park | James Swigart | Abigail Adams
Carle Illinois College of Medicine | Carle Illinois College of Medicine | Carle Illinois College of Medicine
PURPOSE: Discharge planning for geriatric patients can be complex. Understanding the value and role of various health professionals in the healthcare team is important to best address the complexities of the needs of the patient when being discharged. A medium of an escape room type game will be utilized to deliver the content. Various videos and case information will be assessed through the solving of puzzles. These will expose the learners to various healthcare providers including physicians, nurses, case managers, and pharmacists. Increased awareness and understanding of interprofessional collaboration will be strived for through this exercise.
METHODS: On orientation day of the internal medicine clerkship, there will be a 1-h activity that will include all medical students on the clerkship and nursing and pharmacy residents who are available. The students will be given 30 min to complete the escape room activity which will be compiled of 5 puzzles and/or tasks that will unlock the next activity or prerecorded videos by a case manager and a hospital pharmacist. The students will be working in small groups of 4–6 people per group. After the activity, there will be a 20-min debrief time with the whole group discussing topics such as problem list, medication reconciliation, discharge disposition planning, and working through challenging family dynamics. Effectiveness will be measured through an anonymous pre and post assessment survey that will be part of the curriculum but voluntary to be included in the study.
RESULTS: Activity will be implemented in March 2022 and will run every 3 months.
CONCLUSIONS: The hypothesis is that the escape room medium will allow for teamwork and collaboration between various health professional learners and greater understanding of the complexities of hospital discharge planning in the geriatric population.

UWISE EFFECT ON OB/GYN NBME SHELF EXAMINATION SCORE PERFORMANCE WITH SHORTENED CURRICULUM

Karly Meyer | Sophie Cemaj
University of Nebraska Medical Center | University of Nebraska Medical Center
PURPOSE: The Undergraduate Web-Based Interaction Self-Evaluation (uWISE) is a question bank created to help students in their third-year clinical clerkships prepare for the Obstetrics & Gynecology (OB/GYN) National Board of Medical Examiners (NMBE) subject (shelf) examination. The purpose of this cohort study is to compare OB/GYN shelf scores between students who were required to complete uWISE question bank as part of the OB/GYN clerkship versus those who were not.
METHODS: Students were divided in two cohorts: one cohort in which uWISE question bank completion was required to compensate for a shortened clerkship, and the other without a uWISE question bank requirement. Those in the cohort with uWISE requirement had the clerkship length shortened by 25%, from 6 to 4.5 weeks. Data was collected from 2017 to 2021. Raw shelf scores and national percentiles were collected in a de-identified manner and analyzed.
RESULTS: Raw shelf scores were similar between cohorts with no statistically significant difference (uWISE 79.89 vs. no uWISE 80.93, p = 0.129). Shelf percentile scores were also similar between both cohorts with no statistically significant difference (uWISE 59.23 vs. no uWISE 63.24, p = 0.124). In total, 484 students were included in the study.
CONCLUSIONS: The uWISE question bank compensated for a shortened curriculum when its completion was required. No difference in shelf raw score and percentile was found between cohorts of third-year medical students during their OBGYN rotation when the rotation was shortened by 25%.

THE EFFECT AND PERCEPTION OF THE JIGSAW METHOD IN ENHANCING LEARNING OF BIOSTATISTICS IN PODIATRIC MEDICAL STUDENTS

Viveka Jenks | Jill Kawalec | Donna Perzeski
Kent State University College of Podiatric Medicine | Kent State University College of Podiatric Medicine | Kent State University College of Podiatric Medicine
PURPOSE: The jigsaw teaching method is an effective cooperative learning approach that enhances student learning through positive interdependence. Students realize that their individual success is dependent on the success of the group. The purpose of this study was to determine whether the jigsaw activity is an effective and preferred way to teach difficult content such as biostatistics.
METHODS: Twenty-one first-year podiatric medical students enrolled in a medical research course participated in the study. To evaluate the effectiveness of the jigsaw technique in teaching common statistical tests, three quizzes were administered to the participants: (1) prior to studying their one assigned statistical test, (2) after studying their assigned test, and (3) after the jigsaw activity. A one-way repeated measures ANOVA was used to analyze results. To examine student perception of the jigsaw technique, participants completed a Q-sort for which they sorted statements on a forced distribution grid. The statements were compiled from internet searches of peer-reviewed articles, websites, blogs, and opinion pieces.
RESULTS: The average quiz scores were as follows: quiz #1, 25.0 ± 17.6%; quiz #2, 30.7 ± 19.0%; quiz #3, 47.2 ± 24.1%. Quiz #3 scores were significantly greater than both quiz #1 and quiz #2 scores (p < .05). There was no significant difference between quiz #1 and quiz #2 scores (p = .426). Three factors emerged from the Q-sort. Factor A (n = 7) perceived the jigsaw method favorably and beneficial for knowledge retention. Factor B (n = 7) preferred instructor-led lectures yet considered the technique unique. Their concerns centered around their learning being dependent on other students. Factor C (n = 5) was motivated by cooperative interdependence and felt deeper learning occurred. However, they regarded it as inefficient.
CONCLUSIONS: This study found that the jigsaw method was an effective technique for teaching biostatistics, despite mixed opinions about the teaching method.

MEDICAL SCHOOL BENCHMARK PERFORMANCE BASED ON COLLEGE COMPETITIVENESS

Joshua Levy | Hiba Kausar | Edward Simanton | Shaun Andersen | Deepal Patel
Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV
PURPOSE: Medical students are tested through USMLE step 1 and 2 examinations before obtaining a medical license. Traditional predictors of medical school performance include MCAT scores, undergraduate grades, and undergraduate institution selectivity. Prior studies indicate that admissions committees may unfairly discriminate against applicants graduating from less competitive universities with average SAT scores. However, there is limited literature to determine whether those who attended competitive colleges perform better on step 1 and 2 examinations. Our study aims to determine if students who attend competitive undergraduate colleges outperform their counterparts on medical school benchmarks after the MCAT.
METHODS: Data was de-identified and in compliance with existing IRB protocols. We defined competitive colleges as those having greater than 10% of their student body scoring 1400 or higher (on a 1600 scale) on the SAT. If this criteria was not met, colleges would be categorized as less competitive. Of the two groups, descriptive statistics and unpaired t-tests were calculated to analyze average test scores on the MCAT, phase 1 NBME, step 1, Phase 2 NBME, and step 2.
RESULTS: Our findings suggest there are no statistically significant differences between students who do or do not attend competitive undergraduate colleges on medical school benchmark examinations following the MCAT. Students who do not attend competitive undergraduate colleges appear to outperform their counterparts in step 2 examination scores.
CONCLUSIONS: Our research indicates that institutional selectivity accurately predicts MCAT scores, but not standardized medical school examination performance. Admissions committees could use this data in their selection process to mitigate factors that may cause unfair discrimination towards students who attend less competitive colleges. Our findings were based on data collected from single institutions. Multi-institutional analyses should be conducted in the future to assess whether these findings are institution-specific or representative of all medical schools.

IMPOSTER SYNDROME AND STRATEGIES TO IDENTIFY AND MITIGATE IT: A WORKSHOP FOR FIRST-YEAR MEDICAL STUDENTS

Algevis Wrench, PhD | Maria Padilla, MD | Arkene Levy, PhD
Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine (NSU MD), Nova Southeastern University | Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine (NSU MD), Nova Southeastern University | Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine (NSU MD), Nova Southeastern University
PURPOSE: Imposter syndrome (IS) is a psychological pattern typified by doubting one’s accomplishments and a persistent fear of being exposed as a fraud. These feelings of self-doubt are pervasive along the medical education continuum, beginning with medical students where IS has been associated with emotional stress, physical exhaustion, depression, and anxiety. We, therefore, conducted an interactive workshop with first-year medical students to educate them about the manifesting patterns and risk factors of IS and strategies to mitigate these feelings.
METHODS: The 60-min workshop began with participants voluntarily completing an Imposter Syndrome quiz, followed by an interactive presentation that reviewed the literature related to IS and its prevalence in medicine. Participants were then assigned to small groups where they discussed three cases of IS in academia and the medical profession. Medical school faculty acted as facilitators and utilized pre-designed prompt questions to stimulate discussion. Students re-convened for a large group report out, where each group shared main discussion points. The session ended with facilitators discussing IS mitigations strategies that can be implemented at the individual, peer, and institutional levels. Participants were also invited to complete a post-workshop evaluation.
RESULTS: Fifty first-year medical students participated in the session. A total of 48 (96%) completed the IS quiz and post-workshop evaluation. Nineteen (28%) participants showed positive findings for IS. The workshop was effective at meeting its objectives, with a mean score of 4.7 on a 5-point Likert scale. Participants reported that case discussions fostered their learning of IS with a mean score of 4.6. In qualitative feedback, participants reported the workshop was “very interactive,” “provided strategies to manage imposter syndrome,” and “helped me become more vulnerable with my peers.”
CONCLUSIONS: This workshop provided an interactive and effective method to increase medical students’ awareness about IS and can be employed as a strategy to enhance student’s wellness.

INTERACTIVE STUDY SKILLS WORKSHOP TO INCREASE EFFECTIVE STUDY PRACTICES

Algevis Wrench | Kate J.F. Carnevale, Ph.D.
Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine (NSU MD), Nova Southeastern University | Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine (NSU MD), Nova Southeastern University
PURPOSE: The first year of professional education presents students with a heavy course load of challenging and integrated material, including several intensive science courses, which requires that students quickly learn and determine individual productive study strategies1. Studies have concluded that academic competence is associated with the knowledge and application of effective study skills2,3. Thus, an interactive workshop was implemented to teach first-year dental students evidence-based study techniques that would set them up for success in a professional school curriculum.
METHODS: The workshop was delivered at the beginning of the first semester of the dental school curriculum. During the 1-h period, the workshop combined an engaging PowerPoint presentation and interactive study skills activities. Students were invited to participate in a voluntary pre-survey to understand their utilization of study techniques and confidence in implementation. After the workshop, students participated in a post-workshop evaluation to assess the effectiveness of the materials presented in teaching effective study practices. Quantitative data were analyzed using the Mann–Whitney U Test (nonparametric test) to compare pre- and post-workshop results. This study was IBR approved as per the university guidelines.
RESULTS: One hundred twenty-nine participants attended the workshop, of which 106 (82%) completed the pre-survey and 86 (67%) completed the post-workshop evaluation. Self-assessment of participants regarding their confidence in implementing effective study techniques in their studies increased from 5.7% strongly agreeing to 40.7% in the pre-and post-survey, respectively. In qualitative feedback, learners reported that the workshop provided “ways to study effectively,” “new learning techniques,” “motivation to study,” and “study skills to better utilize their time.”
CONCLUSIONS: This workshop was implemented to provide tools to dental students to effectively use study strategies. Techniques believed to offer the greatest impact were presented to provide potential to succeed in academic competence. This workshop can be adapted to other professional schools and deployed early in the curriculum.

WE HEAL THE HEALERS- DIGITAL AGE HOLISTIC CARE FOR DOCTORS ON A VIRTUAL PEER MENTORSHIP PLATFORM

Mahima Viswanathan
Buddies Space
PURPOSE: Increased work stressors through the COVID-19 pandemic have caused a sharp rise in physician burnout and other adverse outcomes, revealing a dearth of access to a reliable mentorship system. Social distancing and a rigorous schedule reduce opportunities for candid in-person interaction, and it can be challenging and cost prohibitive to establish a solid rapport with a relatable mentor virtually. Furthermore, the authoritative approach many teaching institution mentors traditionally assume may be less beneficial than other approaches such as peer mentoring. The psychiatrist-founded technology start-up Buddies Space is designed to provide affordable, timely post-pandemic peer mentorship utilizing a user-friendly mobile application, promoting holistic well-being in a culturally diverse demographic. Unique workshops on topics about residency application, mental well-being, and life skills are also available for holistic guidance.
METHODS: Forty resident physicians have 3 key burnout-inducing issues identified by pre-exposure questionnaire. Physicians (peer mentors) provide individual, formal, targeted, and personalized peer mentorship virtually via the Buddies Space „¢ mobile application to residents (mentees) with peer support and assessment over 1 year. Primary outcome is measured improvement on the three key issues. Secondary outcome is improved well-being. Both are assessed with a verified questionnaire. Challenges include small sample size of one medical specialty over a limited timeframe and evaluation of progress by questionnaire. However, the questionnaires used have published substantiation and documented evidence of validity and reliability.
OUTCOME: An objective improvement is predicted in key issues, well-being, and quality of life of residents under peer mentorship with improved mentor satisfaction over the study period and beyond.
CONCLUSIONS: A well-supported generation of healthy and efficient physicians will be promoted by residency peer mentorship.The reliability and scalability of the Buddies Space platform’s mentoring methods will be demonstrated by further expansion.

REINFORCING COMPREHENSION OF MEDICAL MICROBIOLOGY AND IMMUNOLOGY TOPICS THROUGH ONLINE DRAWING WORKSHOPS

Robert Waters MS | Nancy Carty Ph.D. | Christopher C. Keller Ph.D.
Lake Erie College of Osteopathic Medicine | Lake Erie College of Osteopathic Medicine | Lake Erie College of Osteopathic Medicine
PURPOSE: During preclinical education medical students are required to learn numerous topics that must be retained and added to over time. Studies have shown that generative learning, such as drawing, can improve retention. However, limited studies have been conducted on the use of drawing activities at the medical school level. Additionally, according to the contiguity effect, learners comprehend information better when corresponding words are presented closer to an image. However, no studies have been performed that investigated the effectiveness of labeling drawings. This study aimed to utilize mechanism-based drawing with labeling to reinforce medical microbiology and immunology topics during online drawing workshops.
METHODS: First year medical students attended three drawing workshops which they were required to draw several different topics, half of which were labeled with corresponding words, and the other half labeled with numbers. Multiple-choice questions evaluating comprehension of topics covered during the drawing workshop were compared to questions that were not covered during the workshop as part of three course assessments.
RESULTS: Students performed significantly better on topics covered during the drawing workshop compared to those that were not on the workshop. Students also performed significantly better on the assessments for questions on drawings they labeled with words compared to those labeled with numbers. When comparing the discrimination index between drawing and non-drawing questions and topics labeled with words and those labeled with numbers, there was no significant difference.
CONCLUSIONS: Results presented here show that students perform significantly better when lecture material is reinforced during online drawing workshops and when they are labeled with corresponding words. Future research should investigate the effectiveness of combining different generative learning techniques, including drawing, in the medical school curriculum.

INVESTIGATION OF ACADEMIC PERFORMANCE AND QUALITATIVE EXPERIENCE IN MEDICAL STUDENTS DURING COVID-19

Kian Habashi | Deepal Patel | Shaun Andersen | Genesis Leon | Cynthia Lee | Edward Simanton
Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV
PURPOSE: The COVID-19 pandemic caused a rapid shift of learning at medical schools from in-person to online learning [1]. During this transition, faculty noted a decline in the first-year students’ NBME test performance. In a study by Andersen et al., data was gathered on mental health, student-student and student-faculty relationships, and study location that were affected by COVID-19 and the transition to online learning [2]. This data was used to assess correlations between these factors and academic performance in a study done by Patel et al. [3]. This study aims to examine changes in learning experience due to COVID-19 and ways that those changes impact academic performance and mental health.
METHODS: An electronic survey was emailed to first-, second-, and third-year students asking about student experiences during their first semester of medical school. Survey questions explored study location, mental health, and student/faculty relationships. Performance across the 5 NBME customized exams from the first semester was standardized across the 3 cohorts by coding the performance of each student/exam as being above the national mean (coded 1) or below the national mean (coded 0). In independent sampled t-tests that compared COVID and pre-COVID cohorts to examine the impact of survey variables on academic performance, data from all cohorts was combined and correlations were run between survey variables and the academic performance standardized score.
RESULTS: Students who entered medical school during COVID studied more at home and had weaker relationships with classmates/faculty and worse mental health. Correlating variables with academic performance, it was found that academic performance was negatively impacted by studying at home, poor mental health, and lack of relationships with classmates/faculty.
CONCLUSIONS: Changes implemented during COVID are all associated with decreased academic performance.

COMPARISON OF ACADEMIC PERFORMANCE BETWEEN MEDICAL STUDENTS MATRICULATING FROM HISTORICALLY HIGH AND LOW PERFORMING HIGH SCHOOLS

Lina Chan | Gemma Lagasca | Deepal Patel | Arbab Khalid | Edward Simanton
Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV
PURPOSE: The purpose of our study is to determine the correlation between high school reading proficiency and academic performance throughout the medical school experience. While medical schools look at a variety of predictors of academic performance, the impact of high school quality remains unexplored. Current predictive models for USMLE success have evaluated in-house exam performance, studying habits, financial aid need, MCAT scores, and undergraduate GPA.
METHODS: High school name and academic performance data came from institutional databases in accordance with IRB protocol. We cross-referenced the high school names with state performance data to rank each school based on reading proficiency. Students were identified and separated into two groups €”those who attended high schools with an average reading proficiency above 50% and those attended a high school with an average reading proficiency below 50%. Students with no high school data available were excluded from the study. In order to compare students across multiple exam/scoring formats, all performance data were standardized into schoolwide percentile scores. An unpaired T-test was used to compare the data.
RESULTS: We found that students who attended high schools with under 50% reading proficiency scores performed significantly lower on their MCAT and somewhat lower, but not significantly on in-house exams. On the USMLE step 2, they were within one percentile of their classmates who attended high schools with above 50% reading proficiency scores.
CONCLUSIONS: These results show that while students from lower quality high schools perform less well on the MCAT and initial performance measures, they do catch up with students from better high schools. This study suggests that further exploration of a student’s background, specifically their high school, should be a factor that is considered by the admissions committee.

PEER INSTRUCTION: A NOVEL PEDAGOGIC APPROACH FOR 21ST-CENTURY MEDICAL SCHOOLS

Tyler James | Jenna Reisler | Morgan Williams | Paul Koles | Judith Aronson | David Walker | Alan Barrett | Marjan Afrouzian
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 77555, U.S.A. | University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 77555, U.S.A. | University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 77555, U.S.A. | Boonshoft School of Medicine, Wright State University, Dayton, OH 45324 U.S.A. | University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 77555, U.S.A. | University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 77555, U.S.A. | University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 77555, U.S.A. | University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 77555, U.S.A.
PURPOSE: Peer instruction (PI) is an interactive teaching methodology utilizing a peer-driven classroom with questions designed by faculty to motivate students’ critical thinking. We report a pilot study designed for the online implementation of PI to first-year medical students enrolled in a pathology and immunology course at our institution. Aims were to determine barriers to the implementation of PI in an online format, to identify student perceptions of PI, and to understand how to improve student learning in an online setting.
METHODS: Two lectures, one on the pathophysiology of congestion and edema and one on vaccines, were converted to PI format and delivered online. Eighty-four students experienced one PI session and one traditional lecture in a crossover design. After a concept introduction by faculty, students were exposed to several vignettes, followed by challenging multiple-choice questions. For each question, students were asked to respond to two polls. The first poll assessed the knowledge of individual students, while the second poll assessed the students’ response as a group after a 2-min peer-to-peer discussion. The results of both polls were shared, followed by a student explanation and concept clarification by faculty. Students responded to a survey that assessed their experience following the session.
RESULTS: Students mostly or strongly agreed that (1) the quality of questions enhanced learning (72%), (2) correct and incorrect answers were explained well (93% and 77%, respectively), (3) expectations for PI were clear (67%), and (4) PI was an effective learning tool (63%). Free response statements from students indicated that they appreciated the interactive nature of the PI sessions as opposed to typical lecture.
CONCLUSIONS: PI was perceived to be an effective method of educating first-year medical students as compared to traditional lecture. Future directions include further integration of the PI strategy into online medical education.

DOES EXPERIENCE IMPROVE STUDY SKILLS?

Audrey Thacker | Ravneet Gill | Cortny Williams
University of Western States | University of Western States | University of Western States
PURPOSE: The purpose of this study is to understand how students adapt both their study strategies and their approach to planning, monitoring, and evaluation of study strategies as they progress through pre-clinical years of a first professional program.
METHODS: Students were invited to participate in 3 surveys about perceptions of their study habits administered during the first 2 years of a health sciences professional program. The methodologic framework for data analysis had a pragmatic approach employing mixed methods to assess changes in study strategies over time. Qualitative data collected through open-ended responses were analyzed using grounded theory in which cumulative coding cycles and reflective analysis were used to develop major categories for theory generation. The categories were further refined in comparison to objective responses.
RESULTS: Fifty-one percent of study participants self-reported low-impact strategies like repeated reading and extrinsic motivations to describe initial study strategies. As part of the first survey, participants were invited to view a presentation about effective study strategies. Thirty-nine percent of participants watched the presentation, 89% of those participants tried an effective strategy like self-quiz, and 28% maintained the use of those strategies. Sixty-one percent of participants did not watch the presentation, 38% of those participants tried effective study strategies, and 15% maintained use of those strategies. Participants who selected effective study strategies also demonstrated metacognitive development in open-ended responses by illustrating the importance of application and critical thinking, as well as the ability to reflect on who they are, what they know, and what they want to know.
CONCLUSIONS: Students who chose to engage in learning about and following through with effective study strategies were better able to develop metacognitive skills, resulting in more academically accomplished students that describe how learning goals support their success as well-rounded physicians.

MEDICAL STUDENT PERSPECTIVES CONCERNING MEDICAL EDUCATION AT PLFSOM DURING COVID-19 PANDEMIC

Tracie Huynh | Dr. Cynthia Perry
PLFSOM | PLFSOM Medical Education
PURPOSE: During the COVID-19 pandemic, the curriculum at Texas Tech University Health Science Center El Paso Paul L. Foster School of Medicine along with other medical schools shifted towards an unprecedented virtual education. This project aims to understand pre-clinical MS1 and MS2 student perspectives, challenges, and opportunities for growth during the pandemic.
METHODS: A survey containing 13 Likert-type scale items and 2 open-ended questions was designed using Qualtrics from previously published surveys, an institutional survey, or designed and validated thru peer review. The Likert-type scale items had 5–7 response levels, and the open-ended questions focused on challenges and growth. The survey was sent to MS1 and MS2 students and analyzed using Excel and Word Cloud.
RESULTS: Most students reported a negative impact upon peer connection, professional development, and wellness and increased anxiety, isolation, and burnout. Students living alone were correlated with poorer wellness and increased anxiety and burnout. Students rating the most negative connectedness to peers rated the highest anxiety. Overall, students encountered significant challenges and opportunities for growth throughout the pandemic.
CONCLUSIONS: Students at PLFSOM shared similar challenges with other institutions including difficulties with technology, communication with faculty, connection to peers, and increased anxiety. Our students demonstrated additional challenges and potential for growth. This research is significant in understanding our students and suggests a role of social support in student success and wellness. While more research could be done to explore this potential connection, increasing social support through connection with peers and faculty could improve student wellness and decrease levels of anxiety and burnout.

CORRELATIONS BETWEEN WELLNESS ACTIVITIES AND STRESS LEVELS OF MEDICAL STUDENTS IN THEIR CLINICAL YEAR

Lily Liu | Kristine Liang | Edward Simanton
Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine UNLV
PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to examine time spent on wellness activities and correlations with stress levels of medical students in their primary clinical year. The clinical year is one of the most stressful periods of a medical student’s career 1. Previous studies have associated wellness activities with improved psychological well-being of medical students in their preclinical studies 2. Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine offers weekly wellness activities (i.e., exercise, yoga, meditation) in an attempt to alleviate stress levels experienced by students in their clinical year. However, we wish to assess whether these activities had a significant effect on the students’ stress levels.
METHODS: Data for this study was collected from institution databases in accordance with an approved IRB protocol. Medical students from the 2022 cohort completed wellness questionnaires at the end of their clinical year, which included the AAMC Perceived Stress Scale. Students ranked their stress on a scale of 0–4 on four items (possible scores range from 0 to 16). Students were also asked to estimate the amount of time spent in wellness activities in an average week throughout their clinical year. Mean stress levels were compared between groups who spent less than 5 h a week on wellness activities to those who spent 5 or more hours per week.
RESULTS: Medical students with 5 or more hours per week on wellness activities report significantly lower stress levels compared to those who spent less time on such activities.
CONCLUSIONS: Wellness activities of at least 5 h per week contributes to a lowering of medical students’ stress levels during their clinical year. However, further studies must be done to determine if this effect is found at other medical schools.

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN AGE OF MEDICAL STUDENTS AND CHANGES IN THEIR ATTITUDES TOWARD THE UNDERSERVED

Kristine Liang | Lily Liu | Edward Simanton, PhD
Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV
PURPOSE: The purpose of the study was to examine correlations between medical students’ age at matriculation and the worsening of their attitudes toward the underserved (MSATU). Previous studies have shown that medical students’ attitudes toward the underserved population worsen as they undergo their medical education. The students who have worked directly with the underserved during their medical education expressed significantly more positive attitudes than those who did not interact with the underserved. Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine (KKSOM) has a longitudinal service-learning program incorporated into its curriculum, and we wanted to determine whether the age at matriculation has an impact on the decline of MSATU.
METHODS: Data for this study were drawn from institutional databases in accordance with an approved IRB protocol. Subjects included Class of 2021–2024 medical students at KKSOM. Participants were divided by age at matriculation: age 27 or less, and age 28 or more. Before and after their preclinical phase, medical students at KKSOM took MSATU. The MASTU is a validated self-reported assessment that measures medical students’ attitudes towards the underserved at 3 subscales: total, access, and USA influence attitude change. Results were compared between the two age groups across the 3 subscales.
RESULTS: Students who matriculated at age 28 or higher were shown to have greater decline in the total attitude change subscale compared to students who matriculated at age 27 or less.
CONCLUSIONS: Younger medical students who interact with the underserved population are more likely to retain good attitudes toward the underserved during the preclinical phase of medical school. More study will need to be done to generalize the findings.

PREDICTION OF USMLE STEP 2 SCORES AND EFFECT OF DEDICATED STUDY DURATION WITHIN A LONGITUDINAL INTERLEAVED CURRICULUM

Rachel Kracaw, BS | Emily Weinschreider, BS | Sabrina Antonio, BS | Wynona Dizon, BS | Edward Simanton, PhD
Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV
PURPOSE: Program directors predict more weight will be placed on step 2 performance in the selection of residents as step 1 transitions to pass/fail [1–2]. This study predicts USMLE step 2 scores based on academic performance measures and determines the effect of dedicated study time on step 2 performance within Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine’s Longitudinal Interleaved Clerkship (LInC) curriculum.
METHODS: Undergraduate GPA, undergraduate science GPA, MCAT, step 1, NBME subject exams, and step 2 data was collected (n = 101). Pearson correlations were calculated between variables and step 2 scores to determine correlation strengths. A regression model measured cumulative variable impacts. Comparison of actual and predicted scores identified students who overperformed or underperformed on step 2. A t-test compared the mean difference between actual and predicted scores of students whose dedicated study period before step 2 was 2 weeks or less and that of students whose dedicated study period was greater than 2 weeks.
RESULTS: The Pearson coefficient for the prediction model was R = 0.820 (p < 0.001). The mean score for a dedicated study period < 2 weeks was 251.87 versus 240.81 for < 2 weeks. Students whose dedicated study time was < 2 weeks (n = 54) outperformed compared to their predicted scores (mean = 1.61, SD = 9.21) while students whose dedicated time was < 2 weeks (n = 48) underperformed compared to their predicted scores (mean = −1.67, SD = 6.44). An independent sample t-test between the two groups showed t(100) = 2.06, p = 0.042.
CONCLUSIONS: This study effectively predicted step 2 performance based on prior academic performance measures and found that within a LInC curriculum, students whose dedicated study period was two weeks or less strongly outperformed students who took longer.

A UNIQUE, INTERACTIVE GAME IMPROVES PERCEIVED UNDERSTANDING OF COMPLEX RESPIRATORY PATHWAYS IN FIRST-YEAR MEDICAL STUDENTS

Imogen Kane, OMS-III | Robert Lewis, PhD | Jeffrey Hansen, PhD
A.T. Still University School of Osteopathic Medicine in Arizona | A.T. Still University School of Osteopathic Medicine in Arizona | A.T. Still University School of Osteopathic Medicine in Arizona
PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to identify whether participation in a novel active learning game that physically places learners within a model outlining the respiratory control pathway improves understanding of the physiology of respiration in first year medical students.
METHODS: This study included thirty first-year osteopathic medical students. Participants independently previewed a vodcast provided by faculty explaining the basic physiology of respiration. For the subsequent in-classroom activity, tables in a lecture room were marked to represent components of the respiratory control pathway (e.g., apneustic center, diaphragm). Tables were connected with green and red ropes indicating excitatory and inhibitory physiologic effects, respectively. Teams of students at each table were presented with various scenarios (e.g., diabetic ketoacidosis) and asked to work together to predict each scenario’s effect on subsequent steps in the respiratory pathway. Students would illustrate the predicted physiological effect by waving the appropriate connecting rope, e.g., the green rope to indicate diaphragmatic stimulation. The next table would continue the pattern in order to simulate the collective physiological adaptation of the respiratory pathway in response to each clinical scenario.
RESULTS: Following the activity, 25 participants completed an optional survey assessing the benefit of adding this activity to our first-year medical curriculum. Nearly all respondents reported that engaging in this activity expanded their perceived understanding of respiratory control pathways, and should be implemented in future classes. Respondents also noted that the activity fostered an increased sense of community among participants.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, this is the first use of tactile technique with ropes to teach respiratory control pathways to medical students. Future applications of this activity include collaborative construction using cooperative online platforms such as Google Jamboard or Zoom given the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Replication studies will also offer a critical extension of this research given the small sample size.

A DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS OF A STUDENT-LED, COLLABORATIVE INITIATIVE TO INCREASE MEDICAL STUDENT PARTICIPATION IN SCHOLARLY PROJECTS

Brandon W Moritz | Gage Calhoon
University of Oklahoma College of Medicine | University of Oklahoma College of Medicine, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104
PURPOSE: With USMLE step 1 transitioning to pass/fail, medical students are shifting their focus to other parts of their residency application (e.g., scholarly projects) in hopes of bolstering their applications for a successful match. A student-led initiative was created to support students in this effort by increasing student access to and participation in scholarly opportunities and equipping them with the knowledge and resources to effectively contribute.
METHODS: A working group (WG) was formed consisting of staff, faculty, and medical students. Two medical students in the WG led the development of a 14-item Qualtrics survey to gauge current student involvement in scholarly projects, quantify student involvement, determine how students successfully started participating in scholarly projects, identify barriers that students encountered while trying to participate in projects, and acquire feedback on how to mitigate these barriers. After reviewing and analyzing survey results, solutions were developed and implemented utilizing a collaborative strategy.
RESULTS: Participants: 163 OUCOM medical students. 88.3% are interested in scholarly project participation, but only 56.4% have participated in at least one research project with a faculty member (n = 163). 88.9% and 73.3% of students stated they lacked the knowledge of specific scholarly opportunities to participate in and competencies of how to contribute to scholarly projects, respectively (n = 90).
CONCLUSIONS: In response to the two largest barriers, the WG created an online catalogue of scholarly projects for students; supplemental, educational information on how to conduct research as a student; and the creation of a Graduate Research Assistant position in Academic Affairs and a Research Chair position on Student Council to serve as student liaisons for scholarly project participation and to lead annual quality improvement projects. Future work will focus on assessing the impact of these solutions on student participation in scholarly projects and building onto these initiatives to support future medical students.

SHOULD ANATOMY EDUCATORS TAILOR CONTENT TO BE COURSE SPECIFIC? LESSONS FROM A COURSE IN NURSE ANESTHESIA

Brent Russell | Michael J. Herr
University of Tennessee Health Science Center | University of Tennessee Health Science Center
PURPOSE: Clinical information in major anatomy textbooks is broadly focused and not discipline specific. Lack of focus in graduate-level, discipline specific course may result education that misses board-relevant material and knowledge for future practice.
METHODS: Using an anatomy course in nurse anesthesia as an example, we compared texts to determine if material provided is available to prepare students for discipline-specific board exams. Clinical content from three major anatomy texts was compared to the anatomy-specific content found in board preparatory material.
RESULTS: In Netter’s Clinical Anatomy, 42 of 236 (17.8%) clinical correlates were discussed in any detail in a nurse anesthesia board comprehensive review book. Likewise, 40 of 234 (17.1%) correlates in Gray’s Anatomy for Students and 97 of 697 (13.9%) clinical correlates in Moore’s Clinical Gross Anatomy were shared. Only 13 topics determined to be anesthesia board relevant were common between all three gross anatomy texts and 27 topics were shared between any two texts. Compared to content in Anatomy for Anesthetists text, Netter’s Clinical Anatomy shared 31/236 (13.1%) of clinical topics discussed, Gray’s Anatomy for Students shared 50/234 (21.4%), and Moore’s Clinical Anatomy shared 133/697 (19.1%). Nineteen of these topics were shared between all three gross anatomy texts, and 29 topics were common between any two texts. Of the 189 anatomic clinical correlates found in the Anatomy for Anesthetists text, 67 of these (35.4%) were also discussed in the nurse anesthesia board comprehensive review book.
CONCLUSIONS: This demonstrates a twofold increase in the specificity of text content relative to the student’s future discipline. Therefore, using generic anatomy texts to teach a graduate-level course specific to one discipline may result in missing relevant clinical content or covering a large percentage of irrelevant clinical content necessary for board preparation and future practice. This data demonstrates the need to tailor course content to be specific to future disciplines.

EFFECT OF COVID-19 ON PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT PROGRAM ADMISSIONS

Renée Kamauf | Stephanie Neary
Yale University | Yale University
PURPOSE: This study sought to understand changes in Physician Assistant (PA) admissions resulting from onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.
METHODS: The researchers administered a Qualtrics survey in November 2020 to the admissions contact at each accredited PA program. Additionally, the researchers examined PA program websites and conducted qualitative content to analyze the messages communicated to prospective students and applicants.
RESULTS: The researchers found that 68% of programs made at least one change in their admissions process or requirements as a result of the pandemic. Shifts in prerequisite requirements represented the most frequent admissions policy change noted on the websites with 47% of programs noting such a change. The percentage of PA programs who utilized online admissions events increased from 28.7 to 90%.
CONCLUSIONS: COVID-19 has the possibility of serving as a transformational moment in the PA admissions process. By democratizing the application process through online technology, PA programs have the opportunity to provide expanded access to applicants who are historically underrepresented in medicine. It is the researchers hope that the positive changes that have resulted from the pandemic will remain, and that PA educators and admissions professionals will continue to reexamine their admissions practices to improve the applicant experience.

GUIDED CONCEPT MAPPING AS A TOOL FOR INTEGRATED LEARNING

Joanna Appel
University of South Carolina School of Medicine, Columbia
PURPOSE: Concept mapping has been shown to promote integration of content and encourage self-directed learning. Students often resist concept mapping because unfamiliarity with the technique can lead to discomfort and uncertainty. Learning how to create concept maps and the process of assembling well-designed concept maps can be time-consuming. Thus, learning to utilize concept mapping requires an initial period of adaptation and a substantial investment of time, both of which serve as deterrents to those introduced to the process.
METHODS: To remove the common barriers to concept mapping, a technique referred to here as “Guided Concept Mapping” was devised. Using a free online concept mapping tool, concept maps were constructed and converted into a template by removing key terms and concepts. Students were instructed to “fill-in-the-blanks” using a provided bank of terms and concepts. Students were encouraged to personalize the concept maps and discuss their completed maps with others to identify missing items and form new connections. Following the unit exam, students were offered a survey to assess usage of the guided concept maps and provide feedback regarding their experience with the maps.
RESULTS: While several students verbally reported using the maps, few completed the survey. Of the few students who reported using the guided concept maps, 50% reported the tool to be confusing while the remaining 50% reported it to be extremely helpful and supportive of future efforts at utilizing concept maps.
CONCLUSIONS: These pilot results make it difficult to assess the value of “Guided Concept Mapping,” but faculty and student feedback are promising. Future efforts will be made to market the tool to students and provide more training support on how to properly use the map templates and navigate the online tool. The exam performance of future cohorts will be assessed to determine the impact of “Guided Concept Mapping” upon learning.

HAVING PURPOSE CAN MEDIATE THE TRAIT EFFECTS OF MEDICAL STUDENT PERSONALITY ON MOTIVATION

Robert Treat, PhD | Jeffery Fritz, PhD | Amy Prunuske, PhD | Kristina Kaljo, PhD | Craig Hanke, PhD | Molly Falk-Steinmetz, MS
Medical College of Wisconsin | Medical College of Wisconsin - Central Wisconsin | Medical College of Wisconsin - Central Wisconsin | Medical College of Wisconsin | Medical College of Wisconsin - Green Bay | Medical College of Wisconsin
PURPOSE: Medical student personality 1 and resilience 2 has been reported to impact motivation. However, the dispositional aspect of personality as self-reported by trait measures suggests that students with lower personality scores will have reduced motivation. The stability of traits make this problematic since it is challenging to change one’s personality over modest periods of time. 3 Personal aspects of resilience such as having purpose could mediate the adverse effects of lower personality scores. The purpose of this study is to analyze the impact of personality factors on medical student motivation as mediated by having purpose.
METHODS: In 2017/18, 205/500 M-1/M-2 medical students voluntarily completed the Five Factor Personality Inventory (IPIP-50, scale: 1 = very inaccurate, 5 = very accurate), RS-25 Resilience Scale (scale: 1 = strongly disagree, 7 = strongly agree) to measure purpose, and Trait-Emotional Intelligence Questionnaire to measure motivation (TEIQue-sf, scale:1 = completely disagree, 7 = completely agree). Pearson correlations and multivariate linear regression generated via IBM ® SPSS ® 26.0. This research approved by the institution’s IRB.
RESULTS: Motivation (alpha = 0.7) mean scores were significantly (p < 0.001) correlated with the two personality factors of conscientiousness (r = 0.5) and neuroticism (r = −0.3), and the resilience factor of having purpose (r = 0.4). Motivation was significantly predicted (R2 = 0.35, p < 0.001) by three items of conscientiousness (am always prepared (beta = 0.2), waste my time (beta = −0.2), do just enough work to get by (beta = −0.2)), and two items of neuroticism (dislike myself (beta = −0.2), am not easily bothered by things (beta = −0.2)). Neuroticism was mediated by purpose as the beta coefficients of these items were reduced to beta = 0.0.
CONCLUSIONS: Medical student motivation was significantly predicted by the personality factors of conscientiousness and neuroticism. The impact of neuroticism on motivation reported mediating effects of having purpose, but conscientiousness was not mediated by purpose. This suggests that trait effects of emotional instability on medical student motivation can be compensated by resilience, but a lack of willingness to do one’s work cannot be.

PA STUDENT WELLNESS: A MULTI-FACETED APPROACH TO IMPROVING WELL-BEING

Stephanie L Neary
Yale University
PURPOSE: In September 2021, the Accreditation Review Commission on Education for the Physician Assistant (ARC-PA) released a standard (B2.20) that all physician assistant (PA) programs are required to include curriculum addressing clinician wellness and impairment.1 The purpose of this study was to establish baseline statistics related to multiple facets of wellness among PA students and determine if a 16-week required well-being didactic curriculum during PA training will improve psychological flexibility and help seeking behaviors.
METHODS: First year students in 5 accredited PA programs were recruited to participate in this study. Students were given a pre-survey 4 weeks into their didactic training then enrolled in an online required wellness course. Students created unique identifiers and change scores were analyzed across all 5 programs. Curriculum focused on three core areas of wellness: vulnerability, mindfulness, and reflective writing. Students completed a series of required asynchronous lectures and interactive discussion questions before completing a post-survey.
RESULTS: One hundred fifty-seven (60%) of students completed both surveys with matching identifiers. The preliminary analysis suggests that wellbeing and/or resiliency did not change over the course of the intervention period. However, at baseline and finish, students have high levels of loneliness as indicated by the UCLA Loneliness Scale (5.290 and 5.341 respectively). Additionally, the AUDIT-C revealed that men have a significantly increased use of alcohol throughout the course of this program increasing from 3.24 to 3.74 over the 16-week course.
CONCLUSIONS: It is known that PA student mental health declines rapidly during didactic training.2 It is suggestive that an integrative, deliberate, and required wellness course could be preventative against this decline in mental health. Additionally, this study was the first to establish rates of alcohol use among PA students, a factor that could contribute to both wellness and impairment along with having implications for future patient care.

ASSESSING TRENDS IN PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT STUDENT DEPRESSION RISK, SUICIDAL IDEATION, AND MENTAL HELP-SEEKING BEHAVIOR

Stephanie L Neary
Yale University
PURPOSE: The purpose of this study is to assess how physician assistant (PA) student depression risk, suicidal ideation, and mental health help-seeking behaviors change during didactic training and the relationship between depression risk and demographic factors.
METHODS: Data were obtained through an anonymous online survey sent to didactic students in 7 PA programs during orientation and again at midpoint of the didactic year (6 months later). Descriptive statistics, independent samples t-testing, and one-way ANOVA analyses were used to assess trends in patient health questionnaire (PHQ-9) scores over this 6-month time. The PHQ-9 is the module of the PHQ that measures severity of depression risk.
RESULTS: The orientation survey response rate was 82.7% (287/347) and the midpoint survey response rate was 62% (217/350). Analysis revealed that mean PHQ-9 scores increased significantly from 2.49 to 6.42 (p < 0.001) from orientation to midpoint of the didactic year, with 18.9% of students having scores of 10 or greater at midpoint compared to 4.5% at orientation. Thoughts of self-harm and/or suicidal ideation in the past two 2 weeks also increased from 3.5 to 7.4% during this same time frame. Additionally, students’ likelihood of seeking mental health help decreased between orientation and midpoint despite the concurrent increases in depression risk and suicidal ideation.
CONCLUSIONS: Rising PHQ-9 scores indicated an increased risk of major depression among didactic year PA students. Further research on early screening methods and factors that encourage help-seeking behaviors may serve to inform programs on how to create learning environments that mitigate depression risk and promote wellbeing during professional training.

THE EFFECT OF GROSS ANATOMY TUTORIALS USING NEAR-PEER AND RECIPROCAL PEER TEACHING ON STUDENTS’ CONFIDENCE AND PERFORMANCE?

Jonathan Tse | Victoria Addis | Simranjeet K. Cheema | Sung Jik Cha | Victor Hung | Sara Allison
Western Michigan University Homer Stryker MD School of Medicine | Western Michigan University Homer Stryker MD School of Medicine | Western Michigan University Homer Stryker MD School of Medicine | Western Michigan University Homer Stryker MD School of Medicine
PURPOSE: Prior studies have indicated that the gross anatomy lab can generate feelings of stress or anxiety, particularly in the beginning of a course. While a low to moderate level of stress may be helpful for memory, high levels of stress are detrimental to memory and may hinder a student’s ability to retain course material. To help first year medical students transition to learning in the cadaver laboratory, two tutorials utilizing near peer and reciprocal peer teaching were designed for their musculoskeletal (MSK) course. These tutorials aimed to increase students’ knowledge, confidence, and metacognitive skills.
METHODS: Eighty-four first year medical students will be invited to attend lower and upper extremity anatomy tutorials prior to their first and second MSK anatomy laboratories. During the tutorials, second-year students will guide small groups through anatomy lab objectives. First-year medical students will then utilize reciprocal peer teaching to review the material. Pre and post quizzes will be administered before and after each tutorial to assess students’ knowledge. Each of the quizzes includes 5 different identification questions of similar difficulty and content. Each question also asks students to use a slider scale to rate their confidence in their answer choice.
RESULTS: Results will be analyzed following the conclusion of the tutorials. Given the successful applications of peer teaching in other educational settings, we hypothesize that there will be a significant increase in performance and confidence following the tutorial.
CONCLUSIONS: Identifying strategies to aid students transition into the gross anatomy lab is an important goal for medical educators. Tutorials that utilize peer teaching may provide an opportunity for students to gain knowledge, confidence, and metacognitive skills, all of which are important aspects of becoming a successful clinician.

PERCEPTIONS OF MEDICAL STUDENTS AND EDUCATORS REGARDING LGBTQ+ HEALTHCARE AND SEXUAL GENDER MINORITY PATIENTS

Donna McMahon | Megan Maguire | Karan Malik | Sarah Jane Muder | Christine Hutak
NYITCOM | NYITCOM | NYITCOM | NYITCOM | NYITCOM
PURPOSE: Educating physicians and medical students about providing clinical care to LGBTQ+ and sexual gender minority (SGM) patients presents a pressing issue. The literature details how SGM patients are consistently a patient population with unmet clinical needs. We conducted a cross-sectional self-reported survey investigating perceptions, knowledge, and confidence regarding SGM healthcare competencies. This survey was distributed to all current medical students and faculty at the New York Institute of Technology College of Osteopathic Medicine.
METHODS: The constructed survey included novel questions as well as questions adapted from the Medical School Graduation Questionnaire (Association of American Medical Colleges) and Graduating Seniors Survey (American Association of Colleges of Osteopathic Medicine). The survey included questions assessing willingness, perceived knowledge, and participants’ actual knowledge on treating SGM patients. Questions answered “not applicable” were omitted. We obtained demographic data pertaining to participants’ sex assigned at birth, gender identity, sexual orientation, religiosity, academic year in medical school (students), and faculty status (clinician vs. non-clinician and terminal degree). Data was collected electronically using REDCap. The data was analyzed using descriptive statistics of frequency.
RESULTS: One hundred sixty-nine medical students and faculty completed the survey. The majority of students (77.5%) and faculty (72.2%) demonstrated adequate baseline knowledge. Most students and clinical faculty (n = 146) felt very comfortable (61%) or somewhat comfortable (27%) discussing LGBTQ+ health issues, providing medical care to, and performing osteopathic manipulative treatment on SGM patients. Students (49.5%) and clinical faculty (52%) were relatively less comfortable explaining key differences between biological sex and gender identity/expression. Many students (69.3%) felt that their clinical training thus far did not prepare them for treating SGM patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Among surveyed medical students and faculty members, there is a desire to treat SGM patients. However, there is a perceived lack of knowledge in the skills required to treat these populations effectively.

THE EFFECT OF HISTOLOGY EXAMINATION QUESTION DELIVERY FORMAT ON STUDENT PREPARATION AND PERFORMANCE: STAND-ALONE VS. INTEGRATED EXAMINATIONS

DJ Lowrie Jr. | Andrew R. Thompson
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine | University of Cincinnati College of Medicine
PURPOSE: Most medical schools have transitioned from discipline-based to integrated curricula. Although the adoption of integrated examinations usually accompanies this change, stand-alone practical examinations are often retained for disciplines such as gross anatomy and histology. The purpose of this study is to (1) compare examination performance on histology questions administered as part of stand-alone (practical) versus integrated examinations, and (2) ascertain whether students alter their approach to learning histology content based on examination type.
METHODS: Student performance on histology questions administered as a stand-alone (practical) was compared to performance when similar/identical questions were included in integrated examinations over a 6-year period (n = 4 years stand-alone, n = 2 years integrated) in an endocrine/reproductive course. Because other courses in the curriculum still utilize stand-alone histology examinations, students were surveyed to determine whether their approach to learning histology differed based on the assessment approach.
RESULTS: Analysis of variance and t-tests was initially used to determine the comparability of examination results within each subset of stand-alone and integrated examinations. Results indicated there was no significant difference between the years for stand-alone (p = 0.84) or integrated (p = 0.94) examinations. This suggested that the results within each examination format could be pooled for the reminder of analyses. The average for 4 years (2015–2019) of stand-alone examinations was 87.8% (SD = 13), while examination averages of histology content on integrated examinations spanning 2 years (2020-2021) was 85.7% (SD = 11). A t-test comparing these results showed the difference between these two groups was not significant (p = 0.38).
CONCLUSIONS: Although there was a slight drop in student performance on histology content when it was tested as part of an integrated examination, the difference was not statistically significant. Coupled with survey data, these results suggest that while students’ approach to histology learning differs slightly, examination performance is similar regardless of the testing format.

STUDENT ONBOARDING - ORIENTATION 2.0

Rachel Porter
Duke University Physician Assistant Program
PURPOSE: Physician assistant programs are accelerated and densely packed into a roughly 2-year period. Thus, student orientation must be comprehensive and efficient. The Duke PA Program began in 2018 to more intentionally optimize students’ introduction to the program, which had historically taken place in-person at the start of the first semester. In 2021, dramatically impacted by COVID, the program began to rethink this plan and incorporate technologies implemented during the pandemic. The resulting approach enabled a smoother transition into the program.
METHODS: To ensure a student-centered approach, data from previous cohorts was analyzed and current students were engaged in the new strategy design. The resulting innovations utilized remote technologies and an online onboarding course to streamline processes and strengthen the bridge between admission and matriculation. Videos embedded within the course welcomed students and assisted with navigation of resources. Course announcements and discussion boards centralized communications previously sent via email. Practice assignments introduced core program elements. The course housed all onboarding activities and employed a digital checklist that students used to self-pace, and faculty and staff used to monitor engagement. The course activities spanned 2 months and culminated as student arrived on campus for the start of the Fall 2021 semester.
RESULTS: All 91 students in the class of 2023 engaged with the new onboarding course. Survey data showed that 91% of responding students found the onboarding course to be effective. Early data from the 2021–2022 academic cycle suggests that students have been better able to engage with program resources and tools.
CONCLUSIONS: Data suggests that the redesigned process was effective and students found the course valuable. The online onboarding course provides a platform that will be utilized and refined for future cohorts. This structure could be applied to other medical education programs that include a student orientation process.

THE ACCURACY OF STUDENT SELF-REPORTS COMPARED TO LEARNING ANALYTICS IN A LARGE UNDERGRADUATE ANATOMY COURSE

Freddie Bauer | Polly Husmann, PhD
Indiana University School of Medicine - Bloomington | Indiana University School of Medicine - Bloomington
PURPOSE: Bias in self-reported data is a common problem that can negatively affect educational and behavioral research. Educational research has previously explored student self-reporting as a metacognitive tool, and particular attention has been paid to how students evaluate their own academic performance. However, little attention has been paid to how accurately students assess their own effort and attendance in class.
METHODS: The present study examines the attendance and behaviors of students in an undergraduate anatomy class. The class consists of over 400 students, most of whom are pre-health students. Self-reported attendance and study behaviors were collected from students via a mid-semester survey that students completed shortly after the second of four exams. Self-reported attendance was then compared to actual attendance collected using practice questions during the active learning session. Student behavior data from the survey was also compared with the analytics from lecture recordings and the course management system to assess how accurate students’ self-reports are.
RESULTS: While 65% of students reported being dissatisfied with their exam grades, only 57% of students indicated that they always or nearly always attended the in-person sessions. Results further indicate that students who claim to always or nearly always attend the in-person sessions are more likely to be satisfied with their exam scores than students who report only occasionally attending. Finally, substantial discrepancies are reported between students’ self-reports and analytics data collected online.
CONCLUSIONS: The data presented here demonstrate the accuracy of student self-reports on their study behaviors and class attendance. These data help to elucidate why students may be struggling academically when they claim to regularly attend class. These data also have significant implications for educational research that relies heavily on student self-reports.

CURRENT GAPS IN MEDICAL EDUCATION AS ILLUSTRATED BY THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC: INTERVIEWS WITH PHYSICIANS ACROSS VARIOUS MEDICAL SPECIALTIES

Stephanie Yu | Emmeline Kim | Rita Lee
MS3 | MS3 | Associate Professor
PURPOSE: The COVID-19 pandemic brought unforeseen challenges and had many unfortunate consequences. The unprecedented uncertainty and other drastic changes that were driven by the pandemic illuminated some of the existing flaws in our healthcare system and in medical education. We aim to explore these challenges as opportunities to guide medical education reform.
METHODS: Physicians across Colorado from various medical specialties were interviewed with questions focusing on the impact of the pandemic on physicians’ practices, patient care, and trainee education. Audio files of the interviews were transcribed, analyzed, and tallied according to a list of systematically established themes. The final data was reviewed to identify important common themes that highlight areas for improvement that could be made in medical education in order to create a positive transformation to healthcare.
RESULTS: Thirty-one physicians across 20 different medical specialties and sub-specialties were interviewed within the month of April 2020. Some of the common themes mentioned were a lack of data to drive clinical decisions, the presentation of unique and positive training opportunities from practicing medicine amidst a pandemic and learning to adapt to new obstacles, challenges in communication with patients and their families, patient anxiety, and the disproportionate impact of the pandemic on underserved communities.
CONCLUSIONS: The pandemic illuminated gaps in our healthcare system that were already present but not readily apparent. These themes identified impact all specialties, demonstrating that many of these gaps are universal in the field of medicine. We believe that the best way to effect change is to incorporate these topics into medical education in order to prepare future physicians to be able to make complex decisions, lead in the face of uncertainty, to be adept at various modes of patient communication, and to be well-versed in public health topics to address inequity in medicine.

LANGUAGE SUPPORT PROGRAM: BREAKING LANGUAGE AND CULTURAL DISPARITIES IN MEDICAL STUDENTS THROUGH A TAILORED COACHING APPROACH

Agueda Vega | Sherlie Vázquez | Abner Colón | Elizabeth Rivera
Ponce Health Sciences University | Ponce Health Sciences University | Ponce Health Sciences University | Ponce Health Sciences University
PURPOSE: Ponce Health Sciences University (PHSU) has developed an initiative to ensure competent bilingual healthcare professionals, addressing language and cultural competence for non-Spanish speakers. This research analyzed the impact of the Language Support Program (LSP) in the targeted language (Spanish) and understanding of cultural aspects in medical scenarios. In addition, it explored how the LSP helped the participants overcome language and cultural barriers.
METHOD: The LSP program consists of an individualized approach and is student-centered based. This service reinforces Spanish to students who do not speak Spanish as a first language, and are enrolled in a healthcare career. The program has been implemented for three years. For this research, a longitudinal explanatory sequential design was conducted. This design allows the collection and analysis of qualitative data in a second phase as a follow-up to the quantitative results.
RESULTS: On average, medicine students who participated in the Language Support Program in the vast majority showed increase mastery in the targeted language (Spanish) and understanding of cultural aspects in medical scenarios. During the past 3 years, results of the posttest (M = 85, SE 1.79) in comparison to the pretest (M = 72, SE 2.47) showed the difference among groups (−13, 95% CI [−17.09, −7.33], is significant (t (19) = −5.26, p = .001). This difference represents a large-sized effect (d = 1.21). For the qualitative data, a focal group was done to explore students' experience during their patient encounter interviews on rotations in medical scenarios and discuss strategies to help integrate language and cultural competence aspects for improving Spanish proficiency.
CONCLUSIONS: LSP tailored approach provides a relevant skill that empowers medical students to address language barriers. As a result, more confident and competitive physicians will promote a high-quality healthcare service to Hispanic patients through this innovative method.

COMPARISON BETWEEN ONLINE AND IN-PERSON DELIVERY OF HISTOLOGY LABORATORY MATERIAL IN SECOND YEAR DENTAL STUDENTS

Emma Rehnelt1 and Shanu Markand2
A.T. Still University - Missouri School of Dentistry and Oral Health Kirksville, Missouri, 63501 USA
PURPOSE: Over the course of the COVID-19 pandemic, educators and students have adapted to an online learning environment. Now that second year dental students have learned both online and in-person, we have a unique opportunity to explore the benefits of online learning versus traditional in-person histology laboratory.
METHODS: Our study design was composed of a survey sent to second year dental students at A. T. Still University - Missouri School of Dentistry and Oral Health. Preferences for online or in-person histology laboratories were requested and recorded using a Likert scale. Students were also asked to compare preparation differences and to rank the difficulty of each histology subject over their first and second years of dental school.
RESULTS: Of 64 dental students in the second year class, 21 responded to this survey. Sixty-two percent preferred online histology laboratory format, 24% preferred in-person histology laboratory format, and 14% of students had no preference in format. When asked which required more self-directed study, 24% of students chose that online histology labs required more individual preparation, and 14% of students chose that in-person required more. Sixty-two percent of students agreed both formats required the same preparation. Students also ranked histology subject difficulty. Data analyzed using a Wilcoxon signed-rank test showed nervous tissue was the most difficult first year histology subject with blood being easiest (p-value of 0.04). The endocrine system was found to be the most difficult second year histology subject with skin being easiest.
CONCLUSIONS: This survey showed that the majority of dental students responding preferred online histology laboratories. Goals of this study are to make challenging histology subjects more comprehensible based on students’ preferences. Further studies should continue to compare online and in-person learning with larger survey sample sizes from this cohort.

CHANGING THE DNA OF PHARMACOLOGY CURRICULUM

Linda Chang | Radhika Sreedhar
University of Illinois at Chicago-Rockford | University of Illinois at Chicago
BACKGROUND: Pharmacogenomics is the study of how genes affect a person’s response to drugs. There is a deficit in training medical students on how to translate pharmacogenomic data to clinical practice (1). The recommendations are that students be able to use pharmacogenomics to inform dosing of medications (2) and attain the genomic Entrustable professional activities (EPA) for patient care. (3) To achieve these goals at least 4 h of instruction in pharmacogenomics and participation in mandatory or elective pharmacogenomics course is recommended. (4) The USMLE also tests students re key concepts in pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics including pharmacogenetics (5).
METHODS: The goals of this course are to prepare healthcare students to develop knowledge and skills to assess how genetic polymorphisms affect drug treatment outcomes, identify the clinical utility of pharmacogenomics, and use it to tailor drug therapy. This is a 4-week synchronous online course with (a) virtual meetings to discuss challenges in pharmacogenomics, (b) case-based weekly quizzes, and (c) patient care applications. Students also will work in teams to create videos to (a) explain the role of pharmacogenomic testing to patients; (b) interpret, explain, and apply the results of pharmacogenomic testing; (c) acquire information from reliable resources of pharmacogenomic information including CPIC and PharmGKB; and (d) critically appraise a pharmacogenomic study.
RESULTS: A total of 30 students have completed the course to date. The course outcomes include: knowledge—improvement in average score from pre to post quizzes from 40 to 90%. Skills—average score of at least 80% for EPA aligned rubric based grading of videos, case-based applications, and critical appraisal skills. Attitudes—positive quantitative and qualitative feedback from all students on weekly reflection assignments.
CONCLUSIONS: The National Human Genome Research Institute developed genomic EPA encompassing areas from diagnostic testing to treatment interventions. (3) We demonstrate the successful implementation of a pharmacogenomic curriculum in medical school to address these EPAs.

PROMOTING COLLEGE ADMISSIONS IN THE HISPANIC COMMUNITY: DEVELOPMENT OF A VIRTUAL SUMMER SAT PROGRAM

Rajavi Patel | Nadia Matovski | Claudio Cortes D.V.M, Ph.D.
Medical Student, Oakland University William Beaumont School of Medicine | Undergraduate, Oakland University | Oakland University William Beaumont School of Medicine, Department of Foundational Medical Sciences
PURPOSE: The Scholastic Achievement Test (SAT) is a vital examination for high school students due to its valued role in the college admissions process. Nationally, only 60% of Hispanic high school graduates enroll in college compared to the 71% of white graduates. Due to an underprivileged socioeconomic background, Hispanic teens tend to enroll in schools with low college readiness preparation where average SAT scores are below 950. To support Hispanic teens in college readiness during this pandemic and motivate them to pursue higher education, we established and evaluated a Virtual SAT Summer Program.
METHODS: Eighteen Hispanic teens enrolled in the program. Twelve sessions were established including pre- and post-assessments and math and reading sessions. Sessions were delivered over Zoom. Learning materials included PowerPoint lessons, Khan Academy resources, and prep books. Surveys and formative assessments were provided to students to evaluate the effectiveness of the medical and undergraduate student-delivered sessions.
RESULTS: A significant improvement was observed between SAT pre-test and post-test performance (n = 18, p < 0.05). Significant improvement was found in the SAT Math section (n = 18, p < 0.05) but not found in the SAT Reading section. Nevertheless, there was an increase in the post-reading section suggesting that size of students can be enlarged to determine the significance. The mean score for overall course satisfaction (M = 4.64 STD = 0.46) was high. We expect to determine if students improve on the official SAT and whether they pursue college.
CONCLUSIONS: The COVID-19 pandemic placed responsibility on students to self-regulate their learning. We developed a successful Virtual SAT Summer Program that proved effective in improving students’ knowledge of the SAT structure and format. Overall, students were satisfied and appreciated the interactive sessions and the ample opportunities to do practice problems.

ADAPTING TO VIRTUAL TEAM-BASED LEARNING (TBL) IN RESPONSE TO THE COVID-19

Sutheera Sangsiri | Amornnat Thuppia | Pholasit Chamod | Thanakorn Surarak | Sophapun Ekarattanawong
Pharmacology Division, Department of Preclinical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Thammasat University | Anatomy Division, Department of Preclinical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Thammasat University | Biochemistry Division, Department of Preclinical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Thammasat University
PURPOSE: To maintain active learning activity during the COVID-19 pandemic, we converted the conventional face-to-face team-based learning (TBL) into the virtual TBL. The effectiveness of virtual versus face-to-face TBL was assessed and compared. Besides, pre-class study behaviors, perspectives, and encountered challenges during the virtual TBL activity were determined.
METHODS: Microsoft Team was operated as it features the breakout-roomed element convenient for the small team discussion. Socrative was obtained to operate virtual multiple-choice question assessments including individual Readiness Assurance (iRAT), group Readiness Assurance (gRAT), and team Application of concept (tAPP). Data were collected from 171 and 170 students taking face-to-face TBL in 2020, and the virtual TBL in 2021, respectively. Students were allocated into small groups for TBL topic: pharmacology of contraceptives and hormone replacement. Students completed iRAT, gRAT, and tAPP with immediate feedback after the completion of gRAT and tAPP. Lastly, the students were asked to complete an optional individual online survey to determine (1) student preparedness during the pre-class study, (2) student perspectives toward virtual TBL, and (3) challenges encountered.
RESULTS: Mean iRAT from virtual TBL was higher than face-to-face TBL (8.39 ± 1.84 vs 5.08 ± 2.10). Both virtual and face-to-face TBL show improvement in gRAT compared to iRAT. Data from the survey indicated that students understood virtual TBL process (97.06%), agreed that virtual group discussion enhanced their knowledge (88.24%), and would recommend this approach for the next academic years in case the pandemic persists (76.47%). Students mentioned challenges during virtual TBL including Internet instability (25.00%), insufficient supervision (19.12%), not comfortable performing virtual team leader or members (16.18%).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggests that virtual TBL yielded positive learning outcomes as the traditional face-to-face format. Students well understood in using virtual learning tools. Certain factors important for creating effective virtual TBL include internet stability, good communication, and virtual group discussion skill.

AGE AND PREJUDICE: RAISING AWARENESS ABOUT OLDER ADULTS

Aniela Mendez-Reguera | Karina Rodriguez-Quintanilla | Mildred Lopez Cabrera | Belinda Carrion
Tecnologico de Monterrey | Tecnologico de Monterrey | Tecnologico de Monterrey | Tecnologico de Monterrey
PURPOSE: Although many stereotypes still seep into healthcare, one that raises an alarming concern is ageism. It refers to the prejudices against an individual and encompasses attitudes, thoughts, and behaviors that segregate or discriminate based on age. As populations worldwide are living longer, ageist depictions against older adults pose serious challenges to developing an adequate societal response. A way into the future is the design of meaningful learning experiences that enhance empathy and dispel misconceptions revolving around aging.
METHODS: A 5-week-long interdisciplinary training module for undergraduate students was designed. The activities included lectures and workshops on the physiology of aging, psychological care of older adults, and quality of patient-centered care. At the end of the module, to assess the impact of the training, students engaged in a role-play dynamic, a simulated consultation with an older adult. Participants were given a script and they played the role of a health practitioner, an older adult, or an observer. After the session, participants answered an online survey reflecting on the experience and their attitudes on ageism.
RESULTS: The educational strategy has been implemented twice in 2021 with 250 undergraduate students from healthcare programs enrolled. According to their roles, participants highlighted different learning outcomes; the ones in the health practitioner role stressed the importance of developing skills to successfully conduct a consultation early in their careers, while the ones in the older adult and the observer roles identified ageist attitudes that surround the care of older adults.
CONCLUSIONS: Whether in society or in healthcare, education is our most powerful tool when breaking down stereotypes. Educational strategies early in training help to internalize the values of the profession that improve healthcare quality and patient wellbeing.

WALK A MILE IN MY SHOES: PATIENT-CENTERED SIMULATION

Aniela Mendez | Mildred Lopez | Belinda Carrion | Karina Rodriguez
Tecnologico de Monterrey | Tecnologico de Monterrey | Tecnologico de Monterrey | Tecnologico de Monterrey
PURPOSE: The keystone of clinical practice is the doctor-patient relationship. The foundation on which it is built are clinical competencies, and often overlooked, interpersonal skills like empathy and communication. Patient-centered models require professionals that care for the patient as a whole, from the biomedical, emotional, social, and entrepreneurship dimensions of care. Simulation provides an excellent way to achieve the desired learning outcomes in a safe place.
METHODS: Our study leveraged simulation to promote a patient-centered approach. Participants were assigned either the healthcare practitioner, patient, or observer role. We provided different clinical scenarios, for example, insomnia, informative consultation with an older person, and sharing HIV-positive results with a patient. After the sessions, participants answered an online survey where they reported the skills that they believed the simulation developed, using a scale from least developed (1) to the most developed (7).
RESULTS: The pilot implementation of patient-centered simulation included over 150 students from the third and fourth semesters of medicine, psychology, odontology, and nutrition. Across the different cases, students highlighted skills like empathy (6.16), communication (5.98), and professionalism (6.35) as the most developed during the simulations.
CONCLUSIONS: For students to thrive in a clinical setting, they should be able to approach the patient in a holistic way. In healthcare, a trustful and respectful doctor-patient relationship is of great importance. Strategies that promote and train relevant skills like empathy and communication are keystones in training and we must design and adapt our learning strategies to incorporate these in our undergraduate student training. PRP provides the learners with different perspectives, getting them to understand the complexity of the physician-patient interaction, enhances the students’ cognitive understanding, and enriches the affective experience.

MEDICAL STUDENT ASSERTIVENESS AND THE IMPACT OF PERSONALITY AND GENDER

Robert Treat, PhD | Amy Prunuske, PhD | Jeffery D. Fritz, PhD | Craig Hanke, PhD | Kristina Kaljo, PhD | Molly Falk-Steinmetz, MS
Medical College of Wisconsin | Medical College of Wisconsin-Central Wisconsin | Medical College of Wisconsin-Central Wisconsin | Medical College of Wisconsin-Green Bay | Medical College of Wisconsin | Medical College of Wisconsin
PURPOSE: Assertiveness education and training can be used to promote psychological wellbeing and a culture of respect in healthcare workers. 1 Assertiveness training and its evaluation has strong focus in the literature on nursing students, 2 but less recent reporting given to medical students. Assertiveness as a facet of emotional intelligence has been reported for medical students but with limited results. 3 The purpose of this study is to analyze the impact of personality factors on medical student assertiveness as moderated by gender.
METHODS: In 2017/18, 205/500 M-1/M-2 medical students voluntarily completed the Five Factor Personality Inventory (IPIP-50, scale:1 = very inaccurate, 5 = very accurate) and Trait-Emotional Intelligence Questionnaire to measure assertiveness (TEIQue-sf, scale:1 = completely disagree, 7 = completely agree). Independent t-tests and multivariate linear regression generated via IBM ® SPSS ® 26.0. This research approved by the institution’s IRB.
RESULTS: Medical student assertiveness mean (± sd) scores (4.7 ± 1.3) were significantly (p < 0.001) above the instrument midline (= 4) with 63% above 4.0. Female students mean scores (4.9 ± 1.2) were higher than (p < 0.051) male student scores (4.6 ± 1.4). Female medical students: Assertiveness was significantly predicted (R2 = 0.3, p < 0.001) by personality factors of conscientiousness (beta = 0.3), extraversion (beta = 0.4), and neuroticism (beta = 0.3) using regression analysis. Male medical students: Assertiveness was significantly predicted (R2 = 0.3, p < 0.001) by personality items of openness (beta = 0.2), conscientiousness (beta = 0.2), extraversion (beta = 0.5), agreeableness (beta = 0.2), and neuroticism (beta = 0.2).
CONCLUSIONS: Female medical students reported higher assertiveness scores than male students. The strongest personality predictor of medical student assertiveness was the factor of extraversion for both female and male medical students with the facets of friendliness and gregariousness having the highest impact. Male students have more personality traits to impact assertiveness which include the two cognitive personality factors of openness and agreeableness that did not help female student assertiveness. However, this will assist or interfere with male student’s assertiveness depending on whether they have high or low openness/agreeableness scores.

INTEGRATION OF ULTRASOUND INTO A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT ANATOMY CURRICULUM

Cynthia C Bennett
Elon University Dept of Physician Assistant Studies
PURPOSE: Advances in ultrasound technology over the past 2 decades have led to both increased availability of affordable US equipment and greatly increased use of point-of-care ultrasound (POCUS) by medical clinicians. While US medical schools typically follow 4-year curricula, typical physician assistant (PA) curricula are half as long, making addition of ultrasound education a challenge. This abstract describes a series of workshops designed to integrate ultrasound into a PA didactic year anatomy curriculum. Students’ perceptions of ultrasound as a teaching tool and curricular addition are assessed.
METHODS: A 38-student PA cohort participated in a 4-workshop series using ultrasound to teach regional anatomy during their didactic-year anatomy course. Content was limited to the anatomical region currently being studied; one session covered a common POCUS application in conjunction with the EM course. Workshops included brief large-group lecture followed by small-group (4–5 students) hands-on sessions guided by a preceptor knowledgeable in both ultrasound use and the associated anatomy. Sessions allotted 45–55 min for hands-on learning guided by a checklist of structures to image/understand. A short content quiz (ultrasound and anatomy questions) and feedback form immediately followed each session, and their responses were analyzed.
RESULTS: Analysis showed that students found the sessions increased their understanding of ultrasound technology; improved their understanding of clinical skills associated with the region’s anatomy; developed their understanding of POCUS; and was a worthwhile addition to the PA curriculum. Over time, students expressed increasing comfort with the amount of hands-on ultrasound time they received.
CONCLUSIONS: PA students find ultrasound effective as a teaching tool for anatomy education. Integration of ultrasound into the anatomy curriculum creates interest in and understanding of POCUS as a clinical tool and increases understanding of physical examination skills. Test scores on anatomical knowledge do not suffer as a result of adding ultrasound into the curriculum.

DEVELOPMENT OF HANDS-ON SKILLS IN DIAGNOSTICS OF LUNG DISEASES USING ULTRASONOGRAPHY WHILE REDUCING MEDICAL STUDENT CONTACT WITH EACH OTHER DURING THE PANDEMIC

Caleb Milius | Logan Jepson | Drew Maclaskey | Vanessa Pazdernik | Tatyana Kondrashova
ATSU-KCOM | ATSU-KCOM | ATSU-KCOM | ATSU | ATSU-KCOM
PURPOSE: The ability to quickly diagnose pulmonary pathology is an essential competency for physicians to optimize critical patient care. With the emergence of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), physicians are working to optimize the screening, diagnosis, and management of COVID-19 patients. The current study evaluated the potential importance of advanced pulmonary ultrasonography training for medical students for COVID-19 lung examination.
METHODS: The advanced ultrasonography pulmonary training session that focused on normal and COVID-19-associated lung ultrasonography findings was offered to second-year medical students. Advanced pulmonary ultrasonography training included a PowerPoint presentation followed by a demonstration of relevant scanning techniques using a COVID-19 ultrasound lung simulator. Before and after the ultrasound training, students completed identical pretests and posttests that evaluated participant knowledge of lung ultrasonography. Students also completed a survey designed to assess their perception of the use of ultrasonography for COVID-19 diagnostics and overall satisfaction with the advanced pulmonary ultrasonography training.
RESULTS: When compared with pretest scores, significant changes were found for student posttests for individual quiz questions and overall scores (all P < .02): students improved on image identification skills, previous material, and new COVID-19 material questions. Survey results suggested medical students were receptive to incorporating advanced pulmonary ultrasonography training into their education and future practice (P < .001). The majority of students felt capable of operating an ultrasound machine to guide diagnosis of lung pathology, and they thought the COVID-19 ultrasound lung simulator was useful for the diagnosis and management of COVID-19 patients.
CONCLUSIONS: In the current study, medical students showed marked improvement in their understanding of the aspects of lung ultrasonography. The training helped students better understand COVID-19 lung pathological findings and improved their ultrasonography skills. Pulmonary ultrasonography training described in the current study was beneficial for future practice and should be considered for inclusion in the regular medical school curriculum.

TRANSLATION OF 2D ANATOMICAL EDUCATION TO 3D HUMAN CADAVER PROSECTIONS: A PILOT STUDY

Alexander In | Jennifer Weil | Hana Anderson
Virginia Tech Carilion School of Medicine | University of California Davis School of Medicine | University of California Davis School of Medicine
PURPOSE: As a spatial and visual science, gross anatomy relies on hands-on educational approaches (e.g., cadaver dissection and prosections). In 2020, COVID-19 forced gross anatomy courses to shift from hands-on instructions to remote education. This study compared anatomical identification ability (human cadaver prosections versus anatomical images) of Spring 2020 (S20) students who learned gross anatomy from images to Winter 2020 (W20) students who learned gross anatomy in-person and to assess the effect of hands-on prosection-based trainings.
METHODS: Using a quasi-experimental design, eight participants were assigned to one of three groups: W20 trained (W20-T) or untrained (W20-UT), or S20. W20-UT served as a nonequivalent control group. All subjects took two 30-primary question multiple choice pre-tests, one hands-on, and one image-based. W20-T (n = 2) and S20 (n = 3) then participated in six 4-h hands-on prosection training sessions divided by region: upper limb; thorax; abdomen; pelvis; brain, cranial nerves, and skull; lower limb. W20-UT (n = 3) underwent no training and had no access to prosections. After all trainings were complete, all participants took hands-on and image-based post-tests. All data are reported as mean ± SD (score/30).
RESULTS: No significant differences were found between S20 and W20-T+UT on either the image (20.7 ± 1.5 vs. 17.8 ± 3; p = 0.07) or hands-on pre-tests (12.3 ± 5.1 vs. 16.2 ± 6.1; p = 0.19). For the hands-on tests, training did not produce significant increases in W20-T scores (pre: 18.5 ± 4.9 vs. post: 24.5 ± 2.1; p = 0.13), while S20 showed significantly increased scores following training (pre: 12.3 ± 5 vs. post: 21.67 ± 2.5; p = 0.02). Although W20-T had a higher average score on the post-test than S20, the difference was not significant (p = 0.13).
CONCLUSIONS: Students who learn gross anatomy remotely are able to translate their knowledge to prosections, and an intensive hands-on cadaver-based training program may help them catch up to those with hands-on anatomy education. Study replication with a larger n (n = 60) is going to be conducted this upcoming winter.

“AND NOW FOR THE SCIENCE BIT”: USING EXAMPLES FROM BIOLOGY TO ENGAGE STUDENTS IN TRANSFERABLE SKILLS DEVELOPMENT

Dr Paula Smith
University of Edinburgh
PURPOSE: Reflective ePortfolios are being increasingly utilised in medical school curricula to capture students’ experiential learning and to monitor longitudinal development. However, far fewer undergraduate science programmes formally incorporate reflective practice, and oftentimes it is met with scepticism from students (and staff). This study describes the author’s attempt to enhance student engagement with portfolios by relating skills content to underpinning science.
METHODS: The 2021 iteration of the Edinburgh Undergraduate Biological Sciences ePortfolio includes transferable skills guides focused around key themes (e.g., team-working, communication, resilience, critical thinking), in which students are prompted to reflect upon their personal development. A concerted effort was made to include examples from biology in order to increase the perceived relevance to students, such as the neurobiology of resilience, and biological feedback and the stress response underpinning emotional intelligence. Biological Sciences students were asked to provide anonymous feedback on the transferable skills guides following a live portfolio-related webinar.
RESULTS: Thirty-five students submitted feedback. In response to the question “Do you think inclusion of biological examples helps to improve your engagement with the themes?” the majority of students answered “Yes” (66%). The most popular biology-related example was circadian rhythms for the time management theme (38%), followed by the stress response and impact of cortisol on learning and memory for the emotional intelligence theme (28%). Sample of students’ free-text comments: “Circadian rhythms was useful to me in many other aspects of my life, not just time management”; “The inclusion of biological examples was a brilliant way to demonstrate how all of these attributes are directly transferrable to our course at large”; “ Makes the themes feel more relevant and personalised.”
CONCLUSIONS: Incorporating examples which relate to students’ primary subject area promotes student engagement with Reflective ePortfolios. These findings have the potential to inform any programme which intends to formally integrate graduate skills development into its curriculum.

IMPACT OF COVID - 19 PANDEMIC ON MEDICAL SCHOOLS - A TRANSFORMATIONAL CATALYST

Davinder P S Sandhu
American University of Antigua, College of Medicine
PURPOSE: To understand the impact of COVID-19 pandemic on medical education.
METHOD: A literature review, and the experiential learning of the American University of Antigua policy to continue clinical clerkships in the USA during the pandemic was studied.
RESULTS: Overall, there was a major disruption of clinical exposure with medical student clerkships being suspended. Assessments and summative examinations were cancelled or deferred. Above all, the student-faculty partnership was severely undermined. American University of Antigua (AUA) was unusual in continuing with clinical clerkships and supplied their students with Personal Protective Equipment. The hospitals appreciated the presence of the medical students who became part of the healthcare workforce without serious consequence. Students perceived an ethical obligation to help. Over 80% would accept risk of COVID-19 infection and engage in meaningful clinical experience. There were COVID 19 pandemic courses created to support students who were also able to participate in telehealth patient care and peer teaching.
CONCLUSIONS: The COVID-19 pandemic was both disruptive as well as a catalyst for transformational change such as a hybrid of online and face to face teaching has been established. Major investment on online platforms Healthcare staff with diverse skill sets and disciplines came together to solve complex health problems. Curriculum had to be adapted in real time. Students, Faculty, Institutions and Regulatory bodies adapted constructively. Future challenges how to graduate classes without lowering standards, teaching and assessment of psychomotor skills and laboratory experiments, encourage institutions to co-share resources making it cost effective, respect the emerging competencies of population/public health, healthcare systems, use of data and technologies. Vaccinations can allow continuation with clinical training helping students to cope with mental health issues

LIKELY IMPACTS OF THE HIDDEN CURRICULUM IN THE BASIC SCIENCE MEDICAL STUDENTS- ANALYSIS OF AN ONLINE SURVEY

Amitabha Basu | Samal Nauhria
St. Matthews University School of Medicine | St Matthews University School of Medicine
PURPOSE: Lehmann (2018) indicated that a hidden curriculum is lessons learned that are embedded in the culture of an academic organization and are sometimes responsible for behavioral changes. My study aims to explore the impact of the hidden curriculum in basic science medical students (44 Year 2 students), and their understanding of clinical life and various clinical specialities.
METHOD: An anonymous online survey was conducted via SurveyMonkey. The survey asked students their understanding of hidden curriculum; what else they learned outside their syllabus; if clinical shadowing would impact the choice of residency; how the curriculum influenced them as a person; and understanding of professionalism. Students needed to reply in a textural format. The work is continuing.
RESULT: Despite 75% of respondents did not know what is hidden curriculum; the students reportedly learned the importance of punctuality, study techniques, time management, professionalism, teamwork, communication skill, and early understanding of clinical life in various clinical specialities. Students felt they received unconditional support and respect from professional professors that increased their confidence. Some felt the ‘medical field’ has certain sets of ethics and professionalism that did not match their early understanding and occasionally standard set for students that were not always matched by the professors.
CONCLUSIONS: More work is needed to understand the impact of the hidden curriculum. Educational leadership must ensure that a physiologically safe, friendly, professional environment exists in the institution, which can be established and monitored by faculty-staff training, acting on student feedback, and regularly reviewing the curriculum. The inclusion of clinical shadowing for 2nd-year medical students would help students to gain awareness of different clinical specialities in real-time medical environments.

MEASURING THE IMPACT OF MEDICAL STUDENTS AS MENTORS OF ASPIRING STEAM LATINX HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS

Andrea Roca | Darisel Ventura Rodriguez | Algevis Wrench, PhD
Nova Southeastern University Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine | Nova Southeastern University Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine | Nova Southeastern University Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine
PURPOSE: The Latinx population accounts for 18.5% of the overall population; however, the AAMC report Latinx physicians comprise 5.8% of 2018 workforce. Efforts to increase diversity in medical schools are ongoing and focus on addressing the educational and economical challenges Latinx youth face while pursuing a medical education. We created METAS or Medical Students Encouraging and Teaching Aspiring STEAM Students to mentor students from a predominately Latinx high school in both their educational and early professional development. We aim to demonstrate the impact medical students have in stimulating the early interest of high school students in STEAM-related careers.
METHODS: Virtual mentoring sessions were tailored to meet the needs of the participating 9th and 12th grade levels. The sessions covered a variety of topics including study skills, career planning, and medical Spanish terminology. Microsoft Office forms using Likert scale questions were distributed before and after each session. Finally, a paired t-test was used to assess the statistical significance of the data obtained.
RESULTS: In total 32 out of 42 students participated in the pre-and-post surveys with an overall response rate of 76%. The freshman had a 78% response rate with 18 of 23 freshmen completing surveys and the seniors had a 74% response rate with 14 out of 19 seniors completing surveys. In qualitative feedback students responded: “Hearing each person’s individual advice/personal stories was very helpful because it showed more like real life situations and possibilities” and “I learned more Spanish medical terms.”
CONCLUSIONS: The creation of this initiative provides a framework to narrow the gap in diversity inequality in healthcare by increasing the pool of qualified students applying to universities. Early exposure to medical students and mentoring might influence their desire to pursue medicine, which ultimately helps address the healthcare disparities of the Latinx and other minority populations.

THE FIRST NATIONAL STUDENT-LED PLATFORM FOR INTERNATIONAL PRE-HEALTH STUDENTS: ANALYSIS OF MENTEE FEEDBACK

Gopika SenthilKumar | Kalina Tenorio L. Machado | Salvatore Capotosto | Deepali Bhalla | Rachel Jaber Chehayeb | Nicole Belliard Martuscelli | Abubakr El Sobky | Zezhou (Zach) Zhao | Salome Da Silva Duarte Lepez | Matheus M. S. Peraci
Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee WI | Emory University School of Medicine Atlanta, GA | Renaissance School of Medicine at Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY | Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee WI | Yale school of medicine, New Haven, CT
PURPOSE: International pre-health students face unique challenges in the US and have limited availability of mentorship and resources. F1Doctors is the first national, student-led peer-mentorship platform created with the goals of providing personalized mentorship and community for international pre-health students. This abstract analyzes mentee feedback following a year of the platform’s existence.
METHODS: F1 Doctors allows for pre-health mentees to reach out to mentors (medical/dental students, MD/DO, residents, etc.) of similar backgrounds/interests for one-on-one mentorship. The website and social-media accounts (Instagram, Facebook, Twitter) also feature numerous resources for membership engagement. At the end of the first year, an open-response survey asking mentees about ‘the best part of their experience’ and ‘areas to work on’ was distributed through mailing lists and social media. Responses were de-identified, and a thematic analysis of each response was performed by two independent reviewers. This methodology was selected to alleviate any response biases due to language limitations and/or differences in cultural interpretations of pre-written statements.
RESULTS: One hundred fifteen students responded, and 73% of them sought out mentors for MD applications; the rest inquired about MD-PhD, residency, DO, and dentistry. Forty-two percent of responses identified ‘positive attributes of their mentor’s personality’ as one of the best parts of their experience, 34% mentioned €˜relating to mentors/mentors sharing their own experiences’, 21% mentioned ‘getting helpful/useful pre-med advice,’ and 9% mentioned ‘feeling a sense of community.’ Fifty-sevent percent of mentees felt there were no areas for improvement, and the rest suggested resource topics for the website and a need for ensuring a timely response from mentors.
CONCLUSIONS: F1Doctors is a useful and well-received platform for proving personalized, relatable mentorship for international students pursuing graduate health programs. The identified themes will be used to inform the platforms’ future improvements as well as research directions.

DO CANADIAN MEDICAL STUDENTS BELIEVE IN CHOOSING WISELY?

Bright Huo
Dalhousie University
PURPOSE: Physician application of resource stewardship (RS) is inconsistent. To initiate lasting change, medical students must value RS as good practice habits develop early in training. However, the extent to which Canadian medical students are engaged in RS and the influence of any hidden curriculum related to test and treatment selection has yet to be evaluated. This study investigated medical student perceptions toward the Choosing Wisely Canada (CWC) Campaign.
METHODS: A bilingual questionnaire was distributed to all Canadian medical students. The primary objective was to identify whether students believe that CWC is an important initiative. Students were asked their perceptions toward the amount of CWC represented in curriculum, whether the workplace culture in medicine supports the application of RS, and what barriers exist to student advocacy for CWC. Chi-square tests and student’s t-tests were employed.
RESULTS: A total of 3162 (26.9%) eligible Canadian medical students completed the survey and most students endorsed that the CWC campaign is an important initiative (12.4/15.0 ± 1.98). Few students felt that their institution had sufficiently integrated CWC into the pre-clerkship (n = 1406/3162, 44.5%) and clerkship (n = 735/1157, 63.5%) curricula. Only 1837/3162 (58.1%) students felt that it is reasonable to expect physicians to apply CWC recommendations given the workplace culture in medicine. Only 1049/3162 (33.2%) students were comfortable addressing resource misuse with their preceptor. The most common barriers were the assumption that their preceptor was more knowledgeable (n = 2581/3162, 81.6%), concern over evaluations (1973/3162, 62.4%), and concern for their reputation as students (933/3162, 29.5%).
CONCLUSIONS: Canadian medical students support that the CWC Campaign is an important initiative. However, many trainees felt that that the workplace culture in medicine does not support the application of CWC recommendations. A power imbalance prevents students from advocating for RS in practice.

THE USING OF MINI-OSCE IN THE TRAINING OF RADIOGRAPHERS

Han-Ni Shih | Chih-Wu Cheng | Yi-Hsun Chen | Chia-Hung Chen
Department of Radiology, Ditmanson Medical Foundation, Chia-Yi Christian Hospital, Chia-Yi, Taiwan | Department of Radiation Oncology, Ditmanson Medical Foundation, Chia-Yi Christian Hospital, Chia-Yi, Taiwan | Department of Nuclear Medicine, Ditmanson Medical Foundation, Chia-Yi Christian Hospital, Chia-Yi, Taiwan
PURPOSE: Objective structured clinical examination (OSCE) was initially used for medical students or interns. It is rarely used for the training of radiographers. Here, we assessed the role of OSCE in the training of radiographers.
METHODS: The students with 7-month training course (internship) for radiographers in our hospital were enrolled in this study. According to their curriculum, the training time was 5 weeks in nuclear medicine, 5 weeks in radiotherapy and other times in diagnostic imaging (including “position” and “quality of assurance”). Mini-OSCE was scheduled after they finished the training course and 3 stations (8 min for each station, including nuclear medicine, radiotherapy, and diagnostic imaging) were arranged. After mini-OSCE, the scores were calculated immediately. Results Mini-OSCE was held on November 25, 2021. Six students (1 male and females) were attended the examination. The percentages of average scores were 88% in the nuclear medicine, 82% in the radiotherapy, and 72% in the diagnostic imaging. In the field of the diagnostic imaging, we found that “position” was 78% and “quality of assurance” was only 53%. “Quality of assurance” is the most difficult topic for these students.
CONCLUSIONS: The score was not correlated with the training time. A rigorous pre-testing method, such as mini-OSCE, may be necessary to identify the competence of interns before entering clinic practice.

THE APPLICATION OF “WORLD CAFÉ©” FOR INTER-PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION

Jing Han | Li-Chen Chang | Chih-Ming Lin | Yu-Fang Chung | Hsiao-Ching Lu | Chao-Yu Hsu | Yung-Chi Cheng | Chia-Hung Chen
Department of Rehabilitation, Ditmanson Medical Foundation, Chia-Yi Christian Hospital, Chia-Yi, Taiwan | Clinical Medicine Research Center, Ditmanson Medical Foundation, Chia-Yi Christian Hospital, Chia-Yi, Taiwan | Department of Laboratory Medicine, Ditmanson Medical Foundation, Chia-Yi Christian Hospital, Chia-Yi, Taiwan
PURPOSE: In order to provide a better care for patients, inter-professional education (IPE) is important. Here, we presented the training results of IPE by using “World CAFÉ©.”
METHODS: All medical staff were welcomed to attend the IPE by using “World CAFÉ©.”
A case was selected and 4 questions were made by 6 senior medical educators before IPE meeting. A focus group interview was conducted after IPE meeting. Qualitative study was performed through the verbatim transcripts of the interview.
RESULTS: IPE was scheduled on Oct 21, 2021. Fourteen medical staff (except 4 table leaders) joined the IPE meeting. After IPE meeting, 11 medical staff increasing 8 females and 3 males agreed to be interviewed. The interview lasted for 30 min. Qualitative analysis found that IPE by using “World CAFÉ©” provided the opportunities for mutual learning between different medical professionals. The participants considered that discussion by using “World CAFÉ©” can learn knowledge from different medical professionals and understand the thinking process of different professionals for caring patients.
CONCLUSIONS: IPE by using “World CAFÉ©” provided the opportunities for mutual learning between different medical professionals. The thinking process of caring patients could be shared to different professionals. “World CAFÉ©” can be applied and promoted for IPE.

INVESTIGATING GRADUATING MEDICAL STUDENTS’ EXPERIENCES WITH AWAY (IN-PERSON AND VIRTUAL) ROTATIONS DURING COVID-19: ANALYSIS OF THE ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN MEDICAL COLLEGES (AAMC) 2021 GRADUATION QUESTIONNAIRE (GQ)

Douglas Grbic
AAMC
PURPOSE: The COVID-19 pandemic restricted medical students’ in-person clinical experiences and disrupted opportunities to complete away rotations. Schools and specialty organizations innovated by supplementing in-person away rotations (ipARs) with virtual rotations (vARs). Using AAMC 2021 GQ data, we investigated how graduating students’ experiences with ipARs and vARs differed across 19 specialties.
METHODS: Using data from 15,451 GQ respondents (74% of all 2021 graduates), our outcomes were (a) completing one or more ipARs versus none and (b) completing one or more vARs versus none. Bivariate and multivariate analyses assessed each of specialty, sex, school region, and community-based school attendance for their associations with each of ipAR and vAR completion.
RESULTS: Among GQ respondents, 18.0% (2789/15,451) completed any away rotation, 8.3% (1279/15,451) ipAR only, 7.9% (1218/15,451) vAR only, and 1.9% (290/15,541) both. In bivariate analysis, specialty, sex, and community-based schools (each p < .001) were associated with each of ipAR (n = 1569) and vAR (n = 1508). Region was associated with ipAR (p < .001) but not with vAR. Regression models showed that specialty had the strongest association with ipAR and, to an even greater extent, with vAR relative to other variables. Students entering most surgical subspecialties (vs. emergency medicine) had a greater likelihood of vAR.
CONCLUSIONS: Necessitated by COVID-19, and consistent with national guidelines recommending very limited ipARs, we observed a very low prevalence of ipAR completion, substantially lower than 55% prevalence for away rotations completion reported in 2020. Differences we observed by specialty and medical school type aligned well with the recommended circumstances for ipARs for the class of 2021. The impact of this low prevalence of ipAR completion on program and trainee “fit” in graduate medical education warrants careful consideration. Substantial specialty specific differences in vAR completion suggest that early innovators in this regard represented a discrete set of specialties.

USING MINI-OSCE AS A PRE-TEST TO IDENTIFY THE COMPETENCE OF THE RESPIRATORY THERAPY INTERNS

Jui-Fang Feng | Chih-An Wang | Hsiao-Ching Lu | Hsiao-Lan Chen
Division of Respiratory Therapy, Ditmanson Medical Foundation Chia-Yi Christian Hospital, Chia-Yi, Taiwan | Division of Respiratory Therapy, Ditmanson Medical Foundation Chia-Yi Christian Hospital, Chia-Yi, Taiwan | Division of Respiratory Therapy, Ditmanson Medical Foundation Chia-Yi Christian Hospital, Chia-Yi, Taiwan
PURPOSE: Online learning is common during the COVID-19 pandemic. The learning effect of online learning is not easy to evaluate. The objective of this study is to identify the competence of the respiratory therapy interns through a pre-test using mini-objective structured clinical examination (OSCE) before entering clinical practice.
METHODS: A mini-OSCE with 3 stations (“medical knowledge,” “clinical skill,” and “communication and health education”) was arranged. The mini-OSCE was scheduled 4 days after registration of these interns. They were the final-year students in the department of respiratory therapy, and they were the first time to practice in the hospital (2-month internship in our hospital). Before the pre-test, a complete 2-day orientation was performed by the qualified instructors for all interns.
RESULTS: The mini-OSCE was held on Nov 12, 2021. Four interns (all females) were participated. We found that the score of “medical knowledge” was worst. The percentages of average scores of “medical knowledge,” “clinical skill,” and “communication and health education” were 45%, 67%, and 60%.
CONCLUSIONS: “Medical knowledge” is needed to be improved, the influence of online learning on the learning effect should be considered. Pre-test using mini-OSCE can be a good tool to identify the competence before the interns entering clinical practice.

A MIXED-METHOD CULTURAL ASSESSMENT OF HIGH RELIABILITY CHARACTERISTICS IN U.S. PATHOLOGY RESIDENCY AND PATHOLOGISTS’ ASSISTANT PROGRAMS

Kristine McCluskey
Baylor College of Medicine Houston, TX USA
PURPOSE: According to literature, pathology training program deficiencies are related to a disenactment of a “safety culture.” Safety in this context is defined as providing optimal patient care without error. Recently, “safety culture” has been promoted in US healthcare, and research has demonstrated its sustenance through supportive leadership and described error reduction occurring in high reliability organizational (HRO) settings such as nuclear power plants where minding error, operations, expertise, complexity, and competency are prioritized. HRO has not been examined in medical education. The purpose of this study was to discover the existence of HRO within US pathology residency and Pathologists’ Assistant (PathA) programs and to answer if factors like program type and degrees of directors and educators correlate with HRO, and what do educators perceive concerning HRO. The antecedents of HRO processes can be targeted, and deficiencies can be addressed.
METHODS: A mixed-method explanatory sequential design was utilized surveying 31 US pathology residency and PathA program directors, 142 residency and 13 PathA programs, and interviewing 11 program educators, including pathologists and PathAs to derive HRO correlation with demographics and the existence of HRO to explain the survey findings.
RESULTS: Following regression analysis with higher scores, three of five HRO principles (minding competency, recognizing system complexity, and sensitivity to operations) correlated with program directors holding master’s or bachelor’s degrees relative to those with doctorates and two principles (minding impending error and competency) correlated with a PathA educator’s exposure to academic medicine in training.
CONCLUSIONS: Dialogical data explained survey results with two emerging subthemes: frontline educator proactivity and leadership, educators, and learners (subcultures) affecting the standard of care generating further inquiry regarding the origin of subcultural values.

PRIORITIZING GENDER EQUITY IN MEDICAL SCIENCE EDUCATIONAL LEADERSHIP

Shima Tabatabai
Post-Doctoral researcher, Medical Education department, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran
PURPOSE: The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted numerous areas for improvement within our health care system. In particular, this pandemic has demanded that we have full access to the talent of all women who have marginalized in academic medicine. Studies suggest more must be done, especially for women of diverse racial and ethnic backgrounds. This study aims to explore the root causes that actually produce gender inequity in medical education and leadership in Iran and to propose practical solution to ensure gender equity among faculty and medical school leadership, while envisioning new paths that bring us closer to justice.
METHODS: The qualitative study focused on the view points of medical education and specialty Board of Directors on the political and structural and social realities of gender inequity in medical education and leadership in expert panel discussions in Iran, 2021. All sessions were audio-recorded, transcribed, and analyzed with inductive approach using thematic analysis to understand experts experiences and implicit knowledge.
RESULTS: Experts emphasized that across academic medicine, and particularly among faculty and medical school leadership, the status quo is unacceptable when it comes to gender equity. The analysis revealed four main themes related to prioritizing gender equity in medical education and leadership: vision and actions that ensure gender equity among faculty and medical school leadership, envisioning new paths for embedding gender equity in the medical education system accountability for measurable efforts, with clear definitions of progress.
CONCLUSIONS: It is not enough to measure the representation of different genders at various levels of leadership within our institutions. Medical academic leaders should recognize their key role in leading the systems-level changes impacting gender equity in medical education and leadership. This study suggests more must be done, especially for women doctors of diverse educational backgrounds. Besides, leaders need to be clear about what progress in gender equity means (procedures on hiring, promotion opportunities, rank, and salary).

ONLINE-ONLY CURRICULUM FOR HISTOLOGY TEACHING USING VIRTUAL MICROSCOPY

Dogus Darici | Carsten Reissner | Johannes Brockhaus | Markus Missler
Anatomy and Molecular Neurobiology | Anatomy and Molecular Neurobiology | Anatomy and Molecular Neurobiology | Anatomy and Molecular Neurobiology
PURPOSE: Anatomy teaching includes dissection courses and microscopy classes that rely on the practical hands-on experience. In response to the physical distancing policies during the COVID-19 pandemic, online-only curricula with videoconferencing software became a popular alternative to anticipate a potential learning loss. However, the transition’s impact on traditional hands-on formats remains to be elucidated.
METHODS: Using virtual microscopy, a synchronous online histology course was implemented for two semester cohorts (n = 392 students; mean age = 22.8 years; 63% females) during the Summer Term 2020. Students passed through 19 3-h mandatory course sessions including theoretical introductions, virtual microscopy, and collaborative learning in breakout-rooms. We analyzed data about age, gender, student attendance, webcam activity, summative quantitative, and qualitative evaluations, and the results of a written test required to pass the course.
RESULTS: Over 80% of the students reported having no technical issues during the course. Student attendance was high throughout the whole semester (median = 97.4%). The webcam activity during the theoretical introductions showed a rapid decline in the first weeks of the course (from 25 to 10%). Online examination showed effectiveness of the course (mean correct answers = 71%, SD = 18.5%). Students’ gender was not associated with the test score (H = 2.69, p = 0.459). The age was negatively correlated with the test score (r = −0.26). The overall evaluation of the students was at least as positive as the in-person version over the past years (79 points vs. 72 points over 100).
CONCLUSIONS: We observed that the use of virtual microscopy is effective for learning, and well-accepted among students. Our experiences with an online-only histology curriculum support the positive potential of distance learning for parts of the hands-on anatomical curriculum.

THE 4M’S OF THE GERIATRIC ASSESSMENT: A SKILLS-BASED CURRICULUM FOR 2ND YEAR MEDICAL STUDENTS?

Gabrielle R. Goldberg MD | Gabriela Solis MD | Janice T. John DO, MS, MPH | Doreen M. Olvet PhD | Kimberly A. Kranz MD
Zucker School of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell | Zucker School of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell | Zucker School of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell | Zucker School of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell | Renaissance School of Medicine at Stony Brook University
PURPOSE: The growing older population necessitates all future physicians perform geriatric assessments. The “Geriatric 5Ms” paradigm is a successful model for teaching geriatric competencies. Early introduction of geriatrics in medical school curricula has the potential to inspire learners to pursue a career in the field.
METHODS: We designed a curriculum for 2nd year medical students (MS2s) to introduce the geriatric assessment with the 5M paradigm modified for early learners. Learning objectives: Describe the importance of the geriatric assessment in the care of older adults. Describe how to conduct a comprehensive geriatric assessment using 4 core competencies of Geriatrics: Mind/Memory, Medications, Mobility, Matters Most. Apply skills learned to patient scenarios. Brief didactics were interspersed with real-time, small group, skills-based deliberate practice. The session was conducted virtually in 2020 and 2021. Students completed a geriatric assessment during a summative clinical skills examination (CSE). The 2021 curriculum was updated based on student performance in 2020.
RESULTS: Nearly 200 MS2s participated in the session (N = 100 in 2020; N = 99 in 2021). All students surveyed (33%) reported improved confidence in geriatric knowledge and skills after the session (p-values < 0.001). Students were more likely to use a cognitive screening tool, ask about advanced care planning, and assess medication adherence on the CSE in 2021 compared to 2020 (p-values < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: This curriculum results in successful performance of a geriatric assessment by MS2s on a CSE and can be delivered both in-person and virtually. The curriculum is easily transferable to other institutions with geriatric faculty.

A CROSS-SECTIONAL INTERPROFESSIONAL ACTIVITY TO FOSTER LGBTQI+ CULTURAL COMPETENCY AND INCLUSIVE HEALTHCARE

Samiksha Prasad | Chasity O'Malley | Arkene Levy | Rolando De Leon | Daniel Griffin
Nova Southeastern University | Nova Southeastern University | Nova Southeastern University | Nova Southeastern University | Nova Southeastern University
PURPOSE: Lesbian, gay, bi-sexual, transgender, questioning, and intersex (LGBTQI+) patients often experience discrimination within health care settings due to a lack of provider knowledge and biases of healthcare workers towards this population. There is a greater need to provide culturally competent and unbiased healthcare in all health professions, which can be accomplished through Interprofessional Education (IPE). The overall goal is to expand the pilot study involving the IPE-Case Based Learning-Sequential Disclosure Activity (IP-CBL-SDA) which focuses on promoting the LGBTQI+ cultural competency.
METHODS: This 2-year (2021–22) study of IPE sessions with students from 10 healthcare programs will be conducted during the Nova Southeastern University (NSU) IPE Day Event. A small-group IP-CBL-SDA was delivered and included pre/post-activity 5-point Likert scale surveys. The change in student attitude was calculated in percent change and change in perception of the importance of the IPE activity via a paired student t-test. The NSU IPE Day 2022 results will be aggregated.
RESULTS: Students from 10 healthcare programs traditionally participate in the NSU IPE Day. Preliminary 2021 data indicates a 36% increase (p = 0.05) in overall confidence in the knowledge and attitude towards inclusion and recognition of bias after the activity. Across multiple programs, students displayed further interest in future opportunities for trainings/sessions in this area through IPE collaboration. Pre/post session analysis reflects improvement in understanding of the negative impact of stigma and bias toward LGBTQI+ healthcare.
CONCLUSIONS: An hour-long activity may have a significant impact on student interest and understanding of key challenges faced by LGBTQI+ individuals and these types of modalities show potential to improve LGBTQI+ healthcare outcomes. Results from the study (NSU IPE Day 2021-22) will broaden the impact of the study and strengthen preliminary findings that IP-CBL-SDA is an effective tool for shaping the design of future virtual collaborative sessions across different programs and institutions.

ENGAGING MULTIPLE HEALTH PROFESSIONS IN AN IMMERSIVE PROBLEM-SOLVING EXPERIENCE VIRTUALLY

Samiksha Prasad | Lauren Fine | Vijay Rajput | Marylee Worley
Kiran C Patel College of Allopathic Medicine, Nova Southeastern University | Kiran C Patel College of Allopathic Medicine, Nova Southeastern University | Kiran C Patel College of Allopathic Medicine, Nova Southeastern University | College of Pharmacy, Nova Southeastern University
PURPOSE: Interprofessional education (IPE) can navigate the existing organizational culture, enhance patient safety, reduce errors, and improve the quality of care of patients through collaborative experiences. Our Health professions Division (HPD) holds an annual IPE Day, our problem-solving experience aimed to address the gaps in understanding the management of a patient with an antibiotic allergy. The overall goal was to provide intentional interprofessional (IP) learning experiences that help to prepare future health professionals for IP collaboration, acknowledge roles/teamwork, and care of patients.
METHODS: This 2-year (2021–22) longitudinal study of IPE sessions with students from 10 healthcare programs were conducted. A small group-Case-Based Learning-Sequential Disclosure Activity (CBL-SDA) was delivered. The session included (i) student orientation by facilitators (ii) pre/post-activity 5-point Likert scale surveys; and (iii) CBL-SDA administration. The change in student attitude was calculated in percent change in pre/post-survey. Change in perception of the importance of the IPE activity was calculated via a paired student t-test.
RESULTS: Seventy-five percent of learners completed the pre- and post-session surveys in 2021. Students displayed a 12.2% increase in their perception of the need for IPE in their curriculum and in professional practice. The confidence of student comfort in working with other healthcare professionals increased 28.4% after completing the session as a team. Students also gained a better understanding of the case’s clinical content in the context of IPE.
DISCUSSION: Students recognized the importance of communication in IPE settings for teamwork and collaboration for continuity of care and patient safety. Each profession’s scope of practice and the roles of the healthcare profession’s team members were acknowledged. The virtual methods of the session enabled participants from different geographical campuses to engage in the IPE and the extrapolation to similar future initiatives for a broad range of educational and professional levels.

MEDICAL STUDENT EDUCATORS FOR DIVERSITY BRIDGE PROGRAMS

Jeffrey Sosnowski
Faculty
PURPOSE: The University of South Alabama College of Medicine offers two bridge programs for students of diversity: the Diversity Recruitment and Enrichment for Admission into Medicine (DREAM) and South Medicine Preparation Scholars (SMPS). Two Medical students are selected to fulfill the role of liaisons, tutors and mentors for students in these programs.
METHODS: We organized, hosted and taught activities for the candidates as they matriculated through the program. We spent most of our time planning study sessions where we reviewed material taught throughout the week by the faculty educators, answered questions about certain concepts or problems, and led sessions reviewing practice questions and discussed the correct answers. We also kept the students organized and on track with their various responsibilities and scheduled activities.
RESULTS: Our summer commitment as educators was challenging but an incredible learning experience. We were able to hone our teaching and communication skills that we will use in our residencies. We learned the importance of encouraging students who were struggling, and we were reminded of how resilience can be fostered in a challenging but supportive environment.
CONCLUSIONS: As students who are not traditionally underrepresented in medicine, we saw firsthand the importance of diversity and inclusion in medicine and the necessity of having physicians who represent the patient populations they care for. This summer proved that everyone has a role in achieving a more equitable health care system, and this is something we will continue to make a priority as we continue in our careers. Though we did not always work in perfect harmony, we learned how to effectively communicate with the students and faculty to ensure we made the most out of the program.

INVESTIGATION OF ASIAN SUBGROUP REPRESENTATION IN THE MEDICAL SCHOOL ADMISSIONS PROCESS

Priyanka Mehrotra | Kyle Bauckman
Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine | Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine
PURPOSE: The Asian demographic is considered an overrepresented group in higher academia. This is correlated with less scholarship opportunities and recruitment initiatives. However, little is understood of the overall representation of individual Asian subgroups in medical education. We sought to examine the Asian subgroup representation in medical schools relative to overall US population.
METHODS: Demographic data for US allopathic schools’ matriculation was extracted from the AAMC’s publicly available data reports. US and regional demographics were extracted from the US 2020 Census data. Subgroups were distinguished based on groups identified by AAMC.
RESULTS: Representation of individual Asian subgroups dramatically varied. Students that identified as Indian were overrepresented relative to the overall representation in the USA. Twenty percent of the Asian American population were compared to 32.4% medical student body. Conversely, Filipino, Chinese, and Japanese students were significantly underrepresented relative to their representation in the USA. Demographic data was also compared at the State and County to create actionable data relevant to a school’s surrounding demographics.
CONCLUSIONS: Pipeline programs are shown to be an effective method of addressing disparity underrepresented racial groups. However, as of this publication, a pipeline program to target individual Asian minority groups has yet to be implemented. Our data provides a guide for states to identify the need for an Asian subgroup pipeline initiatives. We aim to survey US allopathic schools to determine current pipeline programs for Asian subgroups and determine the perception of Asian representation in US medical schools. This method may also be useful toward other underrepresented demographic subgroups as well. Our findings highlight the need to take a granular approach toward equity and inclusion.

AN UNPRECEDENTED TRANSITION TO THE SECOND YEAR OF MEDICAL SCHOOL: STUDENT PERCEPTIONS FROM THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

Rachel Kaufman | Kush Patel | Anna Edmondson
Medical College of Georgia | Medical College of Georgia | Medical College of Georgia, Department of Cellular Biology and Anatomy
PURPOSE: In March 2020, medical schools around the country shut down in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, first-year medical students had an abrupt transition into the second year of the pre-clerkship curriculum. Students went from attending classes and labs in person to a virtual learning environment, and summer plans were disrupted. The purpose of the study was to assess student perceptions of the pandemic’s impact on their transition into the second year of medical school.
METHODS: Medical students from the Class of 2023 at the Medical College of Georgia at Augusta University (n = 191) were invited to complete an anonymous online survey in February 2021. The survey assessed student perceptions of the impact of COVID-19 shutdowns on their medical education. In total, 45 responses were recorded. Focus groups were also conducted with 11 medical students who had completed the survey.
RESULTS: Nearly half (54.35%) of survey respondents felt that COVID-19 negatively impacted their readiness for second year, while 34.78% felt it had no impact on readiness. A majority (77.08%) of respondents felt the change in summer plans increased stress regarding their candidacy for residency. Additionally, 84.09% were worried that COVID-19 would impact their ability to engage in extracurricular activities during their second year. Most (86.66%) respondents were also worried that COVID-19 would impact their clinical rotations, and a majority of respondents (62.23%) felt COVID-19 would negatively influence their ability to choose a specialty. Focus group responses echoed these themes.
CONCLUSIONS: COVID-19 had a significant impact on medical student perceptions of their preparedness as they transitioned from first to second year within the pre-clerkship curriculum. As these students continue to move through the curriculum, it will be interesting to see whether these earlier perceptions are maintained and/or reflected in future standardized test scores and residency match rates.

PROBLEM BASED LEARNING AS AN INTERVIEW TECHNIQUE FOR MEDICAL SCHOOL

Vicky Zhang | Maria Giulia Boemi | Uma Ramoutar | Samantha Marazita | Kyle Bauckman
Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine | Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine | Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine | Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine | Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine
PURPOSE: Traditional medical school interviews lack the ability to provide a holistic review of applicants. Despite these findings, 111 out of 155 US medical schools continue to utilize traditional interview styles. The need for virtual interviews has led to a dramatic resurgence of the traditional interview process. The use of a problem-based learning (PBL) activity may serve as an alternative mechanism to evaluate non-cognitive skills such as ethics, professionalism, and interpersonal skills. We demonstrate a methodology that is effective both in person and in a virtual landscape.
METHODS: Interviewing candidates were required to participate in a PBL activity. We surveyed applicants on interest and engagement. Perception and value of PBL interviews for members of the admissions committee was collected and retrospective data of PBL interviewee scores was compared with acceptances. Admissions deans of US medical schools were surveyed to gauge interest in PBL as an interviewing tool.
RESULTS: A total of 223 candidates completed the voluntary post-interview survey (n = 348). The 2019–2020 admissions committee was surveyed at the end of the cycle on their perception of the PBL interview with 10 responding (n = 15). A national survey was administered to admissions deans of US medical schools that focused on the use of active learning activities in the interview process with 28 responding (n = 155).
CONCLUSIONS: Candidates find the use of the PBL interview engaging and prefer attending a medical school with PBL curriculum. Admissions committee members expressed agreement that the PBL interview is valuable for assessing professionalism, interpersonal skills, problem-based learning. However, they still expressed strong favorability for traditional interview formats. Responses from the national survey showed majority reported not directly utilizing interviews to assess non-academic applicant qualities. This suggests a potential current need for holistic interview techniques like our proposed model.

COLLABORATION OF BASIC SCIENCE AND CLINICAL EDUCATORS DURING A GLOBAL MEDICAL OUTREACH EXTERNSHIP IN KENYA

Vickie Roettger | Camille Bentley
Rocky Vista University | Rocky Vista University
PURPOSE: Basic science and clinical educators collaborate frequently during the first 2 years of medical school using clinical scenarios to teach basic concepts. Less frequent are biomedical scientists participating in medical outreach clinical externships. There was discussion at IAMSE 2021 asking how basic science faculty could be involved in global health education at medical schools. This poster describes the challenge of participating in a clinical outreach externship, a realm generally outside a basic science educator’s comfort zone.
METHODS: The experiential goal was providing meaningful contributions to an outreach externship while not exceeding clinical ethics or personal capabilities. The hypothesis was a non-clinician could contribute to the externship in ways other than direct clinical work. The clinical outreach is occurring during January 2022 in Kenya as part of a government-approved annual medical outreach program provided by Rocky Vista University College of Osteopathic Medicine and the Hands for Health Foundation. Suggested relevant areas for collaboration were explored including, but not limited to, health education of the Maasai population, logistics, and IRB-approved research with student doctors.
RESULTS: Results should show that basic scientists are able to contribute to the outreach in non-clinical areas. Working with translators allows for patient education on selected health topics. Logistical work includes helping with the registration process, transferring patients between stations, tracking paperwork, etc. allowing student doctors to work as clinicians. Research activities include supervising student doctors and discussing the research in culturally appropriate language with participants. Additional activities could be allowed depending on the educator’s background.
CONCLUSIONS: A true collaborative partnership continues to develop between basic science and clinical educators. We each have skills to be utilized during a global clinical externship despite our different backgrounds and both can contribute to the experience. Ultimately, the Maasai population attending the outreach clinic benefit from the collaboration.

MOCK CALL IPE ACTIVITY PILOT

Rebeka B Campbell
UTMB Galveston
PURPOSE: The School of Medicine (SOM) Transition to Practice and School of Nursing (SON) Clinical Capstone courses align once each Spring semester. Within a 3-week period, students collaborate to engage in activities fostering role development. The mock call activity was developed to specifically address the communication and professional needs of students transitioning to practice in both Medicine and Nursing. This simulation is student driven and encompasses several aspects of practice, communication, and professionalism that have historically challenged healthcare students of all roles as they enter independent practice, including use of a paging device; handoff reporting; communicating client needs (SBAR); communicating verbally in a timely, respectful, and professional manner; documentation; and evaluation of self and peers.
METHODS: In the Spring of 2021, 235 SOM students and 117 SON students participated in the pilot mock call activity. Due to disparate enrollments, each SOM student received three calls to each SON student initiation of six calls. Faculty developed numerous patient profiles as multi-level, varied acuity case studies. These cases were then randomly assigned to the SON students to create an SBAR for use in making their assigned calls to the appropriate SOM provider. Each SON student was assigned two cases, each with three acuity levels requiring provider interaction. The SOM students were assigned a pager and provided handoff report for a total of 12 patients they were responsible for during their mock call rotation.
RESULTS: Pre-activity evaluation student concerns included “paging a stranger” 33%, “providing and appropriate SBAR” 29%, “technology itself” 20%, and “providing appropriate medical care” 15%. Evaluation of 714 interactions were documented with 86% above “meets expectations.” Student comments included self-assessments that indicated improved confidence and areas for personal growth.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, the students found the activity rewarding. Phase-2 of this activity is planned for Spring 2022 and will incorporate lessons learned in this pilot.

HARRY POTTER AND THE OSTEOPATHIC MEDICAL SCHOOL PART 2: CREATING A VIRTUAL HARRY POTTER THEMED DAY AS A HIGH-YIELD REVIEW FOR FINAL EXAMS

Victoria Bryant | Taylor Willis
A.T. Still University, School of Osteopathic Medicine in Arizona, Mesa, AZ 85206, U.S.A. | A.T. Still University, School of Osteopathic Medicine in Arizona, Mesa, AZ 85206, U.S.A.
PURPOSE: The role of gamification and active learning have been common topics of conversation in higher education for many years and have been correlated to a multitude of positive effects, including increased student engagement, collaboration, and motivation to learn. We previously reported an in-person, Harry Potter-themed didactic exam review for our first year medical students. This year, to accommodate for the COVID-19 guidelines, it was held online, and we utilized this opportunity to introduce gamification into the event. One of our goals this year was to improve connectivity and wellness among the students while they attended the majority of their classes online.
METHODS: There were 6 virtual Hogwarts themed classrooms for the following disciplines: biochemistry, physiology, pathology, microbiology, immunology, and clinical. In each 1-h virtual room, students completed gamified active learning tasks in teams or as individuals as a review for their upcoming final exam. There was also a virtual sorting hat ceremony and a virtual Harry Potter trivia contest as wellness activities.
RESULTS: This non-mandatory event was attended by 77 out of 160 students. An anonymous survey was sent to the 77 students that attended the event, and 26 completed it. Enjoyment of the theme, effectiveness of the online delivery, and connectivity to other students and the faculty were all rated highly, while the majority agreed that their stress levels were reduced. One of our challenges was the low participation rate in the event and the survey, possibly due to the closeness of the event to a major exam, and the historically low attendance rate in optional activities at our school as previously published.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on the survey results, we feel that we met our goal of improving connectivity and wellness among the student body and effectively incorporated gamification into a virtual setting.

ANALYSIS OF STUDENT PERCEPTIONS OF A NEWLY DEVELOPED INTEGRATIVE SYSTEM COURSE MODEL

Amber Sechelski | Yuan Zhao
Sam Houston State University College of Osteopathic Medicine | Sam Houston State University College of Osteopathic Medicine
PURPOSE: In spring semester 2021, we piloted a course model that integrated two body systems by concurrently presenting them in the context of clinical cases. In Immune System and HEENT (head, eyes, ears, neck, and throat), fundamental topics of the immune system were covered and tied to their manifestations in the HEENT system, including trauma, inflammation, infection, and cancer. Concepts from both systems were consolidated in weekly case-based learning and small group discussion sessions (CBL/SGD). To evaluate students’ perceptions of the effectiveness of this integration model, we employed several evaluation tools and analyses at the end of the course.
METHODS: We administered to the class a voluntary survey containing closed- and open-ended questions targeting students’ perceptions of the integration model. We then conducted a focus group with 10 students who were selected via convenience sampling. A mixed approach was employed to analyze the resulting data, including multiple qualitative methods to gain enhanced understanding of students’ perceptions.
RESULTS: Fifty-four of 74 students (73%) participated in the survey. Nearly half (48.72%) rated the overall effectiveness of using CBL/SGD for system integration (1-very ineffective, 5-very effective) as average, with a mean value of 3.08 (std 0.86). Constant comparison analysis of the qualitative data revealed three major themes “student satisfaction with integration of immunology and HEENT, content and time involved in CBL/SGD, and suggestions for improvement”and classical content analysis revealed the relative importance of these themes. Participants held positive and negative perceptions, expressed concerns regarding CBL/SGD (e.g., its helpfulness, complexity), and made suggestions for improvement of integration.
CONCLUSIONS: Using multiple evaluation tools and analyses, we gained a deeper understanding of students’ perceptions of the new course model and identified the obstacles and opportunities in integrating multiple systems concurrently in one course. Actions will be taken to improve the course quality in the future.

STANDING TOGETHER WITH STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES FOR CURRICULUM DELIVERY

John A. Arnott | Jesse Moore | Youngjin Cho | Ian McCoog | Raymond Stemrich | Gabi Waite | John L. Szarek
Geisinger Commonwealth School of Medicine | The Robert Larner, M.D. College of Medicine | Geisinger Commonwealth School of Medicine | Geisinger Commonwealth School of Medicine | Geisinger Commonwealth School of Medicine | Geisinger Commonwealth School of Medicine
PURPOSE: Consistent and effective curriculum implementation in medical education has always presented challenges. Inconsistent understanding and use of pedagogical methods create shared frustration for all stakeholders and increases learner’s extraneous cognitive load which robs them of the valuable working memory capacity needed for effective learning. We have addressed this issue by developing standard operating procedures (SOPs) for curriculum delivery, which function as readily understandable guidelines and eliminate variation in understanding, delivery, and performance. This abstract describes the project and its outcomes.
METHODS: Both institutions have created and used school-specific SOPs. SOPs contain a description of the activity (TBL, CBL etc.), session objectives for the activity, a plan for faculty to create a session based on the activity, a guide on how to facilitate the session (timeline, sequence etc.), the follow up activity and important references to the literature. Complimentary SOPs were developed with input from all stakeholders for both students and faculty to suit distinct roles of each group. SOPs are used by faculty during onboarding, for faculty development, as a guide during the creation of curriculum content and for curriculum implementation. Students created student-specific SOPs based on the faculty versions, to provide students with additional information for success in preparation and in class. Student versions also provide the upperclassman perspective for enhancing incoming students’ experience in the curriculum.
RESULTS: Medical curriculum at both institutions have implemented school-specific SOPs. Involvement of two schools has facilitated discussion and refinement of SOP development and implementation. SOPs have created mutual understanding among faculty and students, set shared expectations, enhanced reliability, promoted equity, reduced learning environment concerns, and have reduced student/faculty anxiety with the curriculum.
CONCLUSIONS: SOPs are a strategy to ensure consistent and efficient curriculum creation and delivery. They enhance all stakeholders experience and provide an environment for effective learning.

GARLAQS VS. MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS: DO FIRST-YEAR MEDICAL STUDENTS PERFORM SIMILARLY ON THEIR ANATOMY EXAMINATIONS?

Steven O'Neill, BA | Mitchell Thom, MSc | Andrew Crofton, PhD | Susanne Wish-Baratz, PhD, MBA
Student at Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine | Student at Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine | Assistant Professor at Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine | Associate Professor at Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine
PURPOSE: Medical students at the Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine are assessed on their knowledge of anatomy using an essay exam that tests clinically relevant anatomy/radiology concepts. These exam questions are known as GARLAQs (Gross Anatomy, Radiology, and Living Anatomy Questions). GARLAQs cover all learning objectives and are designed to facilitate student collaboration, as these questions are distributed months prior to examination. This format has raised concerns surrounding student memorization and lack of an in-depth understanding of GARLAQ answers. The purpose of the present study is threefold: (1) to examine whether students perform similarly on GARLAQs and Multiple Choice Question (MCQ) examinations, (2) to assess whether students perform similarly to the GARLAQs on MCQs throughout the hierarchy of Bloom’s Taxonomy, (3) to collect qualitative data on student opinions of both assessment formats.
METHODS: First-year medical students will be assessed during the gastrointestinal unit of their clinical anatomy curriculum. Volunteers will be recruited from a class of 184 students. A crossover study design will be employed, wherein participants will be randomly placed into one of two cohorts: (1) first complete the required GARLAQ exam, second the MCQ exam, (2) first complete the MCQ exam, second the required GARLAQ exam. A paired t-test will determine if there is a difference in overall examination performance for each respective student. Each MCQ will be categorized using Bloom’s Taxonomy. A paired t-test will compare each student’s mean scores by Bloom’s category to their GARLAQ performance. Participants will also complete a post-test survey where they will be asked to rate their opinions about contrasting exam modalities on a Likert scale.
RESULTS: Data collection is currently ongoing and will be completed in February, 2022.
CONCLUSIONS: Information gained through review of student assessment scores and responses can guide future curricular changes at our institution in a cycle of continuous improvement.

TOUCHING A NERVE: A NEW APPROACH TO MIXED REALITY ANATOMY

Steven O’Neill, BA | Gary Galbraith | Rebecca Enterline, MS | Susanne Wish-Baratz, PhD, MBA
Student at Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine | Professor at Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine | Teaching Associate | Associate Professor at Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine
PURPOSE: Medical students at the Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine learn anatomy through the use of mixed reality (MR) technology. Feedback from students indicated a desire for their anatomy curriculum to be integrated with physical exam skills.
METHODS: Holograms were superimposed on both skeleton and student models during musculoskeletal review sessions, conferring tactile and kinesthetic elements to the MR projections. The intent of this format was to develop student confidence in their ability to clinically approach musculoskeletal anatomy. Fifty-three second-year medical student volunteers attended these self-directed reviews. Students were given a self-efficacy exit survey consisting of questions graded by a Likert scale and sections for open-ended feedback.
RESULTS: Participants reported that superimposed MR/models helped them understand how to better ‘think about musculoskeletal anatomy’, with an average respondent score of 4.06. The average student self-confidence score of ability to relate clinical exam skills to the corresponding anatomy was 3.28. Fourteen students stated that the MR/model approach is only suited for a review session. Six students commented that they wished this format had been the main teaching style throughout the curriculum. A total of 24 students reported active collaboration with peers as being their favorite part of these sessions.
CONCLUSIONS: While this format for incorporating tactile learning may bolster student understanding of muscular attachments and actions, it did little to better explain the rationale behind certain exam maneuvers. An incidental finding was the degree to which students enjoyed the self-directed learning approach. Indeed, group exploration and independence is one of the central aspects of cadaveric dissection. In attempting to simulate the tactile element of dissection, we inadvertently highlighted another key aspect of traditional anatomy education: teamwork. As we refine our curriculum, we will need to identify opportunities that encourage student-driven collaboration in an effort to more precisely reflect a true dissection experience.

FOSTERING SELF-DIRECTED LEARNING (SDL) SKILLS IN MEDICAL STUDENTS

Bruce Giffin | Laurah Lukin | Seth Overla
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine | University of Cincinnati College of Medicine | University of Cincinnati College of Medicine
PURPOSE: We have integrated SDL into our preclinical curriculum and implemented an assessment tool to monitor the development of SDL skills.
METHODS: We introduced SDL into the curriculum using an instructional scaffolding approach in which a series of stages ranging from entirely teacher-directed learning to autonomous SDL are experienced. All courses in the preclinical curriculum have at least one required incidental SDL session. Using the Delphi technique, we developed an SDL inventory to inform the continuous improvement of SDL in our curriculum. The inventory is administered prior to matriculation and at the end of each year of the curriculum. The SDL inventory, which consists of 37 items, helps us assess seven self-directed learning constructs (Reflective/Responsible, Interest/Inquisitive, Impact/Value, Approach/Organization, Collaborative, Motivation for SDL, Grit) reflecting attitudes, abilities, and personality characteristics necessary for SDL.
RESULTS: A 5-point Likert scale was used to indicate how much students agree or disagree with statements about the constructs. A paired t-test was used to analyze aggregated construct scores comparing responses on the pre-matriculation SDL inventory with the responses on the SDL inventory at the conclusion of the M1 year. Overall, students exhibited a significant decrease in the following constructs: Interest/Inquisitive (< .001), Collaborative (< .001), Motivation (< .001) and Grit (< .001).
CONCLUSIONS: The data suggest that student understanding of what comprised SDL is influenced by their engagement in SDL activities during the M1 year. The SDL inventory will permit longitudinal tracking of progress from low self-direction to high self-direction of individual students or the entire class in aggregate. This information enables us to identify what specific aspects of the SDL process students feel confident about, and what areas they continue to struggle so we can make the necessary alterations to how SDL is presented in the curriculum.

FACTORS THAT INFLUENCED FIRST-YEAR MEDICAL STUDENT PRESENCE ON CAMPUS DURING THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

Amanda Delgado | Sahil Gandhi | Anna Edmondson
Medical College of Georgia at Augusta University, Augusta GA, 30901 U.S.A. | Medical College of Georgia at Augusta University, Augusta GA, 30901 U.S.A. | Medical College of Georgia at Augusta University, Augusta GA, 30901 U.S.A.
PURPOSE: During the COVID-19 pandemic, policies were introduced to help mitigate disease spread. At the Medical College of Georgia (MCG), first-year students were given the option of attending lectures in-person or virtually. Students that attended class in-person were expected to wear masks, practice social distancing, and refrain from eating/drinking in the lecture hall. These protocols also extended to students who used campus facilities as a place to study outside class hours. The purpose of this project was to examine factors influencing first-year medical student on campus activity at MCG during the COVID-19 pandemic.
METHODS: First-year medical students at MCG (n = 194) were invited to complete an anonymous survey in February 2021 addressing student demographics, academic networks, social networks, and general wellness during the COVID-19 pandemic. Survey responses were collected from 42 students.
RESULTS: Student respondents only attended lectures in-person ~2.6 ± 1.4 days per week. Factors contributing to this decision included the opportunity for socialization (40%) and interaction with faculty (24%). Thirty-one percent of respondents reported not attending class in-person unless mandatory. Students felt the greatest factors contributing to their decision to attend classes virtually were the commute and parking on campus (62% of respondents) followed by the policies restricting food and water in the classroom (50% of respondents). Survey respondents were more frustrated with the restriction of food and water in the lecture hall (70%) compared to mask and social distancing policies on campus (7% and 26%, respectively). The majority of respondents (62%) preferred to study off campus, and most survey participants (69%) felt that concerns regarding the pandemic impacted their preferred study location.
CONCLUSIONS: Policies to ensure campus safety during the pandemic appear to have deterred student campus activity. Consideration for supplemental academic and social support to combat isolation is likely needed to combat lower levels of on-campus networking.

VIRTUALLY AT A STANDSTILL: WHAT FAILURE LOOKS LIKE

Pooja Shah | Chao Kowa | Joanna Wong | Zainab Hussein
Barts and the London School of Anaesthesia | Central London School of Anaesthesia | Barts and the London School of Anaesthesia | Barts and the London School of Anaesthesia
PURPOSE: As the global pandemic took centre stage throughout the world in 2019, it left in disarray the concept of traditional learning and assessment. What our team used to deliver to candidates in preparation for Anaesthetic postgraduate examinations required significant revision. A face-to-face Objective Structured Clinical Examination (OSCE) preparatory course comprising 2 circuits (each with 16 different stations and one examiner per station) and 16 delegates sequentially and simultaneously rotating through the stations needed to be delivered virtually, with limited resources.
METHODS: We aimed to deliver a hybrid OSCE in October 2020. An online server suitable to our needs was identified. Faculty members were located physically in one building for ease of coordination, whilst delegates accessed the course remotely. Both were extensively briefed prior to the OSCE. Within an hour of commencing the day-long course, the server crashed and the course had to be cancelled despite extensive troubleshooting efforts.
RESULTS: Failing to deliver a course that had been promised to fee-paying delegates was an acutely stressful adversity we had to overcome. We began by apologising to the delegates/faculty, then paired each delegate with one examiner. Next, we sent the entire question and answer pack to all examiners and each pair was asked to contact each other by Skype/Zoom to complete the OSCE circuit under exam conditions. We also offered an additional service providing one-to-one coaching sessions.
CONCLUSIONS: Complete migration to the virtual world marks a paradigm shift in the delivery of education for all stakeholders. Whilst challenging, it is also rewarding as greater opportunities and possibilities are discovered. We have since identified new methods and developed an online-only OSCE course which has successfully run twice, demonstrating greater inclusivity than before by enabling the participation of international delegates and faculty.

REMOTE RESEARCH ELECTIVE OFFERED DURING COVID-19 PANDEMIC

Dustin P DeMeo | Mina Milan | Uriel Kim | Kelli Qua | Samuel Boas | Ellen Kendal | Hammad Khan | Carson Del Greco | Jeremy Ruthberg | George Saieed | Raghav Tripathi | Joseph Younis | Jessica DeCaro | Kristin Sainani | Colleen M Croniger
Case Western Reserve University | Case Western Reserve University | Case Western Reserve University | Case Western Reserve University | Case Westsern Reserve University | Case Western Reserve University | Case Western Reserve University | Case Western Reserve University
PURPOSE: Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine requires four months of research for the M.D. degree. Research is usually completed during MS3 and MS4 years. Social distancing early in the COVID-19 pandemic prevented most learners from accessing research labs. To overcome this impasse, we created a remote research elective that satisfied the first two months of requirements while offering learners a way to publish on publicly available data of their choice.
METHODS: The elective was developed by 11 students and 3 faculty. Modules included 51 Statistics in Medicine videos donated by Kristin Sainani and Stanford University, 24 R (or Python) interactive tutorials donated by DataCamp, 3 R live-recorded coding exemplars, 5 pre-recorded lectures, and an online Q&A forum. Assessments included 6 quizzes, 331 interactive programming exercises, a Not Human Research IRB, and a literature review. The elective was available to current MS4s (2022) and recent graduates (2021).
RESULTS: The elective was completed by 53 of 179 MS4s and 21 of 184 recent graduates. An additional 8 MS4s have started the elective. Learners completed 100% of quizzes, 87% of DataCamp exercises, 100% of IRBs, and 100% of literature reviews.
CONCLUSIONS: Students and faculty created a remote research elective for learners during the COVID-19 pandemic. Self-paced virtual modules allowed students to “learn by doing.” Due to the success of the online modules, the statistics component, pre-recorded lectures, and IRB assessment were integrated into the core Research and Scholarship curriculum for current MS1s (2025) and MS2s (2024).

IMPACT OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC ON USMLE STEP 1 PREPARATION FOR CLASS OF 2022 MEDICAL STUDENTS

Shefali Jain
Medical College of Georgia at Augusta University
PURPOSE: The COVID-19 pandemic disrupted study preparations for medical students across the country as they were preparing to take the USMLE Step 1 exam. Many students were forced to move home and quarantine with their families while studying for Step 1. Additionally, closure of Prometric test centers across the USA caused test date cancellations and scheduling changes. The purpose of this study was to examine the perceived effects of the pandemic on the Class of 2022 medical students at the Medical College of Georgia (MCG) as they were preparing for USMLE Step 1.
METHODS: Third year medical students from the Class of 2022 (n = 29 out of 186) completed an online, anonymous survey consisting of multiple choice, Likert-scale, and free-response questions assessing the impact of COVID-19 on their Step 1 preparation. Students responded to the survey between February and May 2021.
RESULTS: Approximately 45% of respondents relocated because of the pandemic. Respondents reported increased levels of stress (38%), decreased ability to focus (41%), and decreased productivity (31%) due to a change in primary location. Nearly 70% of respondents reported a change in test date during the pandemic, with 59% having their test date changed 2 times. Respondents reported increased levels of stress (76%) and decreased motivation to study (45%). When asked to comment further about motivation changes, students noted that fear of their test date being changed or cancelled caused “great stress” and “decreased motivation” while studying. Interestingly, many respondents reported no changes in Step 1 performance due to change in location (66%) or change in test date (62%).
CONCLUSIONS: The COVID-19 pandemic introduced uncertainty as students were studying for USMLE Step 1, impacting their levels of stress, ability to focus, productivity, and motivation to study. Future studies will assess whether these effects lingered as students prepared for USMLE Step 2.

BUILDING AN INTERPROFESSIONAL PRACTICE EXPERIENCE TO PROVIDE CARE TO THE UNINSURED, THE INTERPROFESSIONAL CONTINUITY OF PRACTICE EXPERIENCE (I-COPE) PROGRAM

Norman Farr | Janet Enderle | Blair Brown | Christopher Messenger | Martha Diaz | Loree Pryor | Monica Green | Melissa Yanes | Daneen Nastars | Jacob Moran | John Davis | Victor Sierpina | Premal Patel
UTMB, Provost Office | UTMB, Clinical Laboratory Sciences | UTMB, Nutrition and Metabolism | UTMB, Nutrition and Metabolism | UTMB, Nursing | UTMB, Occupational Therapy | UTMB, Pharmacy | UTMB, Respiratory Care | UTMB, Respiratory Care | UTMB, Medical Student | UTMB, Medical Student | UTMB, School of Medicine | UTMB, School of Medicine
PURPOSE: There has been long-time consensus on key elements that are needed in contemporary health professions education to align training with needs of the future health care system including (1) interprofessional practice opportunities, (2) more outpatient training, (3) increased opportunity for longitudinal care and chronic disease management, and (4) quality improvement training. Increasing productivity requirements have led to challenges placing students in meaningful outpatient clinical experiences. While interprofessional education has become an increased focus for academic centers, meaningful interprofessional practice experiences have remained elusive due to challenging logistics, funding, and faculty incentive alignment.
METHODS: Through innovative partnerships with community organizations and our health system, we have successfully created an interprofessional program that includes interprofessional clinical care, shared curriculum, quality improvement opportunities, and reflection. Online and in-person workshops taught by interprofessional faculty take place throughout the year. Faculty and students from Clinical Lab Sciences, Nutrition and Metabolism, Occupational Therapy, Pharmacy, Respiratory Care, the School of Medicine, and Social Services work together to provide interprofessional care to medically complex, uninsured patients in our “interprofessional clinic.” We have overcome many of the financial, academic, and logistical challenges by employing the concept of “value-added medical education,” where we support our students in providing value and capacity to the health care delivery system.
RESULTS: Ten interprofessional faculty and over 40 students as part of each program’s core educational curriculum provide clinical care to an average of 35 uninsured patients each week free of charge. The clinic is an interprofessional practice experience that provides longitudinal, chronic disease management in an outpatient setting while students establish relationships with faculty role models from multiple disciplines.
CONCLUSIONS: The I-COPE program through the deployment of value-added educational principles and innovative partnerships embeds students in the practice of longitudinal patient care in an interprofessional patient-centered medical and educational home.

COLLABORATIVE APPROACH TO MEDICAL SPANISH EDUCATION THROUGH STANDARDIZED PATIENT WORKSHOPS

Brian Macias Martinez | Laura Molina | Marla C. Fortoul | Andrea Roca | Jose Garcia | Adrian Alepuz | Darisel Ventura Rodriguez | Erik A. Espino | Algevis Wrench
Nova Southeastern University Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine | Nova Southeastern University Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine | Nova Southeastern University Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine | Nova Southeastern University Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine
PURPOSE: As per official census data, Spanish is the second most common language spoken in the USA and is highly influential in certain areas, such as South Florida. Currently, few medical schools focus on educating their students on how to care for individuals with limited English proficiency (LEP). By addressing the language barrier through teaching Spanish to non-Spanish speakers by way of standardized patient (SP) workshops and edifying students on the values of Latinx culture, this study seeks to gain insight into areas of potential advancements in Spanish medical education that will positively affect the healthcare of the Latinx community.
METHODS: The intervention consisted of educating participants on proper terminology and providing an SP simulation. Participants and SPs consisted of voluntary Allopathic and Osteopathic medical students. Resources included a medical history outline in Spanish and English and a presentation providing instruction on obtaining a history of present illness, review of systems, past medical history, and physical exam in Spanish. An anonymous survey was provided before and after the workshop to self-assess the participants’ level of confidence utilizing Spanish through various aspects of the patient encounter.
RESULTS: Ten (77%) students completed the pre- and post-surveys. The workshop improved participants’ confidence in conducting history of present illness with a mean score change from 2.2 to 3.1 on a Likert scale. There was an increase in confidence in conducting a physical exam with a mean score change from 1.8 to 2.5. The data collection is still in progress. Additional workshops will be conducted.
CONCLUSIONS: Care of individuals with LEP, who are part of the Latinx population in the USA, may be enhanced through Spanish language workshops directed at medical students which may ultimately provide a framework that unifies medical education, as well as addressing the language barrier affecting the healthcare of the Latinx community.

HIGH SELF-EFFICACY FOR ACADEMIC PERFORMANCE IS POSITIVELY RELATED TO STUDENT WELLNESS

Jonathan Ruiz B.S. | Joshua Salzman B.S. | Andrea Espina Rey MPH CPH | Christine Kauffman M.D. | Jonathan Kibble Ph.D.
Medical Student- University of Central Florida College of Medicine | Medical Student- University of Central Florida College of Medicine | Statistical Research Coordinator- University of Central Florida College of Medicine | Associate Professor- University of Central Florida College of Medicine
PURPOSE: Self-efficacy relates to an individual’s belief in their capacity to successfully execute the behaviors necessary to produce a specific performance attainment. The purpose of the current study was to assess if student self-efficacy for academic performance is also related to wellness. As such, we hypothesized that students with greater self-efficacy would possess improved wellness over those with lower self-efficacy scores.
METHODS: As part of an ongoing prospective cohort study, MD program students were administered a 77-question survey in November of their second year consisting of question subsets from multiple validated surveys. Self-efficacy was measured using the appropriate sub-scale items from the Motivated Strategies of Learning Questionnaire (MSLQ). Wellness metrics included the Pearlin Mastery Scale, the De Jong Gierveld Loneliness Scale, the Modified School Burnout Inventory, the Lubben Social Network Scale, the CDC Healthy Days Measure, the Multidimensional Scale of Perceived Social Support, and the Graduate Stress Inventory. Multiple regression analysis was used to compare the self-efficacy score to each wellness score.
RESULTS: Thirty-nine students completed the combined survey. Greater levels of self-efficacy, indicated by the MSLQ score, were associated with less academic stress (p = 0.02, R2 = 0.234), less environmental stress (p = 0.013, R2 = 0.155), less total stress (p = 0.001, R2 = 0.259), less school burnout (p < 0.001, R2 = 0.324), less exhaustion (p < 0.001, R2 = 0.317), less cynicism (p = 0.03, R2 = 0.121), less inadequacy (p = 0.001, R2 = 0.269), less overall unhealthiness (p = 0.037, R2 = 0.113), greater mastery (p = 0.001, R2 = 0.267), greater social support (p = 0.001, R2 = 0.260), greater support from friends (p = 0.022, R2 = 0.133), and less loneliness (p = 0.001, R2 = 0.242). Correlations between self-efficacy and the other wellness subscales were found to be not significant.
CONCLUSIONS: Higher levels of self-efficacy appear to predict greater student wellness during the second year of medical school. As such, continued research is warranted to ascertain what factors contribute to student self-efficacy and, thus, may further improve student wellness in challenging times.

INFORMATION MASTERY COURSE FOR MEDICAL TRAINEES: ASSESSMENT OF LONG-TERM SKILL RETENTION AND CONFIDENCE IN FINDING, APPRAISING, AND APPLYING EVIDENCE IN PRACTICE

Johan Bester, MBChB, PhD
Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV
PURPOSE: Medical students must learn how to apply evidence-based medicine (EBM) to clinical decision-making. Traditional approaches to teaching EBM has delivered mixed results in the acquisition of long-term skills in EBM. An alternative approach to teaching EBM is the Information Mastery (IM) method. The current literature lacks a measurement of long-term retention of skills and confidence in EBM using the IM method. We aim to assess long-term outcomes of an active-learning IM course.
METHODS: Fifty-nine Medical students previously participated in a 12-week active learning course based on the Information Mastery curriculum. Students completed online learning modules, followed by active in-class learning in medium sized groups. Student’s confidence and skill in various EBM domains were initially measured pre- and post-course using a 15-question confidence survey and the Assessment of Competency in EBM (ACE) tool. Long-term retention of students’ confidence and skills were measured after 2 years, using the same survey and the ACE tool.
RESULTS: Time of completion of data collection from the same cohort of students will be February 2022. Results of the confidence survey and ACE tool from all three time periods (pre/post/2 years-post) will be compared to draw conclusions regarding long-term retention of EBM skill and confidence using the IM method.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on learning theory, we expect that the results of the self-confidence survey and ACE scores from 2 years-post completion of the IM course will be higher than the post-course results and significantly higher than the pre-course results. This is the first study that seeks to assess long-term retention of EBM skill using the IM method of instruction.

AN ACTION RESEARCH APPROACH TO CURRICULAR CHANGE

Douglas J. Koch, EdD | Leslie McIntosh, PhD | Kerin Claeson, PhD | Marina D'Angelo, PhD
Philadelphia College of Osteopahic Medicine | Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine, South Georgia | Philadelphia College of Osteopahic Medicine | Philadelphia College of Osteopahic Medicine
PURPOSE: Changes made in the presentation of histology within the PCOM DO curriculum, including reduced contact hours and content delivery over the preclinical years, dictated that histology be presented in a combination of modalities. The histology faculty took an agile approach to create a pedagogically sound and engaging learning environment for the students through an Action Research methodology to implement a Community of Inquiry (CoI) framework during a time of unprecedented change at both the program and the global level.
METHODS: Action Research methodology is a collaborative, reflective, cyclical, planned, and practical approach to improving the practice of medical education by incorporating change. CoI is a theoretical framework in which the faculty create a social learning environment where the students can address the learning objectives, core competencies, and entrustable professional activities prescribed by the accreditors for the histology discipline in the preclinical DO curriculum.
RESULTS: CoI is a collaborative constructivist approach to learning that affords learners consistency whether the class time is synchronous or asynchronous. We have created an environment modeled on this framework, in which the students can engage with each other, the content, and the instructors in multiple modes and with multiple tools: Tophat active learning modules, Blackboard assignments, discussion boards, lectures, team-based learning, and small groups. Collected data will include exit surveys and assessment performance which measure the effectiveness of learning resources, practical identifications, and subject mastery.
CONCLUSIONS: The Action Research approach to curriculum change allowed us to adapt our CoI model of learning to best meet the needs of the program and the learners during a time of change. This reflective process allowed us to implement and assess small curricular changes in a rapid manner, something a more traditional research approach would not allow.

COULD COMMENTS BE THE KEY? A RETROSPECTIVE STUDY OF OSCE QUALITATIVE DATA AND ITS ABILITY TO PROFILE STRUGGLING STUDENTS

Michael Allen | Felise Milan | Tavinder Ark
The Mount Sinai Hospital System | The Albert Einstein College of Medicine | Medical College of Wisconsin
PURPOSE: Quantification of medical students’ performances provides a trusted yet incomplete view of their competence. The aim of this study is to evaluate the latent potential of standardized patients’ comments (qualitative data) to augment existing markers of clinical performance (quantitative data) in accurately identifying students at risk of struggling clinically.
METHODS: SP comments from Objective Structured Clinical Examinations at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine from 2010 to 2011 were analyzed. The investigators built a descriptive coding framework for the SP comments through an iterative process of coding individually and consensus building during periodic meetings until code saturation. Next, student’s clinical performance (clinical rotation/clerkship grades, step 1 scores, and SHELF scores) were analyzed using profile analysis. Work is ongoing to investigate the statistical association between profiles and themes with results expected by IAMSE 2022.
RESULTS: A total of 75 unique themes were identified (interpersonal/communication skills n = 28, global rating n = 17, history taking n = 17, and physical exam n = 13). Global rating’s most common positive and negative comments center on empathy. Profile analysis produced three profiles: high performing students (STEP 1 mean = 239, IM SHELF mean = 81.5, mean # of honors received in clinical rotations/clerkships (H) = 3.62), middle-range performing students (STEP 1 mean = 225, IM SHELF mean = 73.6, mean #H = 1.17), and low-performing students (STEP 1 mean = 215, IM SHELF mean = 71.2, mean #H = 0.706).
CONCLUSIONS: The triangulation of themes that can reliably predict the future clinical performance of students helps identify students struggling in ways that repeated quantitative assessments do not. Interpersonal/Communication skills’ themes were most numerous and often found in the comments of other domains, implying a greater impact on all parts of the encounter. Interestingly, the addition of multiple shelf scores reduced the number of statistically significant and independent profiles from three to two, suggesting that repeated quantitative methods are less helpful in distinguishing at-risk students from the higher performing students.

UTILITY OF PEER-GENERATED FORMATIVE ASSESSMENTS IN THE EDUCATION OF FELLOW MEDICAL STUDENTS

Mahmuod Abdeljaber | Amy Lorber | Patrick Renner | Adithya Reddy | Charlotte Milnes, Ed.D
Western Michigan University Homer Stryker M.D. School of Medicine, Kalamazoo MI, 49007 | Western Michigan University Homer Stryker M.D. School of Medicine, Kalamazoo MI, 49007 | Western Michigan University Homer Stryker M.D. School of Medicine, Kalamazoo MI, 49007
PURPOSE: Formative assessments consisting of multiple-choice questions (MCQs) offer a unique opportunity to recreate the testing environment without the associated high stakes. At our institution, a group of students composed formative assessments during preclinical years. This abstract describes the students’ approach and the perceptions of peers in the Class of 2023 and Class of 2024.
METHODS: Four members of the Class of 2023 collaborated to compose and distribute formative assessments at weekly or biweekly intervals. MCQs were written primarily in clinical vignette format with aid of the NBME Item Writing Guide to target specific curricular learning objectives. Detailed answer explanations were written for each MCQ with a focus on why the keyed item was correct and other items were incorrect. The formative assessments were distributed using an online cloud platform. Suggested edits or corrections from peers were incorporated periodically, and questions were moved between formative assessments intermittently by members of the Class of 2024 to mirror rearrangements in the curriculum.
RESULTS: Thirty peer-generated formative assessments containing a total of approximately 1000 curriculum-relevant MCQs were composed during the period from February 2020 to March 2021. A survey (n = 76, response rate of 45%) found that 92% (70 of 76) of respondents have utilized the formative assessments, with 46% (35 of 76) of respondents reporting utilizing them consistently. Among those who utilized the formative assessments, 87% (61 of 70) reported that they were useful to their learning, and 90% (63 of 70) reported that the answer explanations were useful to their learning.
CONCLUSIONS: Peer-generated formative assessments contributed to the academic growth of students at our institution. Beta-testing the assessments is recommended in the future to avoid poor wording, which may detract from their use.

FACILITATING SOCIAL BONDING BETWEEN INCOMING MEDICAL STUDENTS THROUGH EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN (EMT) TRAINING

Salman Mohammed | Daman Samrao | Edward Simanton
Kerkorian School of Medicine at University of Nevada, Las Vegas, NV 89106, U.S.A. | Kerkorian School of Medicine at University of Nevada, Las Vegas, NV 89106, U.S.A. | Kerkorian School of Medicine at University of Nevada, Las Vegas, NV 89106, U.S.A.
PURPOSE: Incoming students of the Kerkorian School of Medicine begin their medical studies by participating in a 6 week immersive Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) training course which, amongst other objectives, is used to facilitate peer to peer bonding that is known to be vital for learning. Due to the COVID 19 pandemic, the class of 2024 participated in this course at the end of their preclinical curriculum and had a lower overall average on organ system exams in their first semester compared to previous classes. We undertook a study to assess if this course truly meets the objective of facilitating social bonding within an incoming class.
METHODS: A qualitative survey using a 5-point Likert scale with areas for comments was developed to assess numerous EMT course objectives, including facilitation of peer to peer bonding, by the Medical Education department at KSOM. The survey was completed by the classes of 2022 and 2023, 3 and 2 years after course completion respectively.
RESULTS: A total of 77 students responded to the survey and 48 comments were received. The comments were assessed for mention of social bonding. Of the 48 comments shared, 30 (63%) specifically mentioned that the course was vital in forming the social bonds they currently share with their classmates.
CONCLUSIONS: The EMT course is an effective tool in building social bonding for an incoming medical school class (among other curricular objectives it achieves). This social bonding is looked upon favorably by students as a strong positive of the course. The peer-to-peer relationships that result from the EMT course likely contribute to a stronger support system throughout medical school with a positive impact on learning and assessments. However, there may be less costly and less time consuming initiatives that may accomplish the same goal and should be explored.

“SHE LEFT ME WITH A SENSE OF BELONGING AND OPTIMISM”: THE RESULTS OF FACULTY MENTORING FOR STRUGGLING STUDENTS

Kathryn B. Moore | Elliot Asare | Paloma Cariello | Jorie Colbert-Getz | Timothy Formosa | Janet E. Lindsley | Angelica R. Putnam | Karly A. Pippitt
University of Utah | University of Utah | University of Utah | University of Utah | University of Utah | University of Utah | University of Utah | University of Utah
PURPOSE: Many medical schools are moving to Pass/Fail grading throughout training. While there are benefits to P/F grading, concerns remain; students might have a false sense of competence or be less motivated to remediate deficiencies. To promote a growth mindset in medical education in the setting of P/F, we studied supportive factors. In our preclerkship courses, we added a temporary “Not Yet Pass” (NYP) grade that included formal faculty mentoring to support students. Here we explore the role of faculty mentors in supporting students with NYP grades.
METHODS: In 2019–20, the University of Utah School of Medicine changed from P/F preclerkship grading to P/NYP/F. To move from a NYP to a P grade, students are required to write a self-assessment, meet with a faculty mentor to analyze area(s) of deficiency, and create an individual learning plan (NYP process). To better understand what worked and why for the NYP process, we used an appreciative inquiry approach surveying students receiving a NYP grade and faculty mentors (response rate < 70%).
RESULTS: The NYP process enabled students to identify and correct deficiencies while feeling more supported. Mentorship was the most frequently mentioned theme for “what was working” in the process. Faculty mentors (N = 7) appreciated: space to discuss achieving a growth mindset and working with students to identify factors impacting poor performance. Students (N = 23) appreciated genuine mentor support with mentors’ optimistic viewpoints, and ability to decompress the situation and opportunities to discuss academic or wellness struggles with a mentor, which cultivated a sense of belonging.
CONCLUSIONS: Our preliminary results suggest faculty mentorship is a key component to helping students adopt a growth mindset. By linking student self-reflection with personalized feedback, mentoring and support from faculty, the NYP grade offers a way for medical schools to formalize a process that promotes a growth mindset in learning.

SUPERVISED INTERPROFESSIONAL STUDENT PAIN CLINIC PROGRAM - EFFICACY WITH THE UTILIZATION OF ZOOM

Brandon Dao | Ling Cao
University of New England College of Osteopathic Medicine | University of New England College of Osteopathic Medicine
PURPOSE: The supervised interprofessional (IP) student pain clinic program aims to train healthcare professional students to improve their abilities in chronic pain management while working in IP teams. The program has successfully trained students using in-person and on-site settings up until Fall 2019. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, Zoom was employed to allow the program to continue running without physical contact. In this study, survey data from students who participated during and before the COVID pandemic were compared to determine if the program carried out via Zoom could maintain its efficacy.
METHODS: Student pre- and post-program survey data from spring 2019 (on-site, in-person), fall 2019 (on-site, in-person), spring 2020 (Zoom towards the end of the program), and spring 2021 (completely Zoom) were entered into Microsoft Excel spreadsheet and then graphed and analyzed with SigmaPlot. The pre- and post-surveys consisted of questionnaires assessing knowledge in chronic pain physiology and management, attitude and perception towards IP practice, and perceived team skills. The pre-survey also asked about students’ prior experiences, and the post-survey solicited open-ended comments. Paired t-tests and Wilcoxon Signed-rank tests were used for two-group comparisons and two-way repeated ANOVA followed by the Holm-Sidak post hoc tests for multiple group comparisons.
RESULTS: Overall, students continued to have significant improvement in major areas assessed even with the use of Zoom. Also, the strengths of the program were consistent across student cohorts regardless of Zoom usage. However, despite their improvements, students who utilized Zoom stated that they would have preferred in-person program activities.
CONCLUSIONS: Although students prefer in-person program activities, the supervised IP student pain clinic program successfully trained healthcare students in chronic pain management while working in an IP team through Zoom.

DEVELOPING A PRACTICE-DRIVEN COMPETENCY FRAMEWORK TO GUIDE PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT PATHWAYS AND ENHANCE VETERINARY NURSE UTILIZATION IN PRACTICE

Julie Noyes | Patrick Welch | Ed Carlson | Patty Pate | William Cicero | Tricia Kaoihana
VetBloom, Woburn, MA 01801 U.S.A, American Association of Veterinary Medical Colleges, Washington, D.C. 20001 U.S.A | VetBloom, Woburn, MA 01801 U.S.A | VetBloom, Woburn, MA 01801 U.S.A | Ethos Veterinary Health, Woburn, MA 01801 U.S.A. | Ethos Veterinary Health, Woburn, MA 01801 U.S.A.
PURPOSE: The increasing demand for high-quality veterinary services reveals a disconnect between workforce needs and training for veterinary nurses leading to underutilization and undervaluing these vital professionals. When underutilized, veterinary nurses are not practicing at the ‘top of their license’ which decreases labor stratification and the efficiency and efficacy of the veterinary care team. These consequences severely impact quality of life and compensation for veterinary nurses, patient access to veterinary healthcare, and the integrity of the veterinary profession. To address this disconnect, we developed a practice-driven, competency framework with multiple skill levels that align education outputs with workforce needs and provide veterinary nurses with learning pathways to attain and maintain industry-driven skills.
METHODS: A modified Delphi approach resulted in a multi-skill level competency framework for veterinary nurses. A focus group developed Entrustable Professional Activities (EPAs) and delineated competencies. A survey of veterinary professionals ranked focus group competencies and identified additional competencies. Focus group sessions and surveys iterated upon survey data and skill levels were delineated within competency domains creating competency-based learning pathways.
RESULTS: A focus group of five veterinary professionals initially identified 34 EPAs and 73 competencies. The survey was completed by 302 veterinary professionals across 23 hospitals. The data was further iterated upon producing a 10-domain framework. The Clinical Core Domain had nine subdomains with 36 competencies. The remaining nine domains consisted of 88 competencies. Each domain was delineated into skill levels and digital badges were designed to define learning assets and experiential parameters required to advance between competency skill levels.
CONCLUSIONS: We used an iterative and evidence-based process to build a competency framework for veterinary nurses. The process provides a model not only for how such frameworks can be developed but also for creating competency-based learning pathways to help professionals practice at the ‘top of their license’ and increase labor stratification.

FORWARD THINKERS: MEDICAL STUDENT PERSPECTIVES ON COVID-19 VACCINE MANDATES BEFORE EMERGENCY USE AUTHORIZATION

Deidre N. Hurse, PhD | Nelia M. Afonso, MD | Linda M. Dillon, MD | Victoria C. Lucia, PhD
Oakland University William Beaumont School of Medicine | Oakland University William Beaumont School of Medicine | Covenant Community Care | Oakland University William Beaumont School of Medicine
PURPOSE: As COVID-19 vaccine mandates are being implemented in the workplace, including healthcare systems nationwide, this project explores first-year medical student opinions towards such mandates, prior to the FDA’s emergency use authorization (EUA) of the vaccines.
METHODS: In Fall 2020, first-year medical students were asked to complete an assignment requiring them to find a mainstream online media article about COVID-19 vaccines and answer various question including prompts on their views on vaccine mandates for healthcare providers, medical students, and the general public.
ResultsOf 55 students, 47 (85.5%) felt that COVID-19 vaccines should be mandated for healthcare providers (HCP), 46 (83.6%) for medical students, and 12 (21.8%) for the general public. A similar percentage of males (87.5%) and females (80.6%) supported vaccine mandates for HCP. Similar support was expressed for mandating vaccines for medical students: males (87.5%) and females (83.9%). Students were less supportive of general public mandates; 50% of males and 41% of females disagreed, while 33% of males and 32.3% of females indicated mixed feelings. A preliminary review indicates 38 students noted concerns about provider transmission and risk of infection as primary reasons to mandate vaccines for HCP and medical students. Individual freedoms, feasibility, and public trust were noted as rationale for opposing general public mandates. Thematic analysis is ongoing, and key themes in support of and opposition to vaccine mandates in HCP, medical students, and the general public will be presented.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, medical students early in their medical education journey had positive attitudes towards COVID-19 vaccine mandates for healthcare providers and fellow students. This is insightful, given these opinions were solicited before the emergency use authorization of vaccines on the market and the current trend of COVID-19 and response to vaccine mandates.

COMPARATIVE TEST QUESTION PERFORMANCE IN MEDICAL SCHOOL BEFORE AND DURING THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

Alyssa Kendell
Kansas City University
PURPOSE: The COVID-19 pandemic required many institutions to transition components of curriculum to online, remote learning. A retrospective study was performed, analyzing medical school psychometric exam data to determine whether this transition impacted test question performance.
METHODS: Two medical school cohorts were compared: the class of 2022 (COM-2022), who received curriculum in years 1 and 2 as traditional, live lectures, and the class of 2023 (COM-2023), who transitioned to remote learning in spring of year 1. MCAT scores, undergraduate and science GPAs, and performance in a pre-pandemic Musculoskeletal (MSK) course were utilized for a baseline. Courses selected for comparative study were Mechanisms of Disease (MOD) (year 1), Gastrointestinal-II (GI-II) (year 2), and Neuromusculoskeletal-Psych (NMSP) (year 2). These courses had uniform placement in the academic year, duration, and faculty. Test questions utilized for both cohorts were identified and paired t-tests were conducted to compare overall difficulty and performance by the top and bottom student quartiles.
RESULTS: MCAT, GPAs, and pre-pandemic MSK course baselines showed no significant statistical difference between cohorts. In MOD, COM-2023 showed diminished performance (p < 0.05) in all psychometric data points (overall difficulty, top quartile, bottom quartile) compared to COM-2022. In GI-II and NMSP, the overall and top quartile performance of COM-2023 was not significantly different from COM-2022; however, COM-2023 bottom quartile performance was significantly lower (p < 0.05) than COM-2022.
CONCLUSIONS: Psychometric exam data during remote learning showed significant differences from pre-pandemic performance. After an initial overall decrease in test question performance, the top quartile of students recovered to perform similarly to pre-pandemic levels, whereas persistent underperformance remained in the bottom quartile.

SUPPORTING AT-RISK STUDENTS’ CONFIDENCE AND PREPARATION FOR MEDICAL SCHOOL VIA A HYBRID PRE-MATRICULATION COURSE

Brook Hubner | Laura Fraser
University of Alabama at Birmingham | University of Alabama at Birmingham
PURPOSE: Students enter medical school with varying educational backgrounds and learning strategies. Factors contributing to academic difficulty include passive learning, difficulty with time and stress management, poor test-taking skills, and challenges integrating large amounts of material. Students at risk for academic underperformance may benefit from developing learning strategies using medical school course content and from the social and cognitive congruence of peer-assisted learning. For 2 years, we have piloted a free pre-matriculation course for at-risk students pairing medical school lectures with learning strategy instruction.
METHODS: The course was designed to replicate a similar pace and use actual content from the UAB Heersink SOM Fundamentals of Medicine course. SOM learning management and exam software was used to increase familiarity with SOM systems. The final exam was offered in the SOM testing room to decrease exam-related anxiety. The course was not graded to provide formative feedback and encourage experimentation with learning strategies. A peer educator provided content and study skills reinforcement. Sessions were offered live in-person, live online or on demand for asynchronous engagement.
RESULTS: Twenty-four students participated in 2020 and 25 in 2021. Post-course evaluations asked participants to rate the following (average 67% response rate): Level of preparedness and confidence to begin medical school, very prepared 57%; very confident 51%; prepared 33%; confident 43%; unsure 10%; unsure 6%. Effective course elements: peer educator sessions 79%, course format 79%, representative exams 76%. Twenty-seven percent reported not utilizing learning strategy content. Academic outcome data will be analyzed at the completion of the Fundamentals of Medicine course ending December 2021.
CONCLUSIONS: A hybrid course using representative exams, SOM lectures, and peer-assisted learning appears to increase at-risk students’ confidence and perception of preparation to begin medical school. Additional investigation is needed to understand why some students did not use learning strategy content.

INTERPROFESSIONAL EDUCATION AND PERCEIVED SELF-EFFICACY IN HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONAL POSTGRADUATE STUDENTS: A PILOT STUDY

Paula Smith | Lindsay Rutherford | David Griffith
Deanery of Clinical Sciences, University of Edinburgh | Deanery of Clinical Sciences, University of Edinburgh | Deanery of Clinical Sciences, University of Edinburgh
PURPOSE: The Edinburgh online Masters in Critical Care programme enrols a multidisciplinary cohort of part-time postgraduate students reflecting the reality of a team-based approach to critical care. Interprofessional education (IPE) provides an authentic learning environment, improves knowledge and understanding of other professional roles, and ultimately improves patient care. This pilot study explored the relationship between students’ attitudes towards IPE and perceived self-efficacy in a distance education setting.
METHODS: Students enrolled on the programme are assigned to small groups, each comprising around 12 students from 3–4 different health professions, in which they interact in weekly, asynchronous discussion boards and synchronous virtual tutorials. A modified 17-item Self-efficacy for Interprofessional Experiential Learning (SEIEL) scale and an 18-item Readiness for Interprofessional Learning Scale (RIPLS) were piloted during the beginning of the 2021/22 academic year; scores range between 17–85 and 18–90, respectively. Free-text comments were invited. Mean score differences between professions were analysed by one-way ANOVA, and associations by linear regression, using SPSS ®v25.
RESULTS: Thirty-nine students completed the survey (40% response rate). Cronbach’s alpha = 0.80 and 0.90, indicating internal consistency for SEIEL and RIPLS, respectively, and are comparable with published results. Mean SEIEL scores suggest most students have a high self-efficacy with no significant difference between professions (doctor: 72.3 ± 5.5 (n = 19); paramedic: 72.2 ± 7.2 (n = 12); nurse: 67.3 ± 6.8 (n = 7); [pharmacist: 78 (n = 1, omitted)] (P = 0.18)), and similarly for RIPLS scores (doctor: 79.6 ± 8.6 (n = 19); paramedic: 80.0 ± 8.2 (n = 12); nurse: 77.7 ± 5.4 (n = 7); [pharmacist: 85 (n = 1, omitted)] (P = 0.83)), notwithstanding the potential for non-response bias. There was a significant association between SEIEL and RIPLS scores (P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Our pilot study’s preliminary findings suggest that online postgraduate students’ readiness for IPE relates to self-efficacy. Such insight will inform strategies to enhance delivery of IPE and overcome a perceived hierarchy by those less confident working with other students from different professions. Further findings, including data from an end-of-year survey, will be shared at the conference.

AN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE-DRIVEN VIRTUAL PATIENT ENCOUNTER IN A PRECLINICAL TBL

Tim Bauler | Mike Busha | Lisa Miller | Maria Sheakley | Holly Turula
Western Michigan University Homer Stryker M.D. School of Medicine | Western Michigan University Homer Stryker M.D. School of Medicine | Western Michigan University Homer Stryker M.D. School of Medicine | Western Michigan University Homer Stryker M.D. School of Medicine
PURPOSE: Artificial intelligence (AI) has been used in clinical settings including radiology for several years, but AI has not been extensively used or studied in undergraduate medical education. The challenge of providing preclinical medical learners with ‘patient interactions’ during the COVID-19 pandemic led our institution to explore the use of AI technology. We describe our addition of an AI-driven virtual patient encounter to a preclinical basic science course, thereby additionally providing integration of students practicing taking patient histories and performing physical examinations into the course.
METHODS: In the Gastrointestinal System course, the AI-driven virtual patient encounter was added into an existing team-based learning (TBL) session, which was already case-based and integrated clinical decision-making and ethics with basic science content. Each TBL group of six students interviewed the AI patient to determine the patient’s symptoms, medical history, and physical examination data, and used this information to generate a differential diagnosis. The TBL then proceeded, asking multiple questions about the pathophysiology of disease and patient management/treatment as the patient’s laboratory results and treatment outcomes were progressively revealed.
RESULTS: We surveyed students to understand their perceptions of this learning event and solicit opportunities for improvement before adding similar AI patient encounters to other preclinical courses. We also utilized data from the AI platform to quantify the completeness of each group’s patient history, and will seek to correlate this information with the accuracy of their differential diagnosis. Students cited the safe learning environment that AI patients provide as the biggest attribute of the experience, and were most concerned about the perceived inaccuracy of the technology to capture the completeness of the patient history for purposes of grading.
CONCLUSIONS: Case-based learning events are an opportunity to add AI-driven patient encounters into basic science courses for integration of ‘clinical’ learning with basic science education.

EARLY CAREER COACHING FOR ACADEMIC FACULTY IMPROVES FACULTY CONFIDENCE IN NAVIGATING THEIR CAREER

Megan Fix | Katherine Anderson | Tiffany Glasgow | Harriet Hopf | Heather R Walker
University of Utah | University of Utah | University of Utah | University of Utah | University of Utah
PURPOSE: Early career academic faculty often find navigating the academic medicine environment challenging and overwhelming. Although coaching, mentoring, and peer support have all been described to improve wellness and success, coaching has been less explored, with more focus on medical students than on faculty. Some have used professional coaches, but this is costly. We sought to develop, implement, and evaluate an Early Career Coaching Program (ECC) utilizing internal, non-certified coaches.
METHODS: The ECC, a 6-month coaching program focused on professional identity development and career planning, was launched in 2018. ECC coaches were recruited from volunteer faculty recognized as outstanding mentors, and coachees were invited to apply. The program includes group monthly skill building workshops, structured workbooks, six one-on-one coaching sessions, and peer networking sessions for coachees. Three cohorts were surveyed between 2019 and 2021 using SenseMaker technology. Pre- and post-test tools were iterated several times to ensure each item provided reliable and useful feedback. Plenary graphs were used to conduct comparative analyses from pre- to post-test, and between cohorts to gauge growth.
RESULTS: Sixteen coaches and 39 coachees participated in the survey. Feedback on individual coaches was almost universally positive. Preliminary results indicate coachees experienced increased: clarity and confidence in ability to navigate their career, efficacy in making career changes, understanding of the value of seeking guidance, and understanding of how to navigate the wider academic system. Data suggests coachees are increasing confidence without creating a co-dependent relationship with their coach. Coaches demonstrated improved listening skills with increasing experience.
CONCLUSIONS: An early career faculty coaching program using committed internal coaches is an easy to implement and cost-effective method for increasing faculty clarity and confidence in navigating the academic system.

CAMP POSSABILTIES - A COMMUNITY-ACADEMIC PARTNERSHIP TO ADDRESS HEALTH DISPARITIES FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITY

Laurie Farroni | Miles Farr | Loree Pryor | James Walrath | Gabrielle Segal | Carolyn McCrossan | Jessica Nelson | Michelle Gonzalez
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston TX 77550 USA
PURPOSE: People with disability are often underrepresented when planning health professions curriculum and addressing health disparities. The National Council on Disability concluded that, “the absence of professional training on disability competence issues for health care practitioners is one of the most significant barriers that prevent people from receiving appropriate and effective health care.” A partnership was formed between the University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB) and the Christina Sullivan Foundation to meet a community need for inclusive sports and provide an interprofessional practice experience for medical (MD), occupational therapy (OT), and physical therapy (PT) students.
METHODS: PT, OT, and MD student “buddies” work in a team with a group of athletes in playing adaptive sports including tennis and bocce. Deeper connections are achieved through team continuity and profiles of the likes, dislikes, and capabilities of each “buddy” and athlete.
RESULTS: UTMB and the Christina Sullivan Foundation have implemented a successful model for adaptive sports programming. The student-participant experiences are meaningful beyond anything achievable in a classroom, making substantial progress toward addressing identified training gaps for health professionals.
CONCLUSIONS: This collaboration provides a natural interprofessional practice experience while helping to reduce health inequities by providing students with knowledge and experience in working with people with disability. This program is easily reproduced across academic medical centers that have a health professions school and a community partner serving people with disability. As the program continues to develop, we will better define and measure the achievement of shared and program-specific competencies.

CLINICAL CLERKSHIPS AT THE MEDICAL COLLEGE OF GEORGIA DURING THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

Joseph Elengickal | Mehul Mehra | Dr. Anna Edmondson
Medical College of Georgia at Augusta University | Medical College of Georgia at Augusta University | Medical College of Georgia at Augusta University
PURPOSE: The COVID-19 pandemic significantly affected medical education clerkships. Students on clerkships faced unique challenges including the transition to virtual rotations, reopening in-person with COVID-19 precautions, and the cancellation of many extracurricular activities. The purpose of this study was to assess student perceptions about how the pandemic impacted their clinical training at the Medical College of Georgia (MCG).
METHODS: MCG fourth-year medical students in the Class of 2021 were invited to complete an anonymous online survey about the effects of the pandemic on their medical school experience (n = 25 respondents out of 188). Student interviews (n = 3) were also conducted.
RESULTS: Ninety-six percent of respondents felt their clinical experience had been affected by the pandemic (n = 24 out of 25 respondents). Of those who reported a change in clinical experience (n = 24), 83% reported a change in the number of patients seen, 54% reported a change in the number of students rotating with them, and 50% reported a change in the quality of clinical experiences. Respondents reported changes in their motivation (50%) as well as their stress (42%) during clinical experiences. Respondents noted changes in the time available to spend with both clinicians (38%) and their patients (21%). Overwhelmingly, respondents felt these changes were negative, with students reporting a negative impact on the number of patients seen (75%; n = 15 out of 20 respondents) and the number of students rotating at the same location (75%; n = 9 out of 12 respondents). Seventy-seven percent of respondents felt that their clinical rotations would be more enjoyable without COVID-19-related concerns (n = 20 out of 26). Focus group interviews corroborated these findings.
CONCLUSIONS: MCG Class of 2021 medical students experienced major disruptions during their clerkships due to COVID-19. Students reported a variety of negative impacting factors that contributed to less enjoyable clinical rotations.

RESIDENCY PREPAREDNESS AND APPLICATION EXPERIENCES AT THE MEDICAL COLLEGE OF GEORGIA DURING THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

Mehul Mehra | Joseph Elengickal | Anna Edmondson
Medical College of Georgia | Medical College of Georgia | Medical College of Georgia
PURPOSE: Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, changes to medical curricula and extracurricular opportunities significantly impacted Class of 2021 students completing their residency application cycle. The pandemic affected networking opportunities, examination preparation, and research projects. This study’s objective was to assess fourth-year students’ perceptions of their residency application experience at the Medical College of Georgia.
METHODS: MCG fourth-year medical students (Class of 2021) were invited to complete an anonymous online survey about the effects of the pandemic on their medical school experience (n = 25 respondents out of 188). Student interviews (n = 3) were also conducted.
RESULTS: Ninety-two percent of students (n = 23 out of 25 respondents) reported that residency applications and interviews were affected by the pandemic. Sixty-five percent of survey respondents (n = 13 out of 20) applied to more programs, and 55% (n = 11 out of 20 respondents) attended more interviews (mean = 14.9 ± 5.8 interviews), due to the pandemic. Students perceived increased competition for residency positions. Students reported changes in time for preparation (56%; n = 14 out of 25 respondents), stress during preparation (44%; n = 11 out of 25 respondents), and exam date changes (48%; n = 12 out of 25 respondents) as pandemic-related effects on USMLE Step 2 CK. 89.5% of students (n = 17 out of 19) reported a negative impact on the number of conferences and networking opportunities they could attend. Furthermore, 42.9% of students planning to conduct research (n = 14) had projects canceled due to the pandemic. Students reported plans for away rotations (mean = 1.8 ± 1.06), but were unable to attend due to social distancing restrictions. Interviews corroborated survey results, especially preparation time for standardized exams and networking disadvantages.
CONCLUSIONS: The COVID-19 pandemic’s disruptions to the residency application process for Class of 2021 students were widespread, producing significant changes in student experience. Alternative research, networking, and conference opportunities in conjunction with virtual away rotations should be developed to address future pandemic-related application challenges.

DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION OF A SUICIDE PREVENTION THREAD INTO THE PRE-CLERKSHIP MEDICAL CURRICULUM

Kirsten A. Porter-Stransky | Elle Davio | Perry Westerman
Western Michigan University Homer Stryker M.D. School of Medicine | Western Michigan University Homer Stryker M.D. School of Medicine | Western Michigan University Homer Stryker M.D. School of Medicine
PURPOSE: More than 700,000 people worldwide die from suicide each year. Research has shown that nearly half of people who die from suicide are seen in the healthcare system within the month prior to their death. Many health care providers are uncomfortable screening patients for suicidal ideation, and less than half of surveyed general practitioners received formal training on suicide risk assessment. The need for a robust suicide prevention curriculum was identified. METHODS Various stakeholders including interdisciplinary faculty, course directors, staff, administration, and students from the medical school were consulted. The course directors synthesized their viewpoints, created space in the curriculum for this initiative, and designed the curricular content. A suicide prevention thread was weaved throughout a 4-week Behavioral Science course for pre-clerkship allopathic medical students. An asynchronous, guided learning module was created to introduce the topic and provide evidence-based methods to prevent suicide. Resources for patients as well as for medical students were provided. In-class case-based learning and team-based learning events applied these concepts to patient cases. This training culminated in a standardized patient (SP) encounter whereby learners practiced initiating the difficult conversation with the SP, screening for suicide risk, and developing a treatment plan for the SP.
RESULTS: Eighty-four students are completing this new suicide prevention thread. Learners were given pre-course and post-course surveys to examine the effectiveness of this curricular thread. Survey results will be analyzed this spring and shared at the conference.
CONCLUSIONS: Rather than having one event, developing a thread for suicide prevention facilitates repetition and integration with patient care. Positioning this training prior to clerkships equips learners with foundational knowledge and preliminary experience in suicide prevention for their clinical training.

GENDER ROOTS - THE MAKING OF AN LGBTQIA+ EDUCATIONAL ANIMATION FOR THE CARIBBEAN

Sarah Gluschitz | Robert Hage
St. George's University, School of Medicine, Department of Anatomical Sciences | St. George's University, School of Medicine, Department of Anatomical Sciences
PURPOSE: Gender roots explains gender identity, expression, biological sex characteristics, sexual and romantic attraction as well as allyship in 6-and-a-half minutes. The ‘making of’ reveals part of the extensive process that regularly goes unnoticed by the audience, through showing in-depth decision-making on narrative, character design and language. It brings the question of whether the amount of time, effort, logistics and subsequently money spent on developing an underlying narrative, is worthwhile when considering the final product.
METHODS: Creating an educational animation involves outlining a strategy along with determination of goals, content, medium, distribution, audience and expert collaborators (incl. writers, content, visual, audio). Elemental decisions start with vegetable roots as the choice for characters, combining not only the obvious aspects of disarming imagery, but on a deeper level choosing roots specifically. They are generally amorphic and asexual in their nature and thus fit well within the LGBTQIA+ acronym and offer a blank canvas for exploring the often-overlapping concepts discussed in the animation.
RESULTS: Given the controversial nature of the LGBTQIA+ community in the Caribbean due to cultural and religious beliefs, it is integral to the functioning of the animation that the educational message is based on a solid foundation no matter if certain details go unnoticed by some. The audience might not notice the colors of the roots representing a rainbow, but they would notice if they were all the same. The same applies to many other details. The feedback from both the Caribbean and international audience has been overwhelmingly positive in respect to the inclusivity and comprehensiveness of the narrative.
CONCLUSIONS: Conscious choices made by the producers lead to an unconscious message being received by the audience. While some may not be influenced by the details laid out by the producers, an alert and critical audience will not be taken astray by a disorganized narrative.

PERSPECTIVES OF THIRD-YEAR MEDICAL STUDENTS ON SYNCHRONOUS DUAL-CAMPUS LEARNING OF PHARMACOLOGY IN PRECLINICAL YEARS

Rachel Linger, PhD | Jacquelyn Waller, PharmD, BCPS | Qing Zhong, MD, PhD
Rocky Vista University, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Parker, CO 80134, U.S.A. | Rocky Vista University, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Parker, CO 80134, U.S.A. | Rocky Vista University, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Ivins, UT 84738, U.S.A.
PURPOSE: Many medical schools have expanded to additional campuses and/or locations. Providing equitable learning across campuses is essential. This study investigates medical students’ perception of synchronous and asynchronous lecturing formats used to deliver pharmacology curriculum during their first 2 years of preclinical learning. Data will inform future improvements to the pharmacology curriculum.
METHODS: A survey was distributed to third-year medical students (the class of 2021) at both Rocky Vista University College of Osteopathic Medicine campuses in January 2020. The survey was anonymous and participation was voluntary. The survey questions asked about students’ preference on synchronous videoconferencing across campuses and asynchronous video lectures in pharmacology learning during their first 2 years. Aggregate data were statistically analyzed using paired t-tests.
RESULTS: Fifty-one out of 297 third-year students (17.2%) from both Colorado and Utah campuses completed the survey. Students preferred prerecorded video lectures, followed by recorded-live-lecture video, face-face live lecture at the local campus, and synchronous videoconferencing at the distance campus. Fewer students attended 60–100% of synchronous videoconference lectures at the distance campus compared to students who attended face-face lectures on the local campus (20% vs. 42%). When attending class, local students liked the interaction with instructors, while students at the distant campus enjoyed interaction with classmates. Almost all (96%) students who did not attend class would watch 80–100% of the recorded-live lecture videos. Students cited the ability to pause, alter playback speed, and repeat as benefits of watching lecture videos. Sixty-two percent of students agreed or strongly agreed that it would benefit student learning to convert all traditional live lectures to prerecorded video lectures and reserve class time for facilitated practice questions or other interactive formats.
CONCLUSIONS: Students dislike attending synchronous videoconference lectures as passive spectators. Increasing prerecorded video lectures in combination with in-class practice questions may improve pharmacology learning.

ALL VOICES HEARD: ASIAN AMERICAN MEDICAL AND CULTURAL REPRESENTATION IN HEALTHCARE

Brandon Wilkinson | Nicole Phan
RVUCOM-SU, Ivins, UT
PURPOSE: With a diverse population in the USA, there are various races, ethnicities, and cultures. One of the minorities, the Asian American population, has yet still faced healthcare disparities due to cultural insensitivity and the model minority mentality. We hypothesize that there is a lack of Asian cultural competency among the medical community. We seek to assess current population and census statistics related to both the Asian American physician and Asian American populations; related to cultural competency amongst medical practitioners, educators, and students.
METHODS: Statistics through studies published by the United States Census Bureau, AAMC, and AACOM will be collected and compared. Current health disparities faced by Asian Americans will be gathered from the CDC and other reputable sources. Finally, relevant cultural competency information will be collected from medical practitioners, educators, and students from the Utah and Colorado areas via a questionnaire.
RESULTS: Preliminary data shows that 6% of the USA population, 17% of all physicians, and 23% of allopathic medical students are Asian. A higher percentage of Asian adults (19.4%) have no usual source of health care compared to those of the white population (12.9%). The ongoing survey expects to find the Asian cultural competency among the medical community.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study will serve as a foundation for future research investigating strategies to enhance Asian cultural competency to potentially decrease the health disparity plaguing Asian Americans. It is of vital importance for the medical community seeking to advance diversity, inclusivity, and equity amongst practitioners and between practitioners and patients.

TARGETED FACULTY TUTORING

Crissi Stokes | Dr. Alice Akunyili | Ashley Hansen | Jennifer Brown
Noorda College of Osteopathic Medicine | Noorda College of Osteopathic Medicine | Noorda College of Osteopathic Medicine | Noorda College of Osteopathic Medicine
PURPOSE: Many medical students struggle with specific content that can often be remedied by meeting face-to-face with faculty. We have pursued a novel strategy, scheduling online tutoring sessions with medical faculty and a targeted group of students based on performance of first attempts on daily formative assessments. This abstract describes the project and its outcomes.
METHODS: Formative assessments are tied to learning objectives, and we used this data to drive our faculty tutoring program. First attempt scores on formative daily assessments identify students < 1SD below the mean for a tutoring session. Each student submits two questions and attend the hour-long tutoring session. A learning specialist coordinates the program. Faculty are provided the specific learning objectives that students struggled with, along with the questions submitted by the students.
RESULTS: The program has run for 1 month. Four tutoring sessions have been held. The sessions are not limited only to the students identified; all students are invited to attend. The learning objectives covered are provided to allow all students the opportunity for self-directed study. Students who have fallen < 1SD below the mean in the specific subject area are required to attend. Attendance averages around twenty students for each session. Feedback from the students and faculty has been positive. As the program continues, we anticipate an increase in quiz and exam scores for those who attend the sessions.
CONCLUSIONS: The data driven approach of using daily formative assessment scores and learning objectives to target struggling students is a novel tutoring concept. Connecting students with faculty in an online informal setting has proven to be an effective strategy to address student content concerns.

ANIMATED CLINICAL SCENARIO: A SUPPLEMENTAL TOOL TO STANDARDIZED PATIENTS FOR CLINICAL SIMULATION

Jay A. Babu | Edward G. Simanton | Corrin C. Sullivan | Neil G. Haycocks | Gary K. Shen
Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV
PURPOSE: Using standardized patients (SP) is a well-established method to simulate patient interaction. However, during the initial phase of COVID-19, the need for an alternate mode of simulation was apparent. Animation is a common modality for training in other professional fields. Despite this promise, research using animation in clinical training has been limited. We created and assessed the use of animated clinical scenario videos, alongside guided viewing and writing assignments, as a novel educational tool.
METHODS: Videos depicting student-patient interactions based on common chief complaints are written and rendered using Plotagon „¢. Video segments include history, physical examination, and patient discussion. Each scenario is approximately 15 min. The guided assignments instruct students to document a focused history and examination; generate differential diagnoses; research the topic; and revise the notes. The total allotted time is 2 h 15 min.
RESULTS: In a pilot study, students worked through the following 4 cases as part of the “virtual clerkship”: Easy Bruising, Syncope, Hallucination, and Post-op Pain. Students found the videos and the instructions easy to follow. They completed the timed assignments and assessed the overall experience to be valuable.
CONCLUSIONS: Animated scenarios are easy to create and modify, and avoid the associated cost and privacy concerns using live persons. Students can do the work at home in a guided fashion. The same video content can be used for beginning students to learn the basics of history and physical, for clinical students to write focused notes, and for advanced students to use as self-assessment and review. However, while readily available and affordable apps are adequate for simple dialogs such as interviewing and discussion, specific physical findings will require more advanced video editing. Animation is potentially a valuable addition to any clinical curriculum involving SPs.

A STUDENT FOCUSED PRECLERKSHIP MEDICAL SCHOOL REMEDIATION PROGRAM DESIGNED FOR RETENTION OF THE CONTENT

Jeffrey Sosnowski
USACOM
PURPOSE: The University of South Alabama College of Medicine offers a remediation program during the summer months for preclerkship students who do not meet the requirements for one or two modules. Our program uses an internet platform, review of internal exams, tutoring, consoling, a student study plan and an NBME final exam. There is a focus on personal development as a student and a future physician. The program was encouraged by the College of Medicine Curriculum Committee.
METHODS: The internet educational platform OSMOSIS was used to generate weekly content playlists and development of weekly in-house exams. Students formatively took their past module exams and reviewed them with the remediation director and/or module director. The student-initiated study plan was also reviewed weekly with the remediation director. A NBME exam focused on USMLE content was also developed for the remediators. The student remediators were required to have an average of 70% or above to pass modules.
RESULTS: All students demonstrated a successful pass rate for one or two modules during the remediation process requested by the Curriculum Committee. All of the students have successfully progressed to their next level of education. Students felt that they learned the content that they originally found challenging and more importantly they developed a high level of self-esteem that was missing before the remediation process.
CONCLUSIONS: Medical students that do not meet the academic requirements can feel marginalized and a loss of self-esteem but our process of remediation allows students to return to their academic class without a stigma and confidence that they can succeed in future years. The academic concerns are that these students may have academic challenges in the clerkship years. Please contact support@iamse.org regarding any questions you may have regarding this submission

THE INTEGRATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE AND HEALTH INTO THE DIDACTIC EDUCATION OF MEDICAL STUDENTS

Dennis Maar | Christopher Dethlefs | Conor O'Neill | Tazah Weinmaster | Thomas Schroeder | Dr. Jesse Bell
University of Nebraska Medical Center | University of Nebraska Medical Center | University of Nebraska Medical Center | University of Nebraska Medical Center | University of Nebraska Medical Center | University of Nebraska Medical Center
ABSTRACT
PURPOSE: Climate change is a significant threat to human health; medical professionals need a baseline understanding of how climate change adversely affects human health to adapt their practice to certain climate-related pathophysiologies. The progressing impacts of climate change on human health create an opportunity for medical education to take needed steps to prepare the healthcare profession for the future needs of their patients. Some medical schools have attempted to integrate climate change and health in various ways throughout their curriculums. However, few have done so comprehensively and efficiently. At the University of Nebraska Medical Center (UNMC) College of Medicine (COM), the authors have designed a climate change and health curriculum that successfully educates medical students without adversely adding to the competing curriculum demands.
METHODS: The authors first gathered relevant climate change and health resources then identified pertinent lectures throughout the COM phase 1 curriculum (1st- and 2nd-year medical student didactics) that will be integrated. The authors then designed a proposal and template that included sources, learning objectives, and goals to give a framework to start developing the lecture content for each. The template covers material throughout the medical student’s didactic curriculum by integrating “climate slides” in existing lectures. Examples of this integration are provided in-depth below.
RESULTS: The benefit of this template successfully eliminates barriers of time constraints in medical students while also comprehensively teaching future healthcare professionals.
CONCLUSIONS: This article stands as a potential model for other medical schools that use a condensed block format didactic curricula to follow and help alleviate barriers and hesitation to integrating climate change and health into their existing curricula. This curriculum integration would allow students to efficiently get exposed to broad and specific climate change topics relevant to the various pathophysiologies they will already be encountering during the rigorous didactic years.

TRIAGE MADE RIDICULOUSLY SIMPLE: GUIDES FROM STUDENTS TO THE COMMUNITY

Carlos Varela-Chinchilla | Luis Carlos Bueno-Gutierrez | Karla Alejandra Villarreal-Arizpe | Daniela Edith Sánchez-Mejía | Fidel Heriberto Torres-Fabela | Salma K. Andrade-Leal | Nancy de los Ángeles Segura-Azuara
Escuela de Medicina y Ciencias de la Salud, Tec de Monterrey, Mexico
PURPOSE: A triage system is an essential quality index for evaluating and prioritizing care by urgency. Emergencies frequently occur in schools, and they present in both children and adults. School nurses are usually the first responders to these health crises and may take on simultaneous roles during an emergency. This study aims to evaluate the medical students’ ability to create proper and evidence-based triage instruments aimed towards the school’s non-medical staff for initial patient assessment.
METHODS: Medical students conducted a pilot study to evaluate the ability to create triage tools for a school in Northern Mexico. We divided 50 medical students into teams of 4 to 5. Over 5 weeks, they conducted a thorough literature review to design proper, reproducible, and evidence-based triage tools. The students presented their instruments to the school’s principal and nurse, and nine educators evaluated them using an online evaluation sheet. They also received feedback from both the school personnel and from the educators.
RESULTS: The students retrieved one hundred twenty-five evaluations by the educators. They agreed that the students’ triage tools presented innovative, grounded to reality ideas for a powerful and convincing solution (68%). They also reported that the students showed a well-enough understanding of the subject they presented (79.2%) and gave founded answers to all educators’ questions (79.2%). In the comments section of the evaluation sheet, both educators and school personnel reported that the students presented excellent, educational, creative, and elegant triage tools that were evidence-based and valuable to the school’s environment.
CONCLUSIONS: Medical students can create valuable and evidence-based triage tools for non-medical personnel. Implementing these instruments may decrease the morbidity of school emergencies. In addition, future studies evaluating the effectiveness of these instruments in the school environment may help identify conditions that merit referral to the emergency department.

THEY WON’T TEACH YOU THIS IN SCHOOL: PATIENT EDUCATION IN TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS THROUGH A SOCIAL MEDIA CAMPAIGN

Karla Alejandra Villarreal-Arizpe | Luis Carlos Bueno-Gutierrez | Carlos Varela-Chinchilla | Daniela Edith Sanchez-Mejia | Fidel Heriberto Torres-Fabela | Salma K. Andrade-Leal | Nancy de los Angeles Segura-Azuara
Escuela de Medicina y Ciencias de la Salud, Tec de Monterrey | Escuela de Medicina y Ciencias de la Salud, Tec de Monterrey | Escuela de Medicina y Ciencias de la Salud, Tec de Monterrey | Escuela de Medicina y Ciencias de la Salud, Tec de Monterrey | Escuela de Medicina y Ciencias de la Salud, Tec de Monterrey
PURPOSE: The ever-growing global morbidity of diabetes mellitus has become a public health priority. Patient education has always been a challenge and is pivotal to strengthening health promotion programs. Using social media for educational purposes has increased throughout recent years, demonstrating benefits in prevention and disease control. This study aims to evaluate the effectiveness of social media in patient education on diabetes mellitus.
METHODS: Health Sciences Students designed a fully digital campaign via Instagram during the COVID-19 pandemic by launching the profile “diabetesdiaries.emis.” The campaign had twelve publications and lasted for 2 weeks. Finally, we implemented a short 15-item survey following the campaign to assess audience outreach and general education regarding diabetes mellitus.
RESULTS: The Instagram profile gathered 287 followers. One hundred fifty-two participants answered the survey, with the majority being between 16 and 20 years old (59.2%). 91.4% of participants belonged to a population at risk of developing the disease. Most respondents (74%) reported being motivated to make lifestyle changes, and 81.5% of participants understood the information well enough to answer several questions correctly. Participants considered that the most important posts were those about prevention (73.8%), identification of risk factors (69%), and signs and symptoms of diabetes (66.4%).
CONCLUSIONS: Patient education is essential for the prevention and proper management of diabetes mellitus. Instagram, a popular social media platform, was an ideal tool for this campaign. It facilitated the outreach to a critical number of participants, most of whom learned about diabetes mellitus, its prevention, and treatment.

HOW TO INCREASE MEDICAL STUDENT ENGAGMENT AND PERFORMANCE IN EPIDEMIOLOGY

Johan Bester
Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV
PURPOSE: Education in epidemiology is essential for medical students. It is an important component in development of analytical thinking, systems thinking, and skills related to evidence-based practice. A common problem is dissatisfaction with epidemiology as a subject and with epidemiology courses at medical schools. At UNLV, the epidemiology course has been redesigned to draw on a modified team-based learning (TBL) format to address this problem.
METHODS: The epidemiology course was re-designed for 2021, using TBL principles. The course runs for 10 sessions with 2 h allocated to each session. Prior to class, students complete an assigned reading. Class consists of an individualized quiz and a team-based quiz, both amended for our specific circumstances. The second hour consists of team-based activities containing an important problem requiring the application of epidemiology knowledge, meant to foster debate and interaction among teams. Feedback data and performance data are collected during and after the course from students.
RESULTS: Feedback data demonstrate high levels of satisfaction and engagement, significantly improved from prior iterations of the course. An emerging point of importance is that it is the inter-team debate on an important and significant problem that stimulates a lot of the interest and engagement for students. In addition, student performance on NBME examinations will be presented and compared with performance in prior formats of the course.
CONCLUSIONS: Students are actively engaged, report high levels of satisfaction with the course and material, and see the relevance of epidemiology to their careers and exams. This has become one of the best received courses in our medical school. This format shows superior engagement with the subject matter, and favorable performance when compared with other course iterations. This kind of education is thought to encourage longer-term mastery.

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN DEMOGRAPHICS AND PEER EVALUATION SCORES IN MEDICAL STUDENT TEAM-BASED LEARNING GROUPS

Sara Allison | Laura Bauler | Simran Singh | Maria Sheakley
Western Michigan University Homer Stryker MD School of Medicine | Western Michigan University Homer Stryker MD School of Medicine | Western Michigan University Homer Stryker MD School of Medicine | Western Michigan University Homer Stryker MD School of Medicine
PURPOSE: Peer evaluation offers a unique opportunity for medical students to receive feedback from individuals with whom they share frequent and authentic interactions. Prior studies have shown conflicting results regarding the influence that demographic factors such as gender and race have on the scores that students give and receive. The current study examined a number of demographic factors including gender and race, but also extending to first-generation status, age, and highest degree held, to determine if peer evaluation scores given within medical student learning groups were associated with these demographic factors.
METHODS: After completing nine team-based learning activities, medical students were asked to provide formative peer-feedback to their group members collected via survey. Students rated each group member on eight teamwork skills using a slider scale ranging from apprentice to expert. The position of the slider was converted to a numerical score (0–100) for each of the eight individual skills and averaged to generate an overall teamwork score. These scores were then correlated to demographic factors using independent t-tests or ANOVAs.
RESULTS: Eighty-five students were included in the analysis. When analyzing average scores received for individual skills, females received statistically significantly better scores than males for participation (female M = 70.0 vs males M = 67.0, p = 0.025) and timeliness (females M = 70.6 vs males M = 67.5, p = 0.047). However, none of the demographic factors were associated with the overall teamwork scores received. Further analysis is underway to determine if scores given by specific demographic groups are significantly different.
CONCLUSIONS: In the current study, only gender was associated with the average participation and timeliness scores received; however, the small variation seen between female and male scores may not indicate a meaningful difference. This suggests that among this group of students, bias based on these demographic factors minimally impacted the peer evaluation scores that students received.

WELL-CHILD VISITS DON’T STOP HERE: TECHNOLOGICAL, COLORFUL, AND SYSTEMS-ORIENTED MEDICAL RECORDS FOR PATIENTS (AND PARENTS) WITH DOWN SYNDROME

Salma K. Andrade-Leal | Luis Carlos Bueno-Gutierrez | Carlos Varela-Chinchilla | Karla Alejandra Villarreal-Arizpe | Daniela Edith Sanchez-Mejia | Fidel Heriberto Torres-Fabela | Nancy de los Angeles Segura-Azuara
Escuela de Medicina y Ciencias de la Salud, Tec de Monterrey | Escuela de Medicina y Ciencias de la Salud, Tec de Monterrey | Escuela de Medicina y Ciencias de la Salud, Tec de Monterrey | Escuela de Medicina y Ciencias de la Salud, Tec de Monterrey | Escuela de Medicina y Ciencias de la Salud, Tec de Monterrey
PURPOSE: Well-child visits represent a cornerstone in pediatric care, being more challenging in populations with underlying chronic conditions, such as Down syndrome. Children with Down syndrome frequently have several underlying pathologies, and well-child check-ups have a limited time per appointment. Hence, a focused approach for the clinical examination and follow-up is necessary. This study aimed to develop a time-saving, effective tool to get the patients’ medical records at any place or time.
METHODS: Third-year medical students followed a 3-stage process: (1) a thorough literature review on well-child visits, Down syndrome, and its underlying conditions; (2) tool design; and (3) a presentation of the tool before a panel of assessors. Students designed a booklet that contained the patients’ medical records, a systems-oriented checklist, and a timeline on frequently required laboratory studies and procedures in children with Down syndrome. They embedded the information in a silicone-colored bracelet with a unique QR code for each patient.
RESULTS: The assessment panel comprised physicians, members of the Down syndrome clinic in a public hospital, and parents of patients with Down syndrome. They described the tool as time-saving, filled with relevant information, and improved the patients’ and guardians’ involvement in patient follow-up. The panel emphasized that this tool can monitor the patient’s health and record relevant findings by storing critical clinical data for future appointments with any healthcare provider.
CONCLUSIONS: This intervention should increase the encouragement of both patients with Down syndrome and their parents to take part in their healthcare. Introducing a practical, reproducible, and cost-effective tool to keep health records available during follow-ups is imperative to ensure the quality of care, promote an overall better health status, and decrease the possibility of adverse events. Including health students in this intervention helped create a modern and easily accessible tool for parents and patients.

A STUDENT-CREATED VIDEO IMPACTS LEARNING OUTCOMES AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT

M. Cathleen Kovarik | Tamara S. Hancock
Utah State University | University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211 USA
PURPOSE: The anatomy of the equine distal limb is complex and extremely relevant to veterinary clinical practice. First-year veterinary students (VM1s) often struggle to adequately understand the intricacies of these anatomical structures. Two veterinary students collaborated with instructors and created an instructional video to facilitate VM1s comprehension of equine distal limb anatomy.
METHODS: Two third-year students documented their experiences while producing the video and participated in semi-structured interviews. The video was offered to all VM1s (n = 119). Learning outcomes were assessed via practical exams. Exam scores were compared on distal limb structures across students who did (“viewed”), or did not (“not viewed”) watch the video, and with a previous cohort (n = 116). VM1 laboratory experience and confidence were evaluated with a post-exam survey.
RESULTS: Eighty percent of the VM1s viewed the video; 91% of those students rated the video as very valuable. The video improved student confidence during the practical exam by 9%; 89% indicated the video positively impacted their exam grade. One item score was significantly improved in the “viewed” group (p < 0.001). The combined item scores noticeably improved in the “viewed” group (85% correct vs. 71% and 72%) but were not statistically different. Similarly, overall practical exam scores improved, although not statistically. There was a strong positive correlation between question difficulty and the impact of the video. Student collaborators indicated participation reinforced their knowledge while enhancing their professional development.
CONCLUSIONS: The student-created video improved confidence in the exam setting, attitudes about learning, and learning outcomes. Student collaboration was a beneficial strategy for instructional support development that also generated opportunities for professional development for involved students.

EFFECT OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC ON STRESS LEVELS OF FIRST YEAR MEDICAL STUDENTS AT THE MEDICAL COLLEGE OF GEORGIA

Sahil Gandhi | Amanda Delgado | Dr. Anna Edmondson
Medical College of Georgia | Medical College of Georgia | Medical College of Georgia
PURPOSE: The COVID-19 pandemic introduced unprecedented stressors on medical students, as schools rapidly adapted medical curricula to mitigate disease spread. For first-year medical students entering the Medical College of Georgia (MCG) in the Class of 2024, lectures were held in person with optional attendance, and preventive measures including physical distancing and mask wearing were adopted. The purpose of this project was to examine the impact of the pandemic on self-reported stress levels experienced by first-year medical students at MCG.
METHODS: First-year medical students (n = 194) were invited to complete an anonymous survey in February 2021 consisting of questions addressing academic and social networks, wellness, and burnout, including the 1-item Maslach Burnout Inventory. Forty-one students responded (21 females; 20 males). A Mann–Whitney U Test was used to compare results of Likert scale questions on burnout by gender.
RESULTS: Eighty-seven percent of respondents across both genders indicated the pandemic increased or greatly increased their stress levels, with 59% of all respondents indicating academics were their largest source of stress. Male respondents reported feeling stressed or overwhelmed fewer days per week (avg. 2.1 ± 1.7) than female respondents (avg. 3.7 ± 2.1). Male respondents also reported feeling lonely or isolated fewer days per week (avg. 3.1 ± 2.6) than female respondents (avg. 5.1 ± 2.2). Female respondents suggested the pandemic more negatively impacted their stress levels than male respondents (p < 0.032).
CONCLUSIONS: The COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted the majority of surveyed first-year medical students, with females reporting their stress levels were more negatively impacted than males, including having higher rates of feeling isolated and overwhelmed. Further research is needed to assess factors influencing higher self-reported stress levels in females during the pandemic. By better understanding how the pandemic affected medical students’ stress levels a year after it began, schools can design and implement programs to address the negative psychological impact of the pandemic on their students.

THE NOTABLE INTEGRATION OF CLINICALLY RELEVANT PHARMACOLOGY IN PROBLEM-BASED LEARNING CASES

Tawna L. Mangosh | Kelli Qua | Amy L. Wilson-Delfosse
Case Western Reserve University | Case Western Reserve University | Case Western Reserve University
PURPOSE: At Case Western Reserve University, self-directed learning serves as the cornerstone of medical education. To ensure students are trained for their future careers as life-long learners, students engage in Problem-based Learning (PBL) to cultivate their skills. Despite the current inclusion of pharmacology throughout the PBL curriculum, student satisfaction as it relates to their pharmacology education continues to fall short of faculty expectations. Efforts must be made to develop innovative learning opportunities to foster self-directed pharmacology learning and improve student satisfaction and exam performance in this area. The purpose of this study is to determine if the introduction of pharmacology learning objectives and novel video resources for each PBL case improves student satisfaction and learning outcomes related to pharmacology education.
METHODS: New learning objectives are being mapped to pharmacology resource videos created by our faculty via the Notability app. Videos address pathophysiology, drug mechanisms, and important pharmacological considerations relevant to each existing PBL case. Using Notability, these teaching resources can be repurposed by the students to practice recalling and applying their knowledge. Students are being asked to rate their satisfaction with these learning opportunities at the conclusion of each course. Pharmacology-related summative assessments are being examined and compared to cohorts who did not receive the pharmacology learning objectives or video resources. Additionally, student perception ratings of clinical preparedness regarding pharmacology education on the AAMC Graduation Questionnaire will be compared with previous years upon graduation of the first cohort with this intervention.
RESULTS: Data collection is ongoing but preliminary student feedback is encouraging. Student satisfaction and assessment data will be presented for two major curricular blocks of the pre-clerkship phase
CONCLUSIONS: Ideally, integration of pharmacology learning objectives and the development of notability video resources will help guide student’s self-directed learning thereby improving student satisfaction and learning outcomes in their pharmacology education.

THE EFFECT OF A NEW CURRICULUM ON PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT STUDENTS’ CRITICAL THINKING

Jensen Lewis | Mariah Lapinski
Case Western Reserve University | Case Western Reserve University
PURPOSE: Critical thinking skills are necessary competencies for physician assistant (PA) practice, as defined by accreditation standards set by the Accreditation Review Commission on Education for the Physician Assistant. While the predominant teaching method in didactic PA education is lecture-based, case-based activities enhance learning and critical thinking through use of higher order thinking processes. Our project measured the effects of a new case-based clinical correlations curriculum on students’ critical thinking skills.
METHODS: First-year PA students from the graduating class of 2022 and onward experienced a new curriculum in which patient cases were integrated into each body system alongside a physiology course. Two one-hour sessions were held per internal medicine block where students applied physiological or pathophysiological concepts to a patient case, using structured pathophysiological explanation charts and mind maps to link observable signs and symptoms to underlying disease mechanisms. Students’ critical thinking abilities were approximated by self-reported confidence ratings on a survey and preceptor evaluations from their first three clinical rotations. The effectiveness of the curriculum was assessed by comparing these data points between cohorts of students before and after implementation of the new curriculum.
RESULTS: While average scores from clinical preceptor evaluations did not significantly change between cohorts (ranging from 4.04 to 4.27 on a 5-point scale), students’ overall confidence in their critical thinking skills slightly improved from an average of 3.68 to 3.80. Furthermore, all participants in the post-curriculum feedback survey agreed or strongly agreed that they enjoyed the curriculum, and that it helped strengthen their critical thinking ability.
CONCLUSIONS: The clinical correlations curriculum, through its case-based format, offers a new, engaging way to teach basic science to PA students that improves students’ own perception of their critical thinking skills.

USE OF CORE CONCEPTS AS A FRAMEWORK TO ASSESS THE PROGRESSION OF STUDENT LEARNING AND TO EVALUATE THE EFFICACY IN AN UME CURRICULUM

David B. Averill | Gabi N. Waite | Prerna Sharma | Sireesha Mamillapalli | Christian J. Carbe
Geisinger Commonwealth School of Medicine | Geisinger Commonwealth School of Medicine | Geisinger Commonwealth School of Medicine | Geisinger Commonwealth School of Medicine | Geisinger Commonwealth School of Medicine
PURPOSE: Conceptual frameworks have demonstrated better learning outcomes in undergraduate medical education (UME). We propose developing a conceptual framework based upon core concepts (CCs) in biomedical sciences to link the progression of student learning to program objectives of a recently revised UME curriculum.
METHODS: Our project involves three steps. Step 1 identifies clinically relevant CCs pertinent to learning objectives of basic science disciplines. Step 2 tags multiple choice questions (MCQs) allowing us to follow students’ progression of conceptual learning across formative and summative assessments and to identify conceptual learning gaps for continuous program improvement. Step 3 will develop enterprise-grade dashboards allowing monitoring of the learner’s conceptual understanding across UME.
RESULTS: For step 1, we identified 7–10 clinically relevant CCs in the disciplines of physiology, biochemistry, and genetics. We adapted CCs published by discipline-specific organizations and by Aquifer, Inc. to our clinical presentation-based curriculum. The selection process and outcomes will be presented at the meeting. For step 2, we established concept categories in Examsoft „¢ where our MCQs are housed and are already tagged by discipline and clinical presentation. By summer, we will have completed step 2 and will present results of ANOVA-based analysis of student performance data. For step 3, we will incorporate CCs with One45 Analytics-based dashboards which draw upon data from Examsoft and our Learning Management System. This is a collaboration with our Department of Assessment and Evaluation. A beta version will be presented at the meeting.
CONCLUSIONS: This study presents student performance data on concept tagged MCQs. These data will track student learning as well as the efficacy of conceptual clinical presentation frameworks implemented in our revised curriculum. Together with high-quality systemic dashboards, we can monitor conceptual learning and basic science application in our UME curriculum.

STUDENT EVALUATION OF A HANDS-ON LEARNING TEMPLATE: INTEGRATING A TEACHING VENTILATOR INTO RESPIRATORY PHYSIOLOGY

Yun Li | William Dally | Nick A. Sears | Ian V.J. Murray
Office of Academic Technology, College of Medicine, Texas A&M University, Bryan Tx, 77807, USA | NVIDIA, Santa Clara, CA, 95051, USA | Engineering Medicine (EnMed), College, Intercollegiate School of Engineering Medicine, College of Medicine, Texas A&M University, Bryan Tx, 77807, USA
PURPOSE: We piloted a template for a hands-on activity integrating a teaching ventilator with medical respiratory physiology concepts and evaluated students’ perceptions. This template was based on Kolb's experiential learning, Seymour Papert's 4P model (Project, Passion, Peer, and Play), and created using Backwards design. The student feedback allows instructors to design effective experiential activities.
METHOD: The activity focused on a project about which students are passionate: ventilators. Dr. Dally donated ventilator parts, consisting of 2 valves and flow and pressure sensors, with the approximate cost of 8 ventilators at $2000. Engineering medicine students (n = 48) were randomly assigned into 7 small groups of 7–8 students each. The learning objectives for the 2-h activity involved visualizing needed parts (mental model), explaining physiological and engineering concepts, and creating a functioning ventilator. Formative assessments were peer-peer discussions on the mental model vs. reality, and teacher observation. Summative assessments were video submissions, and student responses to 5 open-ended reflection and metacognition survey questions.
RESULTS: Student feedback examples include “very engaging and broken down into steps that were easily understandable,” “learn(ed) about the mechanics behind ventilator construction, which allows us to better relate ventilator functionality to clinical needs,” and “No one in our group has a lot of experience with Arduino.” Initial coding resulted in 354 category codes which were then grouped, axially, and selectively coded to reveal connections. The emergent phenomenon was “active learning” and related to relevance to learning objectives, knowledge comprehension, and application. Negative factors included time constraints, lack of prior knowledge on coding skills, and hands-on group size.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings from the coding of the student feedback indicated that the template and design of this activity promoted students’ perception of active learning. Future research will determine if this activity increases student academic performance.

A COMPARATIVE STUDY TO EVALUATE MEDICAL STUDENTS’ PERFORMANCE IN VIRTUAL ANATOMY LAB VERSUS IN-PERSON DONOR LAB

Nhat Nguyen | Siam Ayon | Naveen Babu Kandavalli | Alexandros Konstantinidis | Sushama Rich
Touro College of Osteopathic Medicine | Touro College of Osteopathic Medicine | Touro College of Osteopathic Medicine | Touro College of Osteopathic Medicine | Touro College of Osteopathic Medicine
PURPOSE: Virtual learning is more time efficient and produces better results among medical students. Since the COVID-19 pandemic, there has been an increase in virtual course offerings at many medical institutions. Online courses have advantages over in-person classes, including the use of videos and other interactive multimedia that allow students to study at their own pace. Ergo, there is a need for more comprehensive studies examining the effectiveness of online courses. Our study analyzes differences in in-person donor vs. virtual Anatomy Lab practical grades among first-year medical students at the Touro College of Osteopathic Medicine (TOUROCOM) between academic years 2019–20 and 2020–21. Virtual Anatomy lab was delivered using PowerPoint presentations, interactive websites, video demonstrations, zoom interactive sessions, and optional human donor lab sessions.
METHODS: Four practical exam results from the academic year 2019–20 and 2020–21 were studied to assess the differences in students’ performance between in-person (n = 530) and virtual class (n = 538). All the exam results were analyzed using an independent T-test on SPSS software.
RESULTS: There was a statistically significant improvement in the overall performance in the academic year 2020–2021, where TOUROCOM implemented virtual practicals (t = −2.561, sig. = 0.011). When comparing each exam between the two academic years, there was a statistically significant improvement in the third (t = −3.363, sig. = 0.001) and fourth exam (t = −2.470, sig. = 0.014) in the year of 2020–2021. The first and second exams did not have statistically significant results.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, there is a statistically significant improvement in students’ performance in the virtual anatomy lab compared to the in-person lab. This result can be potentially explained by the fact that online classes allow students to self-study at their own pace. Additionally, there is a growing interest among students in online multimedia tools, which makes for an effective virtual learning environment. Our research reinforces the need to study the effectiveness of virtual learning.

IMMUNOLOGY EDUCATION IN U.S. UNDERGRADUATE MEDICAL CURRICULUM

Austin Reynolds | Ritvik Bhattacharjee | Yuan Zhao
Medical Student, Sam Houston Osteopathic College of Medicine | Medical Student, Sam Houston Osteopathic College of Medicine | Associate Professor, Sam Houston Osteopathic College of Medicine
PURPOSE: Immunology is an integral component of undergraduate medical education (UME) because of its critical role in host defense and many disease processes. At the time of our study, no authoritative curriculum for immunology in UME exists. This project intends to determine the current status of immunology education in US medical schools in hopes to provide insight on curriculum design and delivery pertaining to this subject.
METHODS: In this study, curricular information for immunology education was collected from the curriculum webpage of 197 U.S. medical schools, including both allopathic and osteopathic programs, based on AACM and AACOM membership. Data pertaining to the setting of immunology education such as subject(s) that are co-taught with immunology, timing of course, credit hours, and integration level was recorded in Microsoft Excel for analysis.
RESULTS: Of 197 U.S. medical schools studied, 168 programs post the needed curriculum information online. Among them, 143 schools (85.1%) provide immunology education in year 1 of the undergraduate curriculum, 16 (9.5%) in year 2, and 9 (5.4%) integrated in both years 1 and 2. For course setting, 59 schools (37.5%) offer immunology with microbiology, 42 (24.1%) offer as part of foundational sciences course, and 18 (10.3%) offer as stand-alone course. Ten programs (5.7%) have immunology fully integrated in system-based curriculum. Other subjects that are combined with immunology include hematology, pathology, oncology, etc. for other programs. Differences exist in MD versus DO Programs in immunology curriculum setting.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggests that immunology education in U.S. colleges of medicine lacks consensus. Continued discussion on standardization of immunology education across U.S. medical schools is recommended. Future direction includes surveying content experts from different programs on the pedagogy of immunology education and using Delphi method to develop authoritative learning objectives for immunology education in undergraduate medical curriculum.

IMPACT OF ‘GAP TIME’ BEFORE MEDICAL SCHOOL MATRICULATION

Daniel Dawson | Emily Weinschreider | Thomas Iida | Edward Simanton
Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine - UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine - UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine - UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine - UNLV
PURPOSE: Taking time for non-academic activities before medical school matriculation has become increasingly common, as reported by the AAMC Matriculating Student Questionnaire (MSQ)1,2. Research, though limited, has shown benefits including a correlation between gap time and decreased medical school burnout, increased adaptability to change and failure, ability to manage stress, and increased maturity3,4. This paper hopes to find correlations between time off before medical school and undergraduate GPA, tolerance for ambiguity, and attitude towards the underserved.
METHODS: Data were drawn from institutional databases in accordance with an approved IRB protocol. Gap time before medical school was decided by any person who had greater than one year (12 months) and less than three years from their previous higher education graduation date and medical school matriculation date.
RESULTS: Undergraduate science GPA was strongly negatively correlated with gap time (Pearson correlation: −.315; p-value < .01) while MCAT score had no significant difference (Pearson correlation: −0.058; p-value = .317). No notable change was seen in perceived stress or empathy score between the two groups (Pearson correlation: −0.045; p-value = 0.437 and Pearson correlation: 0.088; p-value = .131, respectively); however, tolerance for ambiguity increased for those with gap time (Pearson correlation: .154; p-value < .01). Finally, assessment of attitudes towards the underserved as far as total attitudes, access, and USA influence were all positively increased for students with gap time before matriculation (Pearson correlation: .168; p-value < .01; Pearson correlation: .116; p-value < .05; Pearson correlation: .157; p-value < .01, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest gap time tended to be taken among students with lower undergraduate science GPA, but not necessarily lower MCAT scores. Taking a gap before medical school matriculation did not improve empathy scores, but noticeably increased the ability to tolerate ambiguity and have an improved attitude towards the underserved.

EFFECTS OF COVID-19 ISOLATION ON THE ACADEMIC AND SOCIAL HABITS OF OMS-IV

Lisa V Greco | Julia M Greco | Maria A Pino
Vassar Brothers Medical Center | New York Institute of Technology College of Osteopathic Medicine | New York Institute of Technology College of Osteopathic Medicine
PURPOSE: Following the outbreak of COVID-19, medical education shifted from total in-person learning to a virtual platform. This drastically altered the academic and social habits of all students. The aim of the study was to evaluate if imposed social isolation, which was needed to reduce the spread of COVID-19, impacted the study and health habits of osteopathic medicine students.
METHODS: A forty-nine question survey was developed by adapting the design of two previous studies. After Institutional Review Board approval was obtained, the anonymous surveys were distributed electronically to all fourth-year medical students on the RedCap platform (Nashville, Tn). Participants were asked questions regarding COVID-19’s effect on their study habits, academic performance, lifestyle practices, and mental health. Demographic questions were also included. A Pearson’s chi-square test and Student’s two-tailed t-test were used to evaluate for the significance of relationships, with < = 0.05 set for all tests. SPSS Statistics (IBM, New York) was used to perform all analyses.
RESULTS: There were a total of 74 respondents to the survey. There was a significant increase in the amount of time students spent studying during COVID-19 isolation as when compared to when rotations were in person (p < 0.001). Students reported feeling less motivated during isolation (p = 0.001). Students spent less time outdoors during isolation as when compared to pre-pandemic times (p = 0.025). There was a significant increase in isolated studying and a significant decrease in the amount of group studying that was done (p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Isolation imposed by COVID-19 quarantine had a drastic impact on the academic habits of medical students, while altering social interactions. The findings of this study are important as medical schools continue to adapt their curriculums to improve the student educational experience.

FACULTY PERCEPTIONS TOWARDS TEACHING COMMUNICATION SKILLS IN THE VIRTUAL LEARNING ENVIRONMENT

Taranjeet Kalra Ahuja
Donald and Barbara Zucker School of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell
PURPOSE: COVID-19 abruptly shifted medical education to the virtual space including our in-person communication skills (CS) curriculum. Faculty satisfaction with small-group virtual teaching of CS is less known and based on research, faculty with positive attitudes towards online learning are more likely to provide students with positive learning outcomes. The purpose of this study was to assess faculty perceptions on satisfaction and attitude towards teaching online during a 7-week CS course for MS1s.
METHODS: Thirty-nine faculty and 103 MS1 students participated in weekly, small-group, virtual synchronous curricular sessions (110 min) for 6 weeks with the 7th week in a virtual SP encounter. Faculty received post-session weekly surveys and an adaptation of the Online Faculty Satisfaction Survey (OFSS) at the end of the course. Retrospective pre/post design assessed change in faculty perception before and after the course. Student end-of-course data was also collected.
RESULTS: There was a significant increase in OFSS scores (88% response rate) in the student (Z = −3.65, p < 0.001) and instructor (Z = −2.40, p = 0.02) subscales with a non-significant trend decrease in the institution subscale (Z = −1.93, p = 0.05). Faculty perceived the sessions to be effective with no change over time. Student feedback indicated 69% strongly agreed/agreed this was an effective platform to learn CS, 83% rated their faculty 5/5 and 17% 4.5/5 for effectively navigating the virtual platform.
CONCLUSIONS: Faculty satisfaction with online teaching increased over time and perceived as equally effective as in-person. Students evaluated the platform as effective and perceived that faculty effectively navigated the platform. Faculty perceptions of the platform did not change over time, which was surprising as baseline comfort level was higher than expected. A swift pivot to online learning may occur frequently in the COVID era. This course optimized technology and faculty development for small-group learning. Faculty and students were satisfied with the quality of the education and reinforced that a skills-based communication course can be taught virtually and is transferable.

QUALITATIVE EVALUATION OF MICROSOFT-LINKEDIN TEXAS TECH UNIVERSITY HEALTH SCIENCES CENTER EL PASO HEALTH EDUCATION AND AWARENESS TEAM PARTNERSHIP

Sarah Johnson | Suzette Jimenez
Texas Tech Univeristy Health Sciences Center | Texas Tech Univeristy Health Sciences Center
INTRODUCTION: The Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center (TTUHSC) El Paso Health Awareness and Education Team (EP HEAT) is an organization that was created amidst the COVID-19 pandemic to increase community awareness and education regarding COVID-19 and other common health conditions. EP HEAT is a collaborative, multidisciplinary organization comprised of students, faculty, community health workers (also called promotoras), and members of the El Paso community. In summer 2021, EP HEAT received a grant from the tech companies Microsoft and LinkedIn to facilitate free job training courses from LinkedIn Learning (LinkedIn pathways) for any community member residing in the zip code 79905. This population represents a workforce vulnerable to changes in the economy due in part to low levels of educational attainment.
PURPOSE: EP HEAT members established free tutoring workshops to help participants complete LinkedIn pathways. The EP HEAT-LinkedIn partnership had the goal of providing free opportunities for community members to upskill or reskill their qualifications for available jobs, ultimately aiming for increased job stability within the community.
METHODS: Community members were offered a survey to anonymously communicate their experience and offer feedback to organizers, including any hurdles to pathway completion they faced. Additionally, a qualitative, one-hour interview was conducted with the promotoras to evaluate difficulties community members faced, but that might not be captured within the survey responses.
RESULTS: Based on survey responses, it was determined that the experience with the Microsoft-LinkedIn-TTUHSC EP HEAT partnership was overwhelmingly favorable, although many participants lacked basic technology literacy. This caused a significant hurdle to LinkedIn pathway completion. The promotoras also found the Spanish-language LinkedIn pathways to be much longer in completion time, a significant barrier for many Spanish-only speaking participants who ran short on time.
CONCLUSIONS: In the future, EP HEAT will be working with local organizations to match LinkedIn pathway participants to job opportunities in the community.

NOVEL APPROACH TO HOLISTIC MEDICAL PROGRAM ADMISSIONS PROCESS UTILIZES ADAPTED MEDICAL EDUCATION PROGRAM OBJECTIVES (MEPOS)

Max Kaito | Nicholas Patete | Rama Bhat | Kyle Bauckman
Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine | Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine | Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine | Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine
PURPOSE: Medical programs favor well-rounded applicants, but there is a lack of established processes to promote selection of such students. We developed Admissions Program Objectives (APOs) from our institution’s Medical Education Program Objectives (MEPOs). These APOs provide eight metrics to assess interviewees and facilitate selection of students who best fit our program’s educational goals. We propose that evaluation of interviewees using these metrics creates a dynamic and holistic applicant profile.
METHODS: MEPOs required by the LCME delineate goals and expectations for students. We adapted our program’s MEPOs to APOs, which outline the characteristics (e.g. Ethics and Professionalism) desired in a matriculant, rather than in a graduating student. Pre-existing Multiple Mini-Interview (MMI) scenarios were mapped to at least two APOs. Additionally, each APO was assessed at a minimum of two MMI stations. Interviewers provided applicants with numerical scores for each APO, and this data was displayed as radar charts. We then compare each applicant's radar chart against the average performance for their interview day, as well as against the running average of the entire applicant pool. We administer surveys to interviewers and the admissions committee to determine the utility of APOs during the interview process.
RESULTS: This methodology is being piloted for the 2021–2022 application cycle at our institution. We retrospectively compared radar charts for applicants who accept, decline, and do not receive offers. Preliminary data suggest the committee significantly favored applicants who excelled in all eight APOs, but negatively reviewed students who struggled with at least three APOs.
CONCLUSIONS: We expect that use of APOs in the interview process will optimize an admissions committee’s recruitment of applicants whose values and goals coincide with the program’s mission. We believe this methodology is a simple and versatile means to holistically review applicants at any LCME-accredited medical program.

THE DOJO METHOD: UTILITY OF A MOBILE APP FOR REAL-TIME ASSESSMENT OF PROFESSIONALISM IN PRE-CLERKSHIP MEDICAL EDUCATION

Beatrice Thomas | James McAlister | Vijay Rajput | Kyle Bauckman
Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine | Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine | Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine | Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine
PURPOSE: Professionalism is a core competency, expected of medical students. Lack of professionalism during medical education portends future challenges as a practicing physician. We have implemented K-12 behavior tracking apps €˜ClassDojo „¢’, into the pre-clinical education curriculum to objectively assess professionalism in a timely and user-friendly fashion. ClassDojo „¢ allows for the creation of a customized online classroom environment where behavioral tracking is accomplished via a point system. Class Dojo „¢ was implemented across two cohorts of students during the “Fundamentals” course. The method of professionalism assessment has been developed around the use of this app.
METHODS: Students were assessed on core competencies of professionalism. Infractions of common behaviors attributed to professionalism like removal of masks, leaving video off during zoom sessions, late assignments, tardiness, disrespectful behavior, and dress code violations. Each time an infraction was observed, Class Dojo „¢ was utilized to assign a point score to those students record within the app. This point scoring was toward final summative assessments and real time feedback of professional lapses. The empirical rule of standard deviation was used to identify outliers within the data set and assign a satisfactory, satisfactory with concern, or unsatisfactory for the professionalism competency.
RESULTS: The protocol helped to identified professionalism outliers for the course. Only three students fell outside of the 3 standard deviations of the mean threshold and received a satisfactory with concern. There were no failing grades though preliminary results provide a guide toward revision of the scoring process. Individual student qualitative data was also weighed with qualitative actions including intentional effort to correct the behaviors during the course.
CONCLUSIONS: Class Dojo „¢ was effectively implemented across two cohorts of students. Data from this app was used to objectively assess student professionalism and allow for timely feedback with reduced hindsight bias.

MEDICAL STUDENT PERCEPTIONS OF ZOOM VS IN-PERSON REAL PATIENT ENCOUNTERS INTEGRATED INTO PRECLINICAL FOUNDATIONAL MODULES

Sadman Chowdhury | Laurel Gorman
Medical School Class of 2024, UCF COM, Orlando, Fl 32827 | Depart of Medical Education2, UCF COM, Orlando, Fl 32827
PURPOSE: Studies suggest early exposure to real patients sharing stories in person (IP-PE) can be effective in promoting basic science clinical relevance for preclinical medical students. Due to COVID-19, our medical school moved to zoom patient encounters (Z-PE). Given limited data exists on the values of Z-PE, our goal was to study perceptions of Z-PE integrated into second year (M2) foundational systems modules.
METHODS: To query perceptions of prior Z-PE or IP-PE, a Likert 1–5 survey (anchored as: 5: strongly agree, 4: mostly agree, 3: neutral, 2: mostly disagree, 1: strongly disagree) was distributed to student volunteers (N = 44) asking them to compare how each method targeted 5 themes: learning-motivation (L-M), clinical relevance (Cl-R), improved foundational understanding (I-FU), patient attitude (PA), and empathy (Emp). Retrospectively, responses on prior end-of-the module evaluations were compared from an all-virtual cohort (N = 110) vs an IP cohort (N = 116), and % affirmative determined by combining % selecting 4 or 5 ratings.
RESULTS: Mean Likert was calculated for Z-PE vs IP-PE for N = 44 survey volunteers. Significance was determined by paired Student’s t-test. In comparison with Z-PE, students perceived IP-PE significantly improved L-M (Z:4.3; IP:4.5, p < 0.01), PA (Z:3.8; IP:4.0, p < 0.05), and Emp (Z:4.3; IP:4.6, p < 0.01) but not Cl-R (p = 0.6) or I-FS (p = 0.2). On module evaluations, more agreed that IP enhanced learning (Z:67%; IP:76%), attitude (Z:54%; IP:67%), and empathy (Z:79%; IP:91%).
CONCLUSIONS: Survey participants perceived IP-PE was more valuable than Z-PE in enhancing learning, impact, and empathy but similarly effective in enhancing clinical relevance and concept understanding. Module data from entire classes also showed IP-PE preference, but both Z-PE and IP-PE cohorts rated PE highly. Given logistics can limit patient visits, Z-PE can be a convenient and effective method to promote learning, clinical relevance, and empathy, but IP-PE, when possible, is likely to generate more motivation, empathy, and impact on attitudes toward patients.

COMPARISON OF SECOND YEAR MEDICAL STUDENT PERFORMANCE OUTCOMES ON SYSTEMS MODULE TOPICS TAGGED TO VIRTUAL VERSUS IN-PERSON SMALL GROUP CASE-BASED LEARNING

Laurel Gorman | Benjamin Yitzhak
Depart of Medical Education, UCF COM, Orlando, Fl 32827 | Medical School Class of 2024, UCF COM, Orlando, Fl 32827
PURPOSE: Evidence in the literature shows effective learning of pathophysiology and pharmacology using in-person (IP) small-group case-based learning (SG-CBL). Previously presented survey data from our group suggested students preferred IP SG-CBL over virtual, but limited data has reviewed performance outcomes associated with virtual SG-CBL. Due to the COVID-19, our second-year (M2) systems modules shifted SG-CBL to zoom (Z) using small group break-out rooms. Our objective was to compare learning effectiveness of Z SG-CBL with IP SG-CBL by looking at assessment outcomes from the 2020 virtual cohort and the 2021 IP cohort for the same cases.
METHODS: We looked retrospectively at mean scores for USMLE-style summative multiple-choice questions (MCQ) tagged to SG-CBL in an endocrine-reproductive systems module for Z cohort (N = 14 items) vs IP cohort (N = 16 items). We compared mean rubric scores for group case reports using a rubric with a 1–10 scale for 6 criteria (Medical knowledge, Clinical reasoning, Practice-based improvement, Resource utilization, Communication, Management). Scoring was scaffolded to the M2 level with a range of 4–6 designated as “meeting expectations.”
RESULTS: Comparison of mean score + SD for zoom (Z) vs in-person (IP), respectively, showed no significant difference in MCQ scores (Z:88 + 9 vs IP: 86 + 11, p = 0.6) or mean rubric scores for N = 20 groups (Z:6.5 + 1.2 vs IP: 6.2 + 1.0, p = 0.3), with significance determined by Student’s t-test.
CONCLUSIONS: No differences in learning outcomes were evident for topics tagged to SG-CBL for the virtual cohort versus in-person cohort. Both groups demonstrated solid mastery of endocrine-reproductive knowledge taught through SG-CBL as well as sufficient M2-level competency in case-based performance in critical skills that included communication, clinical reasoning, and resource utilization. While the data looked at a limited window, a selective topic area, and different cohorts, it supports that virtual zoom-based SG-CBL can be designed effectively to promote learning of knowledge and clinically relevant competencies.

USING INFORMATION MASTERY TO TEACH EVIDENCE-BASED MEDICINE: DOES AN INFORMATION MASTERY COURSE INCREASE CONFIDENCE AND ABILITY IN THE PRACTICE OF EBM AMONG MEDICAL STUDENTS?

Johan C Bester, MBChB, PhD | Andrew Wilson | Irwin Munoz | Natasha Greene | Edward Simanton, PhD
Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV
PURPOSE: Clinical decision-making must incorporate the best available evidence and necessitates skills in finding, appraising, and applying evidence. However, the best way to teach these skills within medical education is unclear. A recent approach utilizes Information Mastery as an alternative to traditional evidence based medicine (EBM). Proponents of Information Mastery argue that traditional EBM skills are not practical in clinical practice; lack of time, poor retention of skills, and low confidence are all concerns. Information Mastery seeks to build a set of focused skills that enable clinicians to quickly find, appraise, and apply evidence in practice. There is little research measuring outcomes of the Information Mastery approach in medical education. We implemented this approach to see if it improved student confidence and competency in EBM skills.
METHODS: Fifty-nine medical students participated in a 12-week active learning course based on the Information Mastery curriculum. Video modules were followed by case-based, in-class active learning sessions. Student confidence in EBM skills was assessed pre- and post-course using a 15 question self-reported survey. Student competence in four EBM categories (ask, acquire, appraise, apply) was measured pre- and post-course using a validated ACE assessment tool.
RESULTS: On the pre-course self-reported confidence survey 27.11% of students reported low self-perceived ability, 37.29% average ability, and 33.90% high ability. After the course 100% reported high self-perceived ability. On ACE assessment 38.46% attained a passing score pre-course versus 67.80% post-course. Statistically significant higher scores post-test were observed in questions relating to each of the four assessed competencies of EBM.
CONCLUSIONS: A 12-week Information Mastery course increased both confidence and competency in skills associated with effective use of EBM. This suggests effectiveness of the active-learning Information Mastery approach towards successful student utilization of EBM skills, inviting a deeper look into the matter longitudinally and with additional cohorts.

EVALUATION OF A NOVEL ONLINE RESEARCH AND SCHOLARSHIP PRE-CLERKSHIP CURRICULUM

Mina A Milad | Dustin DeMeo | Uriel Kim | Wafa Nabi | Kelli Qua | Vidya Krishnan | Kristin Sainan | Colleen M Croniger
Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, 44106 U.S.A. | Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, 44106 U.S.A. | Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, 44106 U.S.A. | Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, 44106 U.S.A.
PURPOSE: A core mission of Case Western Reserve University of Medicine is to advance healthcare through evidence-based medicine. In the past 2 years, an in person curriculum known as “Research and Scholarship” was implemented to prepare students for their 16-week required research block in their pre-clerkship curriculum. Using feedback from these students and due to the lack of in person curriculum during COVID-19, we developed a remote, self-paced Research and Scholarship curriculum.
METHODS: A needs assessment survey was administered to the in-person curriculum cohort to guide the curriculum design. Pre-test and post-test surveys designed as a 5-point Likert scale will assess perception of knowledge before and after implementation. Students’ overall evaluations of the new curriculum will be compared to those of the in-person curriculum.
RESULTS: The needs assessment survey administered to the control cohort demonstrated a desire for online learning, a dissatisfaction with in-person components and a vast diversity in research backgrounds. Their responses guided us in developing 6 modules: Statistics in Medicine, Finding a Research Mentor, Critical Appraisal of Literature, Writing an IRB, Navigating Excel and Navigating REDCap. Overall, students' evaluations of the course improved from only 5% of students rating the course as “Very good” and “Excellent” before the curriculum innovation to 52% with the new, remote curriculum.
CONCLUSIONS: The development and implementation of an online Research and Scholarship curriculum that was guided by a needs assessment survey has already shown to increase overall satisfaction with the curriculum. Our next steps include the administration of a post-test survey and a feedback survey at the end of the curriculum so we may continually improve, modify, and build upon the exiting modules. This approach of online modules allows students to be well-prepared for their required research block and can easily implemented in other institutions.

PREPARING MEDICAL STUDENTS TO ADDRESS COMMUNITY NEEDS AND HEALTH DISPARITIES: AN ELECTIVE COMMUNITY HEALTH CURRICULUM DURING THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

Arvind Suresh | Nakia Wighton | Tanya Sorensen | Thomas Palladino | Timothy Renier | Lynn Foster-Johnson | Roshini Pinto-Powell
Department of Medical Education, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH | Department of Medical Education, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH | Department of Medical Education, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH
PURPOSE: Students engage with medically underserved and vulnerable populations but often lack preparation to advocate for these communities. The pandemic disproportionately impacted vulnerable communities while also limiting clinical opportunities for learners in community settings. We examined the impact of a streamlined Community Health Scholars (CHS) program on first-year medical students’ preparedness and interest in addressing health barriers faced by Medically Underserved Communities (MUC).
METHODS: The redesigned curriculum for the student-led CHS program required participants to attend nine virtual seminars led by faculty and community members with expertise serving MUC. Topics included housing instability, families with newborns, living with disabilities, substance use, intimate partner violence, LGBTQ+ and veteran health. Students partnered with community agencies to organize service projects and gain exposure to the life experiences of vulnerable populations using virtual and in-person approaches. The elective concluded with participant-led presentations and case discussions, hosted by community health workers and community-based participatory research leaders.
RESULTS: At program completion, 60% of participants (n = 15) organized service projects with one of three community organizations and 67% indicated continued interest in working with their organization throughout medical school. While students did not report increased comfort in discussing health challenges with MUC patients, they were more confident in their ability to direct MUC patients to local resources (p < .05). Most indicated the program positively impacted their interest in volunteering with MUC and interest in practicing in medically underserved areas (71%).
CONCLUSIONS: The streamlined program enhanced student knowledge about community-based resources, impacting their preparedness to advocate for vulnerable populations. While the curriculum demonstrated the efficacy of a virtual approach to service learning, student comfort in discussing health challenges and barriers with patients may be further enhanced by in-person interactions with community members. The virtual seminar-style curriculum is reproducible and integrates into existing curricula on disparities and social determinants.

LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES DURING CURRICULAR INTEGRATION TO ENHANCE CARE FOR PATIENTS WITH DISABILITIES

Arvind Suresh | Evette Ronner | Linda Morris | Michaela O'Connor | Adam Weinstein | Roshini Pinto-Powell
Department of Medical Education, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH | Department of Medical Education, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH | Department of Medical Education, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH
PURPOSE: Patients with disabilities comprise 12–20% of the US population and lack access to adequate and equitable healthcare. These disparities are widened as physicians receive inconsistent training and lack the knowledge to care for this vulnerable population. We aimed to improve skills in caring for patients with disabilities by integrating disability-focused educational content into the preclinical curriculum.
METHODS: We modified existing clinical reasoning and PBL cases to promote discussion on decision-making for patients with disabilities. Relevant clinical and physical exam skills content were added to our school’s clinical skills course preparation materials. Two patient panels on Trisomy 21 and neurologic disabilities facilitated by faculty were added within organ system courses, in addition to a documentary screening and accessibility workshop. Each class year experienced a total of six new curricular sessions.
RESULTS: Forty-six percent of first-year and 38% of second-year medical students who experienced this novel curriculum completed both pre- and post-surveys. At course completion, first-year students reported increased comfort creating a differential diagnosis for patients with physical disabilities and interacting with people with developmental disabilities (p < 0.05). Most students also reported increases in their knowledge of health challenges and barriers faced by these patients. Compared with a 14% satisfaction in disability educational content prior to curricular implementation, 67% of first-year, and 56% of second-year medical students reported satisfaction with the new curriculum.
CONCLUSIONS: Modifying existing preclinical curricula by incorporating disability-related training is a feasible and effective method to supplement student knowledge, skills, and comfort in caring for patients with disabilities. Specific disability-focused content was integrated in a manner that promoted active discussion and reflection. Limitations include variability in exposure to the curriculum with some optional program components and simultaneous curricular changes that may have influenced student perceptions. Educational content is easily transferable to other schools and does not require subject matter expertise.

THE EFFECT OF CLASS ATTENDANCE ON ACADEMIC PERFORMANCE IN A PRE-CLERKSHIP CURRICULUM

Andreas Seyfang
University of South Florida - Morsani College of Medicine, Department of Molecular Medicine, Tampa, FL 33612
PURPOSE: The beginning of the medical school curriculum tends to be a significant adjustment for many new students compared to undergraduate learning and study strategies in college. At the same time class attendance tends to drop significantly after the first few weeks into the new curriculum. The purpose of this study was to investigate how class attendance affects the academic performance in the first course of a medical school curriculum.
METHODS: In Academic Year 2018–19 student attendance had dropped to 30–40 students out of 183 within the first week of course 1 when class attendance was not required. In AY2019-20, class attendance for the first 2 weeks up to the first exam in the course was mandatory. Otherwise, lectures and all four exams of the 8-week course 1 remained identical for the two academic years for subsequent comparison of academic performance.
RESULTS: The class average on exam 1 increased from 88.2% (SD 8.9%) in AY2018-19 to 90.1% (SD 7.3%) in AY2019-20, while the final course grade average increased from 86.1% (SD 6.9%) to 88.0% (SD 6.0%). The largest difference, however, was observed for the required course remediations based on a 75% passline for this course for both years, which dropped from 10 F grades in AY2018-19 to 5 F grades in AY2019-20.
CONCLUSIONS: Mandatory class attendance for the first two weeks of the new medical school curriculum improved the class average by only 2% but had the highest effect on the lower performing students in class with reducing course F grades from 10/183 to 5/184 students. Furthermore, mandatory class attendance for the first two weeks of the course also allowed for more social interaction between the new students and hence facilitated the formation of new study groups during this initial phase of adjustment to the new medical school curriculum.

CONVERSATIONAL MEDICAL SPANISH CLUB: A FRIENDLY VENUE FOR IMPROVING LANGUAGE SPEAKING SKILLS

Daniel Rios-Lopera | Gilberto Garcia | Arely Munoz | Jorge Cervantes
PLFSOM-TTUHSC-EP | PLFSOM-TTUHSC-EP | PLFSOM-TTUHSC-EP | PLFSOM-TTUHSC-EP
PURPOSE: There is an increasing desire amongst students attending a medical school at the U.S.-Mexico border region to broaden their language speaking opportunities besides the Medical Spanish curriculum they receive. We describe an initiative from the students to create a Conversational Medical Spanish Club.
METHODS: The Medical Spanish Club is an official student organization registered at the school office of student affairs. It is open to medical students from pre-clerkship and clerkship years. Club activities includes: Interpreter training, Coffee chat nights, Spanish movie nights, standardized patients encounters, book club, journal club, a walk-in language clinic, and community outreach. The dynamic of this group is based on one-on-one tutoring sessions between advanced students and beginners or intermediate. Additionally a guest speaker who is fluent in Spanish is invited to teach the most common phrases used in their fields. These talks are open not only to the Medical Spanish Club members but to community physicians as well.
RESULTS: The organization structure of the Medical Spanish Club consists of 10 students with diverse roles, including: President, Vice-president, secretary, treasurer, historian, director of design and marketing, event planner, and community liaison. We expect an increasing amount of interest form the student community, and an expanding engagement from our local health professional community. surveys show this course structure is attractive to both medical school faculty and students.
CONCLUSIONS: Creation of a series of activities within a relaxed amical venue is an appealing opportunity for students to practice and improve their language skills. It also provides a social platform for interactions between native speakers, one-on-one mentoring by a native speaker, and more practice with standardized patients, as well as interprofessional exchange.

INNOVATIVE STRATEGY TO PROMOTE DEVELOPMENT OF ADAPTIVE LEARNING SKILLS FOR FINDING, SYNTHESIZING, AND COMMUNICATING TRANSLATIONAL BASIC RESEARCH LITERATURE BY FIRST-YEAR MEDICAL STUDENTS

Steve A. Maxwell | Robin Fuchs-Young | Gregg B. Wells | Geoffrey M. Kapler | Gloria M. Conover | Sheila Green | Catherine Pepper | Barbara Gastel | David P. Huston
Texas A&M University College of Medicine | Texas A&M University College of Medicine | Texas A&M University College of Medicine | Texas A&M University College of Medicine | Texas A&M University College of Medicine | Texas A&M University | Texas A&M University College of Medicine
PURPOSE: Understanding and communicating medical advances driven by basic research are increasingly important skills for physicians. The foundational skills of critically appraising and communicating translational basic research literature affecting patient care, however, are challenging for medical students to develop. To address this problem, we developed “Medical Student Grand Rounds” (MSGR). This course trains first-year medical students in the adaptive learning skillset of finding, critically assessing (translating, synthesizing, appraising), and presenting primary research literature about self-selected, medically relevant topics.
METHODS: With mentoring from research-oriented, basic science faculty, students complete milestones culminating in oral presentations. First, students learn from medical librarians how to search research literature databases and then choose a clinical subject using these searching skills. Second, students outline the background of the clinical subject area and then develop a mechanistic research story based on their deeper search of primary research literature. Mentors provide feedback and assessments about discerning quality of information and synthesizing mechanistic basic science on their research topics. Third, students attend monthly Clinical Science & Translational Research Grand Rounds with faculty role models for translating basic science into clinical medicine. Fourth, students prepare and give oral presentations, emphasizing primary literature on their research topics.
RESULTS: Student course evaluations yielded a Likert-scale rating of < 90% in the agreed/strongly agreed categories for increased proficiency in adaptive skills. Qualitative analysis of student self-reflections revealed < 50% positive responses regarding proficiency in one or more adaptive learning skills. Mentor evaluations of student performance aligned with student self-perception, with < 90% in the agreed/strongly agreed categories.
CONCLUSIONS: Mentoring helped students develop adaptive learning skills to synthesize ideas from basic research literature, and increased their proficiency in finding and interpreting research articles, preparing and delivering presentations, and understanding links among basic and translational research and clinical applications.

THE POWER OF PROMOTORES. STUDENT EXPERIENCE WORKING WITH PROMOTORES FOR COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT AND THE DIRECT IMPACT PROMOTORES HAVE ON HEALTHCARE ACCESS FOR MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED COMMUNITY

Suzette Jimenez | Sarah Johnson
TTUHSC El Paso Medical Student | TTUHSC El Paso Medical Student
PURPOSE: Promotores act as crucial liaisons between their community and the health care world. This study will assess whether EP-HEAT members gained communication skills by working with promotores and determine how MSRC patient’s access to healthcare is increased through a promotora.
METHODS: The El Paso Health and Awareness Team (EP-HEAT) is an organization established at the Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center El Paso (TTUHSC El Paso) Paul L. Foster School of Medicine (PLFSOM) with a focus on the dissemination of health knowledge and distribution of healthcare resources. The Medical Student Run Clinic (MSRC) is another organization at TTUHSC El Paso with an emphasis on increasing healthcare access for the community of Sparks, Texas. Both EP-HEAT and MSRC work with community health workers (promotores) to connect with the surrounding communities. Promotores are lay members of the community who work, predominantly in underserved areas, with healthcare professionals to increase healthcare literacy and connect patients to healthcare resources. It was anticipated that members of EP-HEAT working with promotores would gain a deeper understanding of how to disseminate health knowledge in layman’s terms to the community.
RESULTS: EP-HEAT members who worked with promotores were emailed a survey which gave them an opportunity to share how their communication skills were impacted by their work with promotores. MSRC patients who have interacted with promotores had the option to complete a paper survey where they were able to give insight on how a promotora has impacted their access to healthcare. Both surveys were optional and entirely anonymous.
CONCLUSIONS: The EP-HEAT member surveys showed that 90% of members endorsed working with promotores as an effective way to improve their ability to communicate with members of the community. When surveyed, 100% of MSRC patients agreed that a promotora has helped them address obstacles they face regarding healthcare access.

SELF-STIGMA AS A BARRIER TO ACCESSING MENTAL HEALTH CARE IN MEDICAL STUDENTS

Tori Grice | Brittany Walker | Jacob Kaiser | Helen Kaiser
University of South Carolina School of Medicine Greenville | University of South Carolina School of Medicine Greenville | Prisma Health Center for Psychiatry - Greer | University of South Carolina School of Medicine Greenville
PURPOSE: Physicians, residents, and medical students experience higher rates of depression, suicide ideation and suicide attempts than the general population. Although most medical students experiencing depression have access to treatment, they receive help at a lower rate than the general population. Self-stigmatization and the fear of negative impact on career are barriers that prevent medical students, residents, and physicians from seeking treatment for depression and other mental health conditions. The purpose of our study is to see if students at the University of South Carolina School of Medicine Greenville (UofSCSOMG) experience self-stigmatization of mental health.
METHODS: One hundred forty-one medical students completed a stigma questionnaire, and open-ended questions asking what barriers students experience in seeking mental health care. Eighty-seven% of students who completed the survey answered the open-ended question, and the responses were categorized into: stigma, time, cost, and difficulty to seek care.
RESULTS: The open-ended questions showed that 37% of the total responses related to stigma, 31% to time, 18% to cost, and 14% to difficulty seeking care. Agreement between authors regarding categorizing open-ended answers was substantial to perfect (Cohen’s k = 0.644–.930). These findings are consistent with prior research. Additionally, 30% of students responded that they would not or were neutral towards seeking treatment if they had a mental health disorder.
CONCLUSIONS: Given the high rates of depression found in medical students, it is important to find methods of reducing self-stigma so students who need care seek it at higher rates. Future work needs to focus on interventions in the medical school curriculum that reduce stigma towards seeking mental health care. This has the potential to improve mental health in medical students, residents and physicians and eventually change the attitudes of mental health in healthcare providers.

ADDRESSING RACE, ETHNICITY, AND STRUCTURAL INEQUALITY IN PHARMACOLOGY EDUCATION AND ASSESSMENT

Joe B. Blumer | John L. Szarek | Michael W. Lee | Naunihal Zaveri | Stephen D. Schneid | Marieke Kruidering | Kelly M. Quesnelle
Medical University of South Carolina | Geisinger Commonwealth School of Medicine | Dell Medical School at the University of Texas at Austin | Arkansas College of Osteopathic Medicine | Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences at University of California San Diego | University of California San Francisco | University of South Carolina School of Medicine - Greenville
PURPOSE: Social determinants of health, including race, ethnicity, and gender, represent important factors in health care delivery and patient outcomes, and contribute to health disparities. Pharmacology, as an integrated discipline, lies at the nexus between foundational science and clinical practice, providing a platform for educators to discuss the impact of social determinants on patient outcomes. Our goal is to create a framework that provides guidance for topics in pharmacotherapeutics for educators, learners, and providers to use in promoting antiracism in medical curricula.
METHODS: Through iterative discussions, we developed a conceptual framework that includes topics taught across medical schools, such as drug metabolism, pharmacogenomics, adverse drug reactions, prescribing guidelines, factors affecting medication adherence, pain management, and therapeutic outcomes. Under each topic, we describe how social constructs such as race, ethnicity, and gender can impact pharmacology and therapeutic outcomes.
RESULTS: Literature reports show that some topics in pharmacology education have already established cultural competency and should be adopted widely by all pharmacology educators, e.g., using more appropriate terminology for drug reactions such as vancomycin-infusion reaction. Other topics are less established, so a more nuanced discussion with students is required. Society guidelines for managing diseases such as hypertension include prescribing recommendations based on race, with which learners are expected to be familiar as they enter clinical training but are actively being debated. Similarly, inter-ethnic differences in drug metabolism are often reported as a function of genetic polymorphisms without considering non-genetic factors.
CONCLUSIONS: We have developed a conceptual framework for promoting antiracism in pharmacology education by categorizing topics based on those where cultural competencies are clearly established and those where a more nuanced discussion is required with learners, as well as identifying and reducing bias in assessment. These are generalizable across health professions in which pharmacology education is a discipline in the curriculum.

MEDICAL STUDENTS’ ATTITUDES TOWARDS PRIVATE EQUITY INVOLVEMENT IN HEALTHCARE

Connor Tukel | Samir Kamat | Jacob Appel
Icahn School of Medicine | Icahn School of Medicine | Icahn School of Medicine
PURPOSE: Limited research exists concerning medical students’ understanding of Private Equity (“PE”) involvement in healthcare. This study aimed to assess medical students' attitudes toward PE activity within medicine and the potential effects on their career plans.
METHODS: An online multiple-choice survey was distributed to all current medical students at the Icahn School of Medicine. Descriptive findings of the aggregate data are described herein.
RESULTS: A total of 153 complete responses were included in analyses. 69.9% of respondents reported at least some familiarity with PE in general and 63.4% reported awareness of PE specifically in healthcare. 28.1% were unsure about how much PE activity might affect healthcare; 27.5% thought that healthcare would be affected somewhat significantly and 28.1% thought very significantly. Most students viewed PE involvement in healthcare somewhat or very unfavorably (40.7% and 30.1% respectively) but also said that PE activity was unlikely to affect their choice of specialty. 79.7% expressed a desire to learn more about the business side of healthcare and 75.8% agreed that such topics should be included in medical education.
CONCLUSIONS: Though there were disparities in medical students’ awareness of PE involvement in healthcare, most students felt that PE transactions will significantly affect healthcare. The perceived sentiments regarding the potential effects were predominantly unfavorable. Students nevertheless expressed resounding interest in learning more about healthcare-related business trends and the majority were in favor of incorporating such topics into medical school curricula.

CTRL-F: FINDING PLACES FOR EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY TO AUGMENT HUMAN TEACHING

Noam Morningstar-Kywi | Mrunmayee P. Shirodkar | Ian S. Haworth | Rory E. Kim
University of Southern California, School of Pharmacy | University of Southern California, School of Pharmacy | University of Southern California, School of Pharmacy | University of Southern California, School of Pharmacy
PURPOSE: Educational technology has a growing presence in health science education, where it can be used to increase learner engagement, provide a safe environment for training, and ease the burden of limited instructional resources. However, effective implementation requires careful deployment to ensure appropriate application by students and to make the best use of human and financial resources. This may be achieved by making an early effort to match the strengths of a given technology to the specific needs of a curriculum.
METHODS: Our institution has developed several interactive educational technology platforms in-house, including digital “choose-your-own-adventure” patient cases (eCases), procedurally generated practice problems for lab interpretation and dosing calculations, and database driven quizzes. Each of these applications has unique strengths, such as allowing students to explore multiple correct and incorrect treatment pathways, giving adaptive feedback on practice problem responses, and providing formative self-assessment of knowledge, respectively. Examining course or topic learning objectives and identifying those which pair well with different technologies’ strengths permits targeted and effective deployment and application.
RESULTS: This strategy has improved student engagement and confidence, formative assessment, and learning outcomes. Selecting a treatment regimen from a set of medications can be explored individually by students, whereas reviewing open-ended patient interview questions may be better discussed in small groups led by the instructor. Similarly, providing adaptive feedback on practice problems scales well to larger class sizes, allowing instructors to focus their time on assisting students who still have questions after practicing through the software. Compared to initial, exploratory implementations, this targeted approach has seen increased use, positive feedback from students and instructors, and more efficient allocation of development resources.
CONCLUSIONS: Understanding of humans’ and computers’ respective strengths allows educational technology to be used in ways that complement instructors’ roles. Mapping technological capabilities to learning objectives promotes effective implementation of technology in the classroom.

VIRTUAL BEDSIDE TUTORIALS FOR MEDICAL EDUCATION

Tse Yean Teo | Nathanael Foong Zhu En | Prabavathi Balachandran | Juliana Yin Li Kan
Singapore General Hospital, Singapore | Singapore General Hospital, Singapore | Singapore General Hospital, Singapore Singapore General Hospital, Singapore | Singapore General Hospital, Singapore
PURPOSE: The COVID-19 pandemic has facilitated accelerated adaptation of technology in medical education, due to pressure to minimize patient contact for infection control purposes. We aim to study the effectiveness of virtual bedside tutorials for medical students in a tertiary hospital in Singapore.
METHODS: Medical students rotating through the Internal Medicine department from May to August 2021 were recruited to participate in virtual bedside tutorials. Six sessions were conducted via a tablet and video conferencing platform. The tutor, patient and a pre-assigned student were in the hospital ward, while the remaining students observed the interaction remotely. History-taking, physical examination and clinical reasoning were taught. Student demographic data and feedback were collected using an anonymised, self-administered digital questionnaire after each teaching. Interval data was analysed as mean values. Free-text data was reviewed and categorized into themes. Inter-rater discrepancies were discussed among study team members until a consensus was achieved.
RESULTS: Thirty-eight responses were recorded. Majority of participants were final year students (33/38, 86.8%). On a Likert scale of 1 to 5, most students enjoyed taking part in the virtual bedside tutorial (mean = 3.95), felt that it supplemented learning (mean = 4.01), and agreed that such sessions overcame limitations in patient exposure (mean = 3.68). Most students preferred the traditional method of attending tutorials physically by bedside. Students were generally positive (35/38) about their experiences, citing greater opportunities to learn. Feedback for improvement were mainly regarding technical issues (18/27).
CONCLUSIONS: Virtual bedside tutorials is an effective tool for medical education especially during pandemics when minimalizing patient exposure is crucial. Improvements in technical aspects of teaching delivery can improve the overall utility of such teachings.

THE IAMSE AMBASSADOR PROGRAM: BUILDING OUR FUTURE THROUGH GLOBAL COLLABORATION

Sateesh Arja | Claudio Cortes | Diann Eley | Joseph Grannum | Yawar Hayat Khan | Francisco Raúl Barroso Villafuerte | Jia Zhimin
Avalon University School of Medicine | Oakland University William Beaumont School of Medicine | The University of Queensland | University of Tartu, Centre for Educational Technology | Riphah International University | Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud
PURPOSE: The IAMSE Ambassador Program was formed in 2019 as an approach to expand IAMSE’s mission of sharing health and medical education initiatives and resources and increase IAMSE’s international collaboration and membership around the world. This abstract will describe how the program began, its inaugural Ambassadors and their representative countries, and the activities and progress currently underway.
METHODS: (innovation)
The inaugural Ambassadors represent six countries from across the globe: Mexico, the Caribbean, Estonia, Pakistan, China and Australia. The first zoom meeting was held across several time zones in March 2019 coinciding with the start of the COVID 19 pandemic. The group’s initial task was to create a 5-year strategic plan which allows every Ambassador a means to chart their individual progress and contribution to the program, and importantly as a group to monitor whether we are achieving our aims. For example, each Ambassador aims to form their own IAMSE “embassy” within their home country to help increase the Association’s membership and offer professional development opportunities and promote educational resources and training in their region.
RESULTS: (benefits and challenges)
Thanks to the pandemic, maintaining monthly zoom meetings across several time zones is not the challenge it used to be, and regular meetings help us to progress a journal article highlighting the similarities and differences in medical education between our countries. We have all participated in the IAMSE CAFÉ© series and realise the benefit of learning from each other and working together to share ideas about education and research.
CONCLUSIONS: (lessons learned)
The Ambassador Program acts as a vehicle to encourage knowledge sharing on a global scale. Geography, culture, politics and social norms aside, as educators we all deal with similar issues and value the opportunity to expand the community of health science educators around the world.

VIRTUAL LEARNING “FACE-TO-FACE” USING AUGMENTED REALITY - A PILOT STUDY

Kevin Steed | Hany Ibrahim | Jody K. Takemoto | Leanne Coyne | Thayer Merritt
California Health Sciences University College of Osteopathic Medicine | California Health Sciences University College of Osteopathic Medicine | ScientifCation | West Cost University College of Pharmacy | West Coast University
PURPOSE: Online learning has steadily grown in popularity suggesting a need to optimize online Team Based Learning (TBL) delivery techniques. This need was highlighted during the COVID-19 pandemic when instructors rapidly transitioned to online teaching. Extended reality (i.e., virtual, augmented, or mixed reality) has seen a similar growth in popularity in education. We investigated student perceptions on the effectiveness of a TBL session in augmented reality (AR) compared to conferencing software.
METHODS: We presented two virtual TBL exercises to medical students, one using AR through the Microsoft HoloLens 2 „¢ device and the application, €˜Spatial’. The second session used video conferencing software €˜Zoom’. TBL specific software collected responses for this study. After the sessions, student perceptions were obtained through a questionnaire of 20 questions on a Likert scale and 3 free response questions. Statistics were analyzed using JASP statistical software. Students were given a $25 gift card for their participation.
RESULTS: Overall, our pilot group showed no statistical significance in student response between the two methods. Students tended to agree slightly more with statements about €˜Zoom’ (mean = 3.96, SD = 1.01) compared to €˜AR’ (mean = 3.78, SD = .96). There was a trend towards significance when asked if the student would take a course offered in the format, with a preference for €˜Zoom’ (t(4) = −2.359, p = .078). Several students mentioned a heightened level of engagement in AR because of the realistic avatars €˜revealing’ their level of engagement to peers. A few of the features of AR (such as automated clapping and confetti) were very distracting to the students.
CONCLUSIONS: Students were positive about the increased engagement and connectivity, despite some distracting features, and especially liked the realistic avatars and body language that the avatars conveyed. Continued investigations are required, especially into other potentially more immersive platforms like virtual reality.

SCRIPTING A PATH TO SCHOLARSHIP: HOW STUDENT JOURNALS REDUCE BARRIERS TO PUBLICATION

Sonia Lobo | Niraj Vyas | Matthew Carnevali | Steven Reehl
Geisinger Commonwealth School of Medicine | Geisinger Commonwealth School of Medicine | Geisinger Commonwealth School of Medicine | Geisinger Commonwealth School of Medicine
PURPOSE: Early initiation of research activities among medical students is associated with later academic success and improved short- and long-term scientific productivity. However, barriers to publication in mainstream medical or scientific journals may deter inexperienced student researchers from disseminating their scholarly work. We sought to determine the impact of Scholarly Research in Progress (SCRIP), a student journal, on medical students’ level of experience, knowledge, or practice related to writing and publication, on their writing apprehension, and on promoting their future scholarly productivity.
METHODS: Medical students from Geisinger Commonwealth School of Medicine (2017–2021) were surveyed to assess their experience and motivation to publish, to determine publication rates, and to better understand potential barriers to publishing practices. Data was collected in Qualtrics and reported using means and standard deviations for all ranked questions.
RESULTS: Seventy-nine students completed the survey over an 8-week period. Most students reported that publishing in SCRIP was much better than they had expected and that they learned a lot €”it improved their ability to understand the publication process, write up research for publication, understand the peer review process, and comprehend primary scientific literature. Students also reported that the peer review process was one of the best parts of the experience. Most students indicated that they were very likely to submit their manuscript for publication in a mainstream journal or that they had already done so.
CONCLUSIONS: Medical student journals provide an opportunity for students to engage in the publication process with fewer barriers than mainstream journals. Our survey results indicate that SCRIP positively impacted students’ attitude towards future publication and was associated with improved writing confidence. Reviewer feedback was well-received by students and helped to improve their research to a publishable level while simultaneously supporting development of their scientific writing skills and confidence.

DEVELOPMENT OF AN ORTHOPEDIC ANATOMY CURRICULAR MODEL FOR FOURTH YEAR MEDICAL STUDENTS USING A MODIFIED DELPHI METHOD

Dorothy Chan | Jorge Figueras | Bhargavi Maheshwer | Andrew Thompson
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine | University of Cincinnati College of Medicine | Case Western Reserve University | University of Cincinnati College of Medicine
PURPOSE: Recent trends in medical education favor reducing preclinical education to provide more time for career exploration during the clinical years. As a result, anatomical instruction and cadaveric dissection have declined. This presents a potential problem for medical students applying to anatomy intensive surgical specialties. We sought to develop a curricular model for a fourth-year anatomy elective focused on content important for students applying to residency in orthopedic surgery.
METHODS: A series of proposed learning outcomes (N = 56) was developed in collaboration with orthopedic surgeons and residents using the ACGME Orthopedic Milestones 2.0. These outcomes were then converted into a survey that asked participants to rate the importance of each outcome on a 5-point scale and provided free-text options to make suggestions. The Modified Delphi-Method was used to refine the list of outcomes until group consensus was achieved. Consensus was defined using a conservative three-tier approach based on best practices in the literature.
RESULTS: Twenty-nine orthopedic surgery faculty from seventeen institutions throughout the USA participated in this study. During the first round, consensus was reached on 24/56 learning outcomes. Outcomes that were identified as important but did not meet consensus criteria were redistributed in second-round survey. Additional outcomes were also generated based on free-text responses from the first round. Results of the second round achieved a level of consensus that met the closing criteria, and the Delphi process was concluded. The resulting list of learning outcomes range from basic concepts to foundational surgical anatomy.
CONCLUSIONS: In a climate where preclinical education is being truncated, it is critical that anatomy content essential for success in surgical specialties is identified and taught prior to residency. This study provides a framework for an anatomy-focused fourth-year curriculum that is designed to ensure rising orthopedic interns meet critical expectations prior to residency.

DIVERGENCE OF AFFECTIVE AND COGNITIVE EMPATHY SCORES OF A SMALL SUBSET OF OSTEOPATHIC MEDICAL STUDENTS

Bruce W. Newton | Zachary T. Vaskalis
Campbell University Jerry M. Wallace School of Osteopathic Medicine | Campbell University Jerry M. Wallace School of Osteopathic Medicine
PURPOSE: Medical education at CUSOM emphasizes students form an empathic bond of trust with patients; as such, communication skills are taught and practiced. At the same time students are learning effective communications skills using cognitive empathy, they must learn to blunt their affective empathy to remain composed during emotionally charged situations. The hypothesis is that with each year of training, cognitive and affective empathy scores will diverge with increasing cognitive scores and decreasing affective scores.
METHODS: The study used the Balanced Emotional Empathy Scale (measures affective empathy) and Jefferson Scale of Empathy (measures cognitive empathy). Surveys were given at the beginning of each academic year (M1-M4) and at the end of year 4 (M4F) to the graduating classes of 2017–2019. Gender and specialty choice (primary care, i.e., Family & Internal Medicine, Pediatrics, Ob/Gyn, Psychiatry vs. technically oriented specialties) was also gathered. n = 345: 169 men and 176 women.
RESULTS: For all students combined, both affective and cognitive scores significantly decreased from M1 to M4F with the decrease being driven by males entering technically oriented specialties. Scatter plots showed affective empathy scores decreased for only 11.3% of all students; conversely, cognitive scores increased for just 7.8% of all students.
CONCLUSIONS: There is a divergence of empathy scores of just a small subset of students: affective empathy is being blunted, while cognitive empathy scores increase. These results infer that more emphasis needs to be placed in the didactic years and clinical rotations on teaching and showing how to build an empathic bond of trust with patients while blunting affective responses. Complete statistical analyses will be provided at the meeting.

OBSERVED BENEFITS OF GROUP LEARNING THROUGH COLLABORATIVE QUIZZES IN HUMAN ANATOMY

Natascha Heise | Jessica Bergden | Lane Fortney | Alberto Musto | Matt Myers | Richard Gonzalez
Eastern Virginia Medical School | Eastern Virginia Medical School | Eastern Virginia Medical School | Eastern Virginia Medical School | Eastern Virginia Medical School | Eastern Virginia Medical School
PURPOSE: Within the medical field, educators have worked on implementing various assessment tools and active learning strategies to deepen students’ understanding of human anatomy. With the decreased time devoted to the anatomical sciences, educators are challenged how to effectively teach human anatomy. Here, we propose a 9.5-week medical gross anatomy course containing collaborative quizzes coupled with National Board of Medical Examiners (NBME) anatomy-focused unit examinations. We hypothesized that the implementation of collaborative quizzes will enable group learning and ultimately help at-risk students to be better prepared for the NBME unit examinations.
METHODS: During the weekly collaborative quizzes, medical student groups rotated through 20 dissected donor stations, each containing a short clinical or anatomy-related multiple-choice question formatted in NBME style. Students individually answered the question during the first 60 s and then collaboratively discussed the question in their group during the following 90 s. Success was measured by individual student outcomes of six collaborative quizzes, three NBME anatomy-focused unit examinations, and overall course evaluations.
RESULTS: Overall, all students (n = 150) passed the course and performed well on collaborative quizzes and NBME anatomy-focused unit examinations. Course evaluations stated alleviation of stress during the quizzes allowing students to focus on their learning and have a thoughtful dialogue and discussion within their group.
CONCLUSIONS: The collaborative quizzes enabled the students to review the anatomy of their donors and apply their knowledge to clinical case questions in preparation for the NBME anatomy-focused unit examinations. Students were exposed to group discussions, which may have given them the opportunity to identify lack of knowledge areas. This assessment for learning may have especially helped at-risk students. In the future, we hope to continue using this assessment and integrate content from various other courses.

COMPARING STUDENT PERCEPTIONS OF PEER ASSESSMENT IN ONLINE AND ON-CAMPUS LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS

Ravneet Gill | Cortny Williams | Cecelia Martin
University of Western States | University of Western States | University of Western States
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study is to determine the influence of peer assessment on the development of co-regulated learning, as defined by having elements of evaluative judgement and self-regulated learning.
METHODS: Peer assessment is an important element of team-based learning (TBL) in year one of a doctor of chiropractic program (DCP). Peer assessment is also used throughout the DCP curriculum and in the online college of graduate studies programs at the University of Western States (UWS). Using a sequential mixed methods design, qualitative responses assessing student perceptions about team effectiveness during TBL modules were analyzed using the constant comparative method. Based on this analysis, an instrument was developed by modifying questions selected from other validated instruments to assess student perceptions of peer assessment and its impact on co-regulated learning. The survey will be distributed in February 2022.
RESULTS: Thematic analysis of TBL peer assessments supported three phases of co-regulated learning that involves evaluative judgement and self-regulated learning: (a) forethought, in which learners communicate key performance indicators for team effectiveness; (b) preparation and performance with an emphasis on actions to improve; and (c) self-reflection of peer and individual performance. Further, it may be inferred that employment of self-regulated learning skills occurred to adapt to the TBL tasks because the frequency of the theme reasoning skills increased from one peer assessment to the next. Analysis of survey data is forthcoming. Comparisons will be made between the colleges at UWS.
CONCLUSIONS: Students self-reported that they valued communication, preparedness, and reasoning skills in peer assessments. In developing these skills, students are able to critically engage with their peers, which serves to prepare them for future practice in a modern healthcare system with a range of professionals working together to manage health problems.

MEDICAL HUMANITIES, EMPATHY, AND READING HABITS OF FIRST YEAR MEDICAL STUDENTS

Melissa Huddleston | Krupa George | Martine Coue, Ph.D. | Niti Manglik, M.D. | Curt Pfarr, Ph.D.
TTUHSC El Paso | TTUHSC El Paso | TTUHSC El Paso | TTUHSC El Paso | TTUHSC El Paso
PURPOSE: There is evidence that humanities can help cultivate important communication and observational skills for future clinicians and can foster empathy. In this study, we examined the degree to which reading a novella, The Death of Ivan Ilyich, could be used to promote understanding of what empathy is and the role of empathy in medicine.
METHODS: First-year medical students at Paul L. Foster School of Medicine were voluntarily recruited to read this supplementary novella prior to a Colloquium discussion. We used a validated scale, the Toronto Empathy Questionnaire (TEQ), to measure empathy before and after a discussion about the novella. Students provided feedback through a short post-session Experiences and Perceptions survey, which contained Likert and free-response questions to assess student reading habits and perceptions of the value of this short intervention.
RESULTS: Of 125 first-year students, 50 responded to the post-survey questionnaire. Of these, 8 reported reading the full book, and 42 reported reading between 0 and 60%. Most students found the session helpful in defining empathy and identifying empathy as important in medicine; further, students reported increased interest in pain management and learning about palliative care. In terms of empathy measures, there was an average 1.543 increase in TEQ scores between pre- and post- intervention surveys, with a statistically significant paired t-test p value of 0.0133.
CONCLUSIONS: From this small intervention, we learned that even students who did not read the full novella found the discussion useful for reflecting on themes, such as expressing empathy in patient interactions, holistic care of patients, and how to communicate with patients with chronic or terminal conditions. There was also a measurable increase in empathy scores before and after our intervention. Thus, promoting literature reading and engaging medical students in relevant discussions may be a useful way to enhance medical student professional education.

DISTRIBUTION OF NEUROANATOMY CONTENT IN FIRST YEAR MEDICAL HUMAN GROSS ANATOMY

Lane Fortney | Jessica Bergden | Richard Gonzalez | Natascha Heise | Alberto Musto | Matt Myers
Eastern Virginia Medical School | Eastern Virginia Medical School | Eastern Virginia Medical School | Eastern Virginia Medical School | Eastern Virginia Medical School | Eastern Virginia Medical School
PURPOSE: Neuroanatomy education is subjectively covered in first-year undergraduate medical education. Reductions in curricular time, allocation of resources, and emphasis on “high-yield” clinical relevance contribute to the variation. Considering the indivisible anatomical relationship and functionality of gross anatomy and neuroanatomy, the distribution of neuroanatomy content was tracked and examined in a medical first-year gross anatomy course.
METHODS: Within a 9.5-week Human Structure course, the nervous system was introduced via lecture in the first regional block, musculoskeletal. In the second block, head and neck, the spinal cord, fundamentals of neuroanatomy, and sensory and motor systems were introduced to first-year medical students through direct and indirect instruction developed from standardized learning objectives. During the third block, thorax, abdomen, and pelvis emphasis was placed on the regional nervous system and the autonomics. Complementary laboratory sessions were organized into five rotations; brain removal, specialized dissections, models and plastinates demonstrating skull, dura, and cranial nerve pathways, and medical imaging paired with pathological specimens to emphasize clinical significance and ethical considerations.
RESULTS: Student performance was measured through higher-order level exams developed via NBME Customized Assessment Service. Distribution of content was generated and defined by NBME as a discipline and organ system. The neuroscience discipline comprised 17% and the nervous and special senses systems were represented by 51% of the total questions and assessed content for the course. Overall, students performed above the national average on the exams.
CONCLUSIONS: The distribution of neuroanatomy content in first-year medical curricula provides insight into the impact of curricular reform and evaluation of curriculum. It is worth noting, the NBME codes for the questions available dictate how the exams are to be built. Therefore, content distribution mapping is imperative for delivering purposeful instruction, alignment, and providing competent exposure. Quite possibly, this effort will aid students in their subsequent future neuroscience courses.

COMPARISON OF SELF AND TRAINER ASSESSMENTS FOLLOWING A TRAINING COURSE ON VOXEL-MAN TEMPORAL BONE SIMULATOR

E Richards | D McNulty | CL Dalton
Queen Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham, UK | Queen Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham, UK | Queen Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham, UK
PURPOSE: To assess the usefulness of a previously validated objective structured assessment of technical skills (OSATS) tool for mastoid surgery, the Johns Hopkins Assessment of Surgical Competency in ENT (ASCENT) for Mastoidectomy, for assessment of training in mastoid surgery using the VOXEL-MAN (VM) Temporal Bone (TB) simulator, by analysing the strength of association between self and assessor ratings.
METHODS: Candidates attended 3-h VR TB drilling courses held in the West Midlands Deanery VR TB Laboratory between 1 June and 18 November 2021. At the end, course faculty assessed candidate skills, and candidates self-assessed, using the modified Johns Hopkins ASCENT for Mastoidectomy. The latter is divided into a task-based checklist (TBC) and global rating scale (GRS).
RESULTS: Thirty-two junior doctors (21 M:11F), ranging from Foundation Year (FY) 3 to Specialist Trainee (ST) Year 8 completed self-assessments, and were rated by a total of 10 faculty members, with each candidate assessed by between one and three raters (mode = 2). Mixed models indicate highly significant correlation between self and assessor ratings, both for all fourteen sub-sections of the TBC (highest p < 0.006), and all six domains in the GRS (highest p < 0.047). Furthermore, assessor variance components were calculated to be insignificant across all sections of the TBC and all domains in the GRS.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate a strong correlation of self-assessment and faculty-assessment using the modified ASCENT for Mastoidectomy for assessment of mastoidectomy work on the VM TB simulator, with strong congruence of assessor ratings. This suggests the modified ASCENT for Mastoidectomy assessment may be a useful tool for self-directed learning and monitoring of skill progression in simulated temporal bone surgery.

USING THE GRPI MODEL TO TRAIN HIGH FUNCTIONING AND COLLABORATIVE SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH TEAMS

Michelle Jones
University of Kentucky
PURPOSE: Investigators from varied disciplines come together to form research teams that address and solve complex problems. Effective team collaboration requires that members, often trained as independent investigators, share goals, knowledge, and responsibility.1,2 The Igniting Research Collaborations (IRC) program fosters the development of new interdisciplinary research teams. A training program designed to enhance IRC investigators’ knowledge of team science principles will be offered in Winter, 2022.
METHODS: Faculty from all colleges are invited to participate in the IRC program. Investigators from 2 or more different colleges who have not previously collaborated on research form new teams as multi-PI’s, and apply for pilot funding through the IRC program. A networking event is held to foster the development of new teams. A presentation on the value of team science in supporting effective collaboration will be presented to all investigators at the networking event. All IRC teams will be invited to participate in a targeted training program where the GRPI model, an approach to building high-performance teams, will be introduced. 3,4 The model addresses four components for building an effective collaboration: goals, roles, process, and interpersonal relationships. Two months after team formation, follow-up consultations on the use of the GRPI model will take place with the each IRC team. Self-paced electronic microlearning modules describing the GRPI skills will be distributed to all IRC team members.
RESULTS: Twelve and 24-month data on team effectiveness/function and project outcomes will be collected. Team science training evaluations, baseline metrics of the IRC teams, and a description of the GRPI-based team science training program will be provided at IAMSE 2022.
CONCLUSIONS: The GRPI model has been used in educational and business settings since 1970. We believe this model is applicable to team science training, providing a clear approach to creating effectively functioning teams and diagnosing teaming issues.

EVALUATION OF CLINICAL REASONING FROM NOVICES TO EXPERTS USING THE ILLNESS SCRIPT METHOD: A PILOT STUDY

Hannah Bass | Shourya Kumar | Muhammad N. Akram | James Zhang | Dheeraj Reddy | Lauren Fitzgerald | Srujan Kancharla | Amelia Khoo | Kenneth Sims | Peter Lin | Rhome Hughes | Burton F. Dickey | Ericka Greene | Gregg Wells | Nivedita Ganguly | Yun Li | Dan
Engineering Medicine (EnMed), College, Intercollegiate School of Engineering Medicine, College of Medicine, Texas A&M University, Houston TX, 77030, USA | Engineering Medicine (EnMed), College, Intercollegiate School of Engineering Medicine, College of Medicine, Texas A&M University, Houston TX, 77030, USA
PURPOSE: We evaluated a modified script concordance test (SCT) to quantify the clinical reasoning skills in pre-clerkship medical students. The SCT converts implicit clinical reasoning skills into a quantifiable, demonstrable activity, thus effectively quantifying the Dreyfus model of skill development from novices to experts.
METHODS: This SCT presented 4 cases containing ambiguous preliminary information and a respiratory or cardiovascular diagnosis. When presented with additional information, students re-evaluated the diagnosis validity. The SCT modifications were the use of only three Likert choices and justification of their reasoning. These inverse problems involved regressive reasoning (diagnosis to signs/symptoms) and consisted of 10 questions. Participants included clinicians (n = 4), first-year or M1 students (n = 5), and M3 (n = 5) students. Student Likert answers were compared to experts, with similar or concordant responses = 1.
RESULTS: In this pilot with small sample sizes, clinicians performed significantly higher than M1 and M3 (83.3% ± 14.3 vs. 40.0 ± 20.2, and 37.8 ± 12.7; p = 0.003 and 0.0015 respectively, unpaired t-test). Indeed, the answer choices were 60–75% the same/concordant for clinicians, and students in 8/10, and 5/10 questions, respectively. On average, the SCT took 32 ± 14.6 min to complete. Concordance was highest with classical disease presentation. The justification highlighted the differences in thought processes from expert to novice. The clinicians intuitively focused on the key symptoms, and discordance occurred due to mismatches in information. The M3s created a differential diagnosis. The M1s used rules and maxims related to basic science (e.g., smoking = COPD), whereas experts needed more information for diagnosis validation.
CONCLUSIONS: This pilot data from this modified SCT quantitatively differentiated clinical reasoning between expert and novice, and the justification feedback provided insight into the illness script development. Using the SCT in the pre-clerkship allows for metacognition, quantification, visualization, and demonstration of implicit clinical reasoning skills.

STUDENT-CONTRIBUTED CONTENT FOR EXPERIENTIAL ACTIVE LEARNING: A PILOT STUDY

Alexandra Ramos | Paulamy Ganguly | Charles Foster | James Zhang | Helen C. Murray | Yun Li | Thomas V. Peterson | Nick A. Sears | Ian V.J. Murray
Engineering Medicine (EnMed), College, Intercollegiate School of Engineering Medicine, College of Medicine, Texas A&M University, Houston TX, 77030, USA | Engineering Medicine (EnMed), College, Intercollegiate School of Engineering Medicine, College of Medicine, Texas A&M University, Houston TX, 77030, USA
PURPOSE: We piloted a learning activity for a cardiovascular physiology course using Kolb’s experiential learning theory. The activity was designed to engage students through self-directed content development, thus promoting both metacognition and deep learning.
METHODS: First-year engineering medicine students (n = 4) volunteered for the project prior to taking a cardiovascular physiology course. They were given a structured pre-assignment with the following instructions: relate ECG, pulse oximetry, and heart rate data collected from the Arduino connected device (ProtoCentral MAX86150) to cardiovascular concepts; next, reflect on knowledge gaps and create a hands-on activity to assess important physiological concepts. The PI (IVJM) then provided students feedback and requested refinements on the learning activity developed for the course.
RESULTS: Pilot data from 2 participants were heart rate (86.67 ± 2.13; 78.0 ± 0.00 bpm) and R-R interval (0. 70 ± 0.03; 0.76 ± 0.05 ms). The data represent pooled averages and standard deviations of 3 trials of 30 s each. Student feedback on the activity indicated that low-level Arduino and coding knowledge were required. Generating the data aided student comprehension of the heart’s electrical activity, and its relation to the cardiac cycle diagram and valve closure concepts. In collaboration with the faculty, the student-contributed learning activity was developed to expose and fill knowledge gaps.
CONCLUSIONS: Using Kolb’s experiential learning, we integrated real-life data with basic science concepts, identified knowledge gaps, and developed a joint faculty/student learning activity. This pilot study demonstrated the feasibility of using such devices in designing experiential learning for small group learning in medical education.

AN INTERACTIVE WORKSHOP FOR MEDICAL STUDENT TRAINING IN LGBTQ+ HEALTHCARE

Arkene Levy | Daniel Griffin | Samiksha Prasad | Chasity O'Malley
Dr. Kiran C Patel College of Allopathic Medicine, Nova Southeastern University | Dr. Kiran C Patel College of Allopathic Medicine, Nova Southeastern University | Dr. Kiran C Patel College of Allopathic Medicine, Nova Southeastern University | Dr. Kiran C Patel College of Allopathic Medicine, Nova Southeastern University
PURPOSE: Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer, and other (LGBTQ+) individuals experience disparate health outcomes due to multiple factors including discrimination, stigmatization, and reluctance to seek healthcare due to fear of discriminatory treatment by healthcare providers. Marginalization of LGBTQ+ individuals due to structural barriers that limit access to healthcare, also increases the risk for poor mental health outcomes. There is a clear need to increase cultural and structural competencies of medical students to serve LGBTQ+ individuals, but training of this nature is still underrepresented in medical school curricula. We implemented a workshop to train medical students regarding best practices for equitable healthcare for members of the LGBTQ+ community.
METHODS: Second year medical students participated in a 3-h workshop focused on unique aspects of care needed for LGBTQ+ patients. The first hour was an interactive lecture by a physician with extensive experience serving LGBTQ+ patients. The second and third hours involved small group discussions with 6–8 students that centered on clinical case scenarios with LGBTQ+ patients that emphasized best practices for optimal healthcare. Discussions were facilitated by patient guests from the LGBTQ+ community. Facilitators assessed student engagement and professionalism using a rubric developed by the study team. Students’ knowledge and confidence regarding LGBTQ+ health disparities and best healthcare practices was assessed before and following the session.
RESULTS: Fifty-one students participated in the session and 25 (49%) completed the pre/post surveys. There was a significant (p < 0.005) increase in student confidence of their knowledge of LGBTQ+ health disparities and best healthcare practices following the session. Students did not show significant change in knowledge of the topics presented, having initially scored high on the pre-assessment.
CONCLUSIONS: This workshop involving members of the LGBTQ+ community and an experienced physician was effective at increasing student confidence in their knowledge about best practices to ensure improved healthcare outcomes for LGBTQ+ patients.

TO PROSECT OR TO DISSECT: LEARNER PREFERENCE VS. LEARNING OUTCOMES IN A MEDICAL SCHOOL ANATOMY COURSE

Lillian Dyre | Natalie Langley | Jaxon Quillen | Nan Zhang
Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine, Scottsdale, AZ 85259 U.S.A. | Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ 85259 U.S.A. | Department of Quantitative Health Science Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ 85259 U.S.A. | Department of Quantitative Health Science Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ 85259 U.S.A.
PURPOSE: The body of research assessing the effectiveness of prosection versus dissection does not show a definitive advantage of one method over the other as to academic performance. This study broadens the analysis of these teaching methods to include learners’ perspectives on outcomes pertaining to content mastery, wellness, and professionalism.
METHODS: First-year medical students (n = 51) enrolled in a 7-week hybrid prosection (42%) and dissection (58%) course completed a post-course survey about laboratory learning modalities. Students were asked to rate the effectiveness of prosection and dissection for 22 learning outcomes related to content knowledge, teamwork, career preparation, humanistic learning, and wellness. A one-way ANOVA was used to evaluate performance differences on assessments with previous dissection only classes.
RESULTS: The response rate was 51%. Respondents indicated 55% of objectives were accomplished more effectively through dissection, 18% were better accomplished with prosection, and 27% were accomplished equally well by both methods. Students favored dissection for gaining hands-on skills relevant to surgical practice, appreciating anatomical variation, becoming more comfortable handling the human body, engaging in self-directed learning, and fostering teamwork. Respondents felt prosection provided more time for independent study and wellness activities. Prosection and dissection were rated equally effective for developing a medical vocabulary, applying anatomical knowledge to clinical conditions, and gaining a 3D appreciation of the body. There were no statistically significant differences in academic performance related to teaching methods (F(3,195) = 2.65, p = 0.34). A hybrid prosection and dissection course was preferred by 73% of respondents over a solely prosection or dissection course.
CONCLUSIONS: Most objectives evaluated in this study were accomplished more effectively through dissection. However, learners recognize distinct benefits of prosection and dissection and prefer a hybrid course that capitalizes on the strengths of each method. Anatomy curricula should factor learning outcomes and learners’ needs into decisions regarding instructional methods.

A MODEL FOR CRITICL THINKING SKILLS DEVELOPMENT IN A PREMEDICAL MASTER OF SCIENCE PROGRAM

Susan Cline | James Drummond
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Mercer University School of Medicine, Macon, GA 31207 U.S.A. | Department of Biomedical Sciences, Mercer University School of Medicine, Macon, GA 31207 U.S.A.
PURPOSE: ‘Special’ Master’s degree programs designed for premedical academic enhancement may or may not include critical thinking skills development. We have designed a novel, mentored, learning experience for developing critical thinking in biomedical science research and its medical application. This ‘capstone’ course model and its outcomes are described herein.
METHODS: Over 7 years, students in the Master’s program were required to take the course (n = 199), which involved a literature review and a presentation on a research topic including its application to clinical medicine. Students were given guidelines and grading rubrics for the composition and the presentation. Instructor feedback was provided during topic selection and composition background and outline preparation. An example presentation was delivered to guide students in understanding the presentation grading rubric. Each student was assigned a faculty mentor for assistance with advanced scientific concepts, methods, and data interpretation. The mentor and one other faculty member served as a student’s evaluators. Presentations also were evaluated by at least four peers. Written feedback, grades for each assignment, and an overall course grade were given to students. Students completed a course evaluation survey, which included questions about their prior writing and presentation experience and their perception of their critical thinking skills development during the course.
RESULTS: The direct outcomes measures for student development of critical thinking are faculty scores for the ‘rationale’ component of the student presentation and student agreement with the course evaluation question: ‘This course challenged me to think critically about scientific research data and results’. Over 98% of the 199 students taking the course agreed with this question, indicating that students have consistently gained critical thinking skills through this learning experience.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on direct outcomes measures, we feel that the ‘capstone’ course model is an effective learning experience for building critical thinking skills in a premedical Master’s degree program.

EXPLORING THE USE OF CONCEPT MAPPING AS ASSESSMENT FOR LEARNING WITH 1ST YEAR PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT STUDENTS

Munder Zagaar | Weichao
Baylor College of Medicine | Baylor College of Medicine
PURPOSE: Across health professions education, the COVID pandemic has accelerated the adoption of hybrid instruction that combines asynchronous lectures with synchronous class time devoted to active learning. However, hybrid instruction makes identifying learner knowledge gaps and adjusting instruction more challenging for educators. In teaching pharmacology with physician assistant (PA) students, learners often develop misconceptions in attempting to master numerous complex concepts within a short time. Hence, it is critical for educators to effectively implement assessment for learning to provide timely guidance. While research has supported the usefulness of concept mapping in promoting learners’ externalization of their understanding, its implementation as assessment for learning is hampered by the demand on educators to provide timely feedback for learner maps. This project experimented with different strategies of concept mapping to enhance PA students’ learning and assessment of pharmacology topics.
METHODS: Various mapping strategies were adopted in a pharmacology course consisting of a cohort of 38 PA students. Over 4 months, learners engaged in online learning with four synchronous in-person reviews arranged prior to their end-of-month exams. In each session, a different mapping strategy was adopted based on learner feedback, including in-person collaborative mapping, individual computerized mapping-based quiz with automatic feedback, and collaborative computerized mapping-based quiz enhanced by jigsaw strategy.
RESULTS: Initial training was necessary to optimize student learning and assessment with mapping. Computer-generated feedback complemented feedback from peers and the instructor. Learners’ mapping performance informed just-in-time-teaching. Mapping-based assessment was found to be more helpful for remediating struggling students than as a learning tool for all students. We are collecting data to compare the helpfulness of each mapping approach on student learning. Findings from both quantitative and qualitative analyses will be reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on lessons learned, findings from this project will inform best practices for incorporating concept mapping into hybrid instruction.

GREEN INITIATIVES TO IMPROVE THE LEARNING ENVIRONMENT IN THE HUMAN ANATOMY LABORATORY

Matthew Myers | Lane Fortney | Jessica Bergden | Richard Gonzalez | Alberto Musto | Natascha Heise
Eastern Virginia Medical School | Eastern Virginia Medical School | Eastern Virginia Medical School | Eastern Virginia Medical School | Eastern Virginia Medical School | Eastern Virginia Medical School
PURPOSE: Wetting solutions are used in a cadaveric laboratory to reduce tissue dehydration and to aid with the inhibition of microbial growth. Most solutions contain harsh chemicals that affect students and faculty during academic endeavors. Complaints about phenol-based pungent odors, headaches, nausea, and numbing of tongue, face, and hands have been reported while using the King Wetting Solution. This ultimately impacts the educational mission of the anatomy laboratory. To overcome these issues, the wetting solution was switched to Lysol I.C. in compliance with the Virginia State of Anatomical Program.
METHODS: The King Wetting Solution [B11550] utilized on donors located in our facility was replaced with Lysol I.C. to reduce overall phenol exposure and chemical interactions. Wash bottles were used to directly apply the wetting solution to the donors switching it from an aerosol spray bottle. Periodic short-term (15-min) and long-term (8-h) monitoring was conducted by Environmental Health and Safety to identify exposure levels of faculty members and students. Monitoring occurred at the beginning and end of the dissection course.
RESULTS: Short-term and long-term monitoring yielded acceptable levels of phenol throughout the course. The wash bottles enabled direct application of Lysol I. C. onto the donors preventing aerosolizing and inhalation of the chemical. The use of Lysol I.C. as a wetting solution also contributed to the reduction of harmful exposure, while maintaining good educational integrity of the tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: Switching the King Wetting Solution to Lysol I.C. and the utilization of wash bottles maintained tissue quality and improved the overall learning environment. It reduced the adverse reactions of previously reported side effects. Measure of quality control are ongoing and will continue to align with national and statewide environmental health and safety policies to ensure best teaching practices.

EFFECTIVENESS OF COLLABORATIVE LEARNING GROUPS IN MEDICAL EDUCATION

Weston Murdock, Spencer Boster, Dr. Akunyili
Noorda COM
PURPOSE: At Noorda-COM, students self-select into collaborative learning groups called pods and determine their own schedules to provide the autonomy that andragogy requires. Two medical students assessed if groups of three to eight self-selected students responsible for studying content together in a collaborative learning environment would correlate with improved academic performance.
METHODS: We are able to track both the number of students in a given pod, attendance, and participation in the daily formative assessments for daily assigned content. Pods range from 2 to 7 members in size and meet for 3 h per day. The class of 90 was divided into three outcome categories based on performance on summative assessments: top tier (above one standard deviation), average performance (within one standard deviation of the mean), lower tier (below one standard deviation). We also categorized pod attendance. Over 80% attendance in a pod with 3 or more students was collaborative pod learning. Those with either less than 80% attendance, or pods with less than 3 students, as non-collaborative pod learning.
RESULTS: Within the lower tier, more than 90% of the students had non-collaborative pod learning, while within the top tier 90% of the students worked in collaborative pods. Within one standard deviation of the mean, close to 70% of the students worked collaboratively and about 30% did not. Students also reported less mental burn out and fatigue once they engaged in a pod that provided a complementary learning team and an opportunity to work with others at their own choosing.
CONCLUSIONS: The results show that attending pod is strongly correlated with better performance on assessments. There is not a strong correlation between a specific pod style and performance. It appears to be more important that a student consistently attends pod rather than participating in a specific pod learning style.

MEDICAL STUDENTS’ WELLBEING AND BURNOUT IN A CARIBBEAN MEDICAL SCHOOL DURING COVID-19 PANDEMIC

Yuliya Modna | Allen Barbarovich | Mariya Klauber | Steven Stanton
Associate Professor of Physiology at Trinity Medical Sciences University | Medical Student Trinity Medical Sciences University | Medical Student Trinity Medical Sciences University | Medical Student Trinity Medical Sciences University
The modern hospital environment during Covid-19 pandemic has become an increasingly stressful place to work for physicians. While students enter medical school with the goal of helping others, many of them have encountered some degree of burnout during their study.
PURPOSE: To evaluate wellbeing and burnout among medical students in a Caribbean medical school during Covid-19 pandemic.
METHODS: Sixty student-volunteers of TSMU with a similar academic load answered the Maslach Burnout Inventory for Students and the Medical Student Well-Being Index.
RESULTS: The Medical Student Well-Being Index showed 78.5% students felt burned out from medical school, 50% students reported that things piling up so high, 78.5% students felt depressed or hopeless, and 26% students reported that physical health interfered with their ability to do a daily work. The Maslach Burnout Inventory showed that the Emotional Exhaustion (EE) is experienced by 26% of students every day, 24% a few times a week, 31% a few times a month, and 19% a few times a year. Cynicism, which corresponds to experienced burnout, is reported in 9.5% of students every day, 7% a few times a week, 60% a few times a month, and 23.5% a few times a year. Professional efficacy, which reflects personal accomplishment and effectiveness in work, 7% of students indicated that they did work effectively every day, 24% a few times a week, 57% a few times a month, and 12% a few times a year.
CONCLUSIONS: 78.5% of the TMSU students felt burned out from medical school and experienced depression and hopeless, and 57% of students responded that only a few times a month their study goals were accomplished and they studied effectively. Suggestions: provide more institutional services such as open dialogs, support group/community options, academic counselling, and health professionals.

INTEGRATING CULTURAL HUMILITY AND SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH WITHIN THE HUMAN ANATOMY EXPERIENCE

Richard A. Gonzalez | Jessica Bergden | Lane P. Fortney | Natascha Heise | Alberto E. Musto | Matthew S. Myers
Eastern Virginia Medical School | Eastern Virginia Medical School | Eastern Virginia Medical School | Eastern Virginia Medical School | Eastern Virginia Medical School | Eastern Virginia Medical School
PURPOSE: Racial, cultural, and socioeconomic biases have deep historical roots in medical education. The accrediting bodies of U.S. medical schools have recognized the problem and in recent years have added cultural competence standards to medical school accreditation requirements. The human anatomy experience during the preclinical years of medical education can facilitate an environment in which students are exposed to and free to discuss topics relating to empathy, racial, cultural, and socioeconomic biases in medicine.
METHOD: In the fall of 2021, the 9.5-week first-year human anatomy experience was organized into three blocks. Instructors used a multifactorial approach to integrate concepts relating to cultural humility and social determinants of health. These concepts were discussed during lectures, laboratory discussion activities, and were a vital component of end of week case presentations. Collaborative quizzes and end of the block written examinations were also used as evaluations during this module. Students were asked to consider and discuss the personal, social/cultural, and psychological dynamics that contribute to a clinical case. Students drew upon their own awareness, perspectives, and experiences. Literature research, faculty experience, and comments provided in the end of module evaluations facilitated an examination of student reactions concerning these presentations.
RESULTS: Overall, comments ranged from being a very rewarding learning experience to distracting from studying testable material. Strong influences on student perception included (1) pressure to only focus on testable material, (2) institutional culture, (3) curricular time, (4) premedical education, and (5) personal perspective.
CONCLUSIONS: The concept of cultural competence in medical education is problematic because it minimizes cross-cultural human interactions to mere technical skills. A more organic approach can help minimize this concern and enable continued engagement, beginning during the human anatomy experience, by facilitating equal curricular importance throughout the entirety of medical education.

INTRODUCING LONGITUDINAL DISABILITY EDUCATION INTO MEDICAL SCHOOL CURRICULUM

Gabrielle Segal | Carolyn McCrossan
University of Texas Medical Branch | University of Texas Medical Branch
PURPOSE: Roughly one in five people in the U.S. live with a disability, yet medical curricula frequently lack formal disability sensitivity training. We describe our newly created longitudinal disability education for medical students, introduced through modifications to existing curriculum.
METHODS: Early in Year 1, all students participate in a disability awareness panel composed of self-advocates, family members, and medical professionals. Panelists share experiences regarding their lived experience, interactions with PWD, and encounters with health care professionals. Questions from students are encouraged. Ongoing modification of pre-clerkship Problem Based Learning (PBL) cases to represent PWD is underway. In addition to normalizing common medical problems in PWD, these cases prompt discussion about needed interview or physical examination modifications and model respectful language. At the midpoint of the clerkship year, a multi-station workshop is offered. Experiences include an interview with a standardized patient portrayed by a PWD, article review regarding perspectives of PWD, discussion with a self-advocate, and a presentation about special considerations for outpatient treatment of PWD. Final year students can participate in a disability elective. Students have opportunities to work with physicians who treat PWD, complete online educational modules, and volunteer in the community.
RESULTS: Responses to all offerings (through surveys and discussions) have been positive. Year 1 students affirmed new knowledge of life with a disability and enhanced attitudes toward treating PWD. Many students mentioned interest and desire for further training. Addition of PWD to PBL has favorably added to case content. The standardized patients with disabilities reported enjoyment in participating in education and interacting with medical students.
CONCLUSIONS: Our curriculum was lacking in disability education. Recent initiatives to bridge this gap have shown to be well received by students and educational administration. We are aiming to better prepare future physicians to effectively treat this diverse patient population.

INTERPROFESSIONAL PSYCHIATRIC SIMULATION: PREPARING STUDENTS FOR SUCCESS

Cheryl Vanderford, MSPAS, PA-C | Greg Carlisle, MFA | Shelley Irving, MSPAS, PA-C | Leslie Woltenberg, Ph.D.
University of Kentucky | Morehead State University | University of Kentucky | University of Kentucky
PURPOSE: To describe an interprofessional psychiatric patient-provider simulation assessment model and to explore student perception of this experience. Through a pedagogical lens, simulation assesses student capability to apply knowledge gained and engages students in a higher-level mastery of skill. Through a student lens, simulation activities provide hands-on opportunities to practice “real-life” skills in a safe environment.
METHODS: Theater students from Morehead State University (MSU) volunteered to serve as simulated patients for University of Kentucky Physician Assistant (UKPA) students. PA students received in-class lecture on how to conduct thorough psychiatric interviews; in addition, theatre students were provided symptoms of each diagnosis and were encouraged to improvise their role. All student participants were invited to participate in a voluntary, anonymous online survey upon completion of the simulation. The 25-question survey included 3 demographic items, 5-point likert-type items, and three qualitative items to obtain reflection/commentary.
RESULTS: Cronbach’s alpha reliability exhibited exceptional levels of internal consistency for scaled items for knowledge/confidence levels and agreement levels (= 0.981 and 0.999, respectively). A paired samples t-test revealed statistically significant results in pre- vs. post levels of knowledge gained and confidence in the components of a psychiatric interview, conducting a psychiatric interview, and for theatre students, portraying characters diagnosed with a mental health disorder. Furthermore, students who identify as rural indicate they are nearly twice as likely to agree that this activity fostered changes in his/her attitude and/or beliefs related to mental health.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study validates the intentional use of interprofessional students in simulation activities to foster meaningful learning experiences for all. Moreover, incorporation of psychiatric interview simulations into PA curricula show promise to create an inclusive culture for all who struggle with mental health.

PERCEIVED BENEFITS AND DRAWBACKS OF CONSTRUCTED RESPONSE SHORT ANSWER QUESTIONS (CR-SAQS) IN UNDERGRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION PRE-CLERKSHIP ASSESSMENT

Judith Brenner | Jeffrey Bird | Tracy B. Fulton | Marieke Kruidering | Joanne Willey | Klara Papp | Kelli Qua | Doreen Olvet
Donald and Barbara Zucker School of Medicine | Donald and Barbara Zucker School of Medicine | University of California at San Francisco School of Medicine | University of California at San Francisco School of Medicine | Donald and Barbara Zucker School of Medicine
PURPOSE: The purpose of this multi-institutional study was to understand learner and educator perspectives regarding benefits and drawbacks of constructed response short answer questions (CR-SAQ) in pre-clerkship summative assessment. Some US medical schools use CR-SAQ exams to assess students’ medical knowledge, but the benefits of a constructed response assessment can extend beyond simply assessing knowledge1. Studies examining learner and educator perspectives on this topic in medical education are limited1,2. A broader understanding of the views of learners and educators can aid in quality improvement for institutions implementing this type of assessment.
METHODS: This was a mixed methods study at three US medical schools utilizing CR-SAQ exams. We distributed a survey to students in three cohorts (260, 19%) and faculty (57, 48%). Analysis of responses to nine 5-point Likert items based on Norcini’s criteria for good assessment3 provided descriptive statistics. Responses to two open-ended questions were deductively coded using Norcini’s criteria, and thematic analysis yielded qualitative themes.
RESULTS: The quantitative and qualitative results were well aligned. More than 80% of both students and faculty agreed that CR-SAQ exams better represent real-life professional situations (authenticity), positively impact student preparation for exams (educational effect), and improve future student learning and curriculum development (catalytic effect). Drawbacks included the time needed to take and score questions (feasibility), concern that questions are ambiguous (construct validity), and that scoring could be subjective (reproducibility). There were mixed results on the acceptability of this exam format, with respondents listing both benefits and drawbacks.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that the CR-SAQ exam format is beneficial to learner and educators beyond providing measurement of medical knowledge and should be considered by medical educators in their programs of assessment. Some drawbacks were noted, however, and future studies should be aimed at best practices to improve in these areas.

THE POSITIVE IMPACTS OF STRUCTURED MENTORING IN UNDERGRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION

Caryn Hazard | Savannah Whitfield | Todd Coffey | Launa Lynch | Sarah Davis | Brittnee Haynes
Idaho College of Osteopathic Medicine | Idaho College of Osteopathic Medicine | Idaho College of Osteopathic Medicine | Idaho College of Osteopathic Medicine | Idaho College of Osteopathic Medicine | Idaho College of Osteopathic Medicine
PURPOSE: Mentorship has shown a positive impact on medical student success, and maximizing the benefits of mentorship is important in the development of well-rounded medical students. Herein, we identify sources of mentorship within the undergraduate medical education system at the Idaho College of Osteopathic Medicine (ICOM) and compare the subjective growth of the inaugural and second classes in three domains: personal and professional development (PPD), stress reduction (SR), and ease of transition into medical school (ET).
METHODS: An IRB-approved, SurveyMonkey survey was distributed to ICOM students with questions pertaining to unidentifiable demographics, sources of mentorship, and 5-point Likert scales assessing characteristics related to the three domains. We hypothesized that all sources of mentorship can aid growth within these domains, and that inaugural class students experienced less growth in all three domains due in part to lack of an on-campus peer mentorship (PM) program.
RESULTS: Of twenty-three respondents, the second class (n = 9) rated their growth higher in all three domains than the inaugural class (n = 14). The inaugural class utilized the faculty mentor most (78.57%) followed by informal PM (71.42%). The second class utilized on-campus PM most (100%) followed by faculty mentors and informal PM (77.78%). Students who utilized their faculty mentor reported the greatest mean growth in PPD (0.442) and ET (0.560) while students who utilized on-campus PM reported the greatest mean growth in SR (0.865). Growth in all domains improved for students who utilized any form of mentorship considered, except informal PM in which utilization correlated with less growth.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that the sources of mentorship variably influence PPD, SR, and ET. The benefits of on-campus PM may not have been satisfied by other sources of mentorship due to this variability. This data may help optimize medical school mentorship programs to improve student outcomes.

4TH YEAR MEDICAL STUDENT ELECTIVE INTEGRATING ANATOMY AND RADIOLOGY AS PREPARATION FOR RESIDENCY

Alexa Hryniuk
University of Manitoba
PURPOSE: On average, only 5% of total teaching time in medical education is dedicated to radiology, which does not adequately fulfill students' learning needs and potentially leaves them underprepared for residency. Benefits of integrating radiology and anatomy includes improved clinical application of anatomy, an increase in student’s interest in anatomy, and ultimately improved radiological interpretation. This study looks at combining radiology and anatomy teaching in a 4th year medical student elective as a preparatory course before residency.
METHODS: A 4th year medical elective, Regional Anatomy in Diagnostic Imaging, was created for students to review regional anatomy and apply anatomical knowledge to clinical imaging. Students completed online learning modules, assignments and quizzes before coming to in-person laboratories. Laboratories consisted of anatomical review on cadaveric specimen, interactive media and radiology case studies. Upon completion of the course, students (n = 16; 76%) completed a questionnaire containing Likert scale and open-ended questions regarding motivation for taking the course, evaluation of course format and knowledge gained.
RESULTS: Most students choosing the 4th year elective had applied to residencies in emergency medicine, family medicine and internal medicine. From the survey results, students stated their motivation for participating in the course was to review anatomy and improve diagnostic image reading skills. Students indicated that the course increased anatomical knowledge (4.9 ± 0.13), helped relate anatomy to radiological imaging (4.8 ± 0.19), increased confidence in interpreting imaging (4.9 ± 0.13) and helped students prepare for residency (4.7 ± 0.3). Students lauded the diversity of learning resources and noted the clinical cases aided in consolidating information learned.
CONCLUSIONS: It appears that combining radiological resources and teaching along with traditional anatomy in a blended approach is beneficial as a 4th year elective. Students reviewed and gained knowledge in both disciplines while applying that knowledge to clinical scenarios as preparation for their residency programs.

MASTER STUDENT ATTITUDES AND KNOWLEDGE OF OSTEOPATHIC MEDICINE: COMPARING VIRTUAL TO IN-PERSON DELIVERY OF A NOVEL STUDENT-DESIGNED CURRICULUM

Nicole A. Wong, MSBS, OMS III | Jessica P. Harper, OMS III | Lindsay M.Ellson, OMS III | Gage E. Williamson, OMS IV | Kristin Putnam, DO | Joel Roberts, MD
Rocky Vista University | Rocky Vista University | Rocky Vista University | Rocky Vista University | Rocky Vista University | Rocky Vista University
PURPOSE: More than 25% of medical students are training to become physicians as doctors of osteopathy (DO) yet pre-medical students and medical professionals lack knowledge about differences between DOs and MDs, osteopathic education, and the use of Osteopathic Manipulative Medicine (OMM). Combined with the recent utilization of virtual learning, we gave a three-part lecture series to a group of Master of Sciences in Biomedical Sciences (MSBS) students for two consecutive years. In 2020, the lectures were virtual; in 2021, the lectures were in-person. Impacts of virtual versus in-person learning of OMM for pre-medical students have not been well described and may provide significant opportunities to educate non-DOs about the profession. This study compares pre- and post-survey data to determine if delivery methods affect knowledge and attitudes towards OMM.
METHODS: Pre-doctoral fellows of the OMM department are responsible for teaching lab and lecture materials to first- and second-year medical students. They designed a curriculum and presented it to two cohorts of MSBS students in consecutive years. Topics included (1) what is osteopathic medicine; (2) how OMM is used to benefit patients; and (3) an OMM demonstration. Anonymous pre-post surveys assessed participants’ understanding of OMM, the differences between a DO and an MD, and their likeliness to receive care from or refer a loved one to a DO. A grading rubric was designed to give a numerical value to answers, each survey was graded by a fellow, an MD, and a DO, and the scores were averaged for each answer. The data from 2020 and 2021 are currently being analyzed.
CONCLUSIONS: This information will help determine most effective formats for engaging audiences with minimal knowledge of DOs and OMM. This study could be a basis for developmental workshops within educational institutions, clinical environments, and community awareness campaigns.

IN-HOUSE QUIZZES HAVE PREDICTIVE VALUE FOR MS2 STUDENT PERFORMANCE ON NBME CUSTOMIZED EXAMS

Chris M. Brasel
University of Oklahoma- Tulsa, School of Community Medicine
PURPOSE: This study assesses the degree to which low-stakes, in-house quizzes predict MS2 student performance on NBME customized exams.
METHODS: During the Cardiovascular, Respiratory, and Renal (CRR) Systems course, MS2 students (n = 168) were assessed weekly with low-stakes, faculty-written quizzes. Three quizzes, each consisting of about 20 multiple-choice questions, were given during each organ system block. Prior to each quiz, students were provided a 6–7 page study guide containing concise, high-yield course content. Students were told the quizzes would only assess content on the study guides. At the conclusion of each course block, students were summatively assessed with a customized NBME exam. Faculty selected exam questions reflective of high-yield content. Last, for each course block, the mean of each student’s 3 quiz scores was determined. A Pearson correlation coefficient was then calculated between the mean quiz scores and exam scores.
RESULTS: In general, there was a moderate, positive relationship between students’ quiz scores and their customized NBME exam scores (cardiovascular block: = 0.59; respiratory block: = 0.61; renal block: = 0.61). When the mean of all the quizzes in the course was compared with the mean of all the exams, the correlation was stronger (all blocks: = 0.70).
CONCLUSIONS: The in-house quizzes for the CRR course had several goals: (1) to encourage students to keep up with the fast pace of the course, (2) to encourage students to learn high-yield facts, (3) to build student confidence, and (4) to help the students prepare for the NBME customized exams. This study demonstrates some success with the last goal as there was a moderate, positive relationship between students’ quiz and customized NBME exam scores.

TEACHING IMMUNOLOGY TO FIRST YEAR MEDICAL STUDENTS: SELF-DIRECTED STUDY VERSUS IN-CLASS DIDACTIC LECTURES

Andrew Wilson | Ronnie Joseph | Edward Simanton | Daman Samrao | Dale Netski
Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV, Las Vegas, NV, 89102, U.S.A. | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV, Las Vegas, NV, 89102, U.S.A. | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV, Las Vegas, NV, 89102, U.S.A. | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV, Las Vegas, NV, 89102, U.S.A.
PURPOSE: Students accepted to medical school come from diverse backgrounds with a variable knowledge base in different subjects. Immunology is one such subject, with some students having no prior immunology and others having a semester or more of instruction. This year, to address this diversity, we piloted a faculty-guided, self-directed learning strategy using recorded media and extracurricular resources to teach immunology.
METHODS: The current study compares immunology exam performance among all five cohorts of our new medical school. Each class had 2 weeks of immunology instruction, which included 6 h of immunology Problem-Based Learning cases per week. The first three classes (2021–2023) had 8–10 h/week of in-class didactic-based lectures. Due to COVID-19, the 2024 cohort was entirely virtual, receiving asynchronous recorded lectures. This year’s cohort (2025) had no in-class didactic lectures but had 4 h/week of mandatory in-person sessions consisting of faculty-guided strategies to learn the material with extracurricular resources. NBME exam performance, our mode of pre-clinical phase assessment, was compared to national averages, and relative performance was compared between cohorts to assess outcomes.
RESULTS: To date, five cohorts have completed the 2-week immunology curriculum. Each cohort except the 2024 class performed above the national average on the immunology NBME exam questions. When comparing the mean differences of exam scores between the cohorts, only the 2024 class performance was significantly lower than all other cohorts. We found no significant differences in exam performance when comparing the 2021–2023 and 2025 cohorts.
CONCLUSIONS: Regardless of how each cohort was expected to learn immunology, NBME exam performance remained similar, excluding the 2024 COVID-19 cohort. This data suggests that our hypothesis that a faculty-guided, self-directed approach is an efficient means to teach medical students immunology. It also indicates that entirely virtual curriculums may not be as efficient at teaching medical students.

PRECLINICAL NEUROSCIENCE EDUCATION IN THE UNITED STATES: OPPORTUNITIES FOR EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH

Audra Schaefer | Ellen Robertson | Lauren Fletcher
University of Mississippi Medical Center | University of Mississippi Medical Center | University of Mississippi Medical Center
PURPOSE: Neuroscience in the preclinical medical curriculum includes content from multiple basic sciences and clinical disciplines. Due to the diverse nature of the subject in clinical application and scientific foundation, research on the topic is found across a wide range of journals, making it difficult to stay abreast of current educational advances. This abstract describes the present findings and ongoing analysis of a scoping literature review, which aims to map the current educational research and identify the opportunities for future research in preclinical neuroscience courses.
METHODS: The authors conducted a literature search of 5 online databases (PubMed, ERIC, PsycINFO, Web of Science, Google Scholar). A team of six researchers was screened with the set inclusion criteria, and each reference was screened by a minimum of two researchers. The final set of included articles is undergoing analysis to generate a map of the literature.
RESULTS: The initial search yielded 4633 results. Initial screening of titles and abstracts narrowed the included references to 517 results. These underwent full-text screening, and articles were excluded because they did not pertain to medical trainees (130) or preclinical medical students (73), were not neuroanatomy or neuroscience-focused (67), were not written in English (3), were not research (100), were conducted outside of the USA (81), or were inaccessible or a duplicate (4). Of these, 59 full-text articles are presently going through qualitative analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this scoping literature review will synthesize the present research findings in preclinical medical neuroscience education in the USA and identify the opportunities for future educational research to be conducted.

CADAVERIC CLINICAL INTEGRATION: AN INNOVATIVE SELF-DIRECTED LEARNING ACTIVITY TO INTEGRATE BASIC SCIENCE, CLINICAL MEDICINE, AND MEDICAL INNOVATION

Leslie Day | Ericka Greene | Bhargavi Patham | Michael Paolini II | Nick Sears
Texas A&M Univeristy - ENMED Program, Houston, TX | Houston Methodist, Houston, TX | Houston Methodist, Houston, TX | Texas A&M Univeristy - ENMED Program, Houston, TX | Texas A&M Univeristy - ENMED Program, Houston, TX
PURPOSE: The Liaison Committee on Medical Education (LCME) requires that the pre-clerkship medical curriculum include self-directed learning (SDL) activities for the goal of fostering self-reflection, metacognitive ability, and lifelong learning skills. SDL was implemented during the first semester of the pre-clerkship curriculum of the Engineering Medicine (ENMED) program at Texas A&M College of Medicine as part of an integrated practice-based learning activity involving four concurrent courses; Gross Anatomy (MGA), Foundations of Medicine which includes histology and physiology (FOM), Practice of Medicine that includes physical examination (POM), and Engineering Innovation (ENGR).
METHODS: Forty-nine students enrolled at ENMED were divided into 7 groups, based on the cadaveric dissection assignments for the practice-based learning activity. Over the 16-week MGA course, students documented the pathologic findings and medical interventions during dissection and correlated the findings to the knowledge gained in the concurrent courses of FOM, POM, and ENGR. Throughout the course, individual students were required to address a clinical question based on pathologic findings and present their summary of their research based on the PICO format. The activity culminated with each group submitting a written forensic clinical summary, a written reconstructed comprehensive patient encounter at 1-year prior to death, and 15-min oral presentation of their findings, along with the analysis of the clinical need and potential medical innovations that could have improved the patient’s outcome or quality of life.
RESULTS: Forty-seven out of 49 students successfully completed all aspects of the project. Students reported appreciation for horizontal integration across content areas and an overall high satisfaction with the project. The student presentations demonstrated high level of integration and understanding of healthcare needs pertinent to their cadaver.
CONCLUSIONS: The innovative, longitudinal, multi-disciplinary endeavor increased the value of cadaveric dissection and integration of material across several courses. It fostered an intrinsic curiosity and self-directed learning attitude.

IDENTIFYING HEALTH DISPARITIES AMONG TRANSGENDER PELVIC CANCER PATIENTS: A GROUNDED-THEORY THEMATIC META-ANALYSIS APPROACH

Anastasia Filimonov | Estefania Rivera | David Flynn | Jonathan Wisco
Boston University School of Medicine | Cornell University | Boston University School of Medicine | Boston University School of Medicine
PURPOSE: Underserved and minority groups are among the most vulnerable to developing pelvic cancers, and it is imperative to study race and ethnicity, sex, sexual orientation and gender identity in clinical practice. The objective of this study was to determine the barriers that transgender pelvic cancer patients, specifically, face and to identify gaps in the literature that may indicate directions for future research, and to advise healthcare professionals on the importance of health disparities and inclusive patient education.
METHODS: We used grounded-theory thematic meta-analysis in our research to identify health disparities among pelvic cancer patients. We generated primary codes from social determinants of health that served as PubMed boolean search terms to gather literature pertaining to factors that impact healthcare access amongst pelvic cancer patients. We developed secondary codes as themes from the initial results to focus on clinical experiences. We developed tertiary codes identifying intersections between clinical care themes specific to transgender healthcare access.
RESULTS: Our total search for health disparities in pelvic cancer resulted in 410 papers, of which 49 focused on physician education, 30 on diagnostic screening, 11 on patient education, 9 on LGBTQIA+ . From these, 22 papers related to barriers in healthcare access among transgender pelvic cancer patients. This shows the paucity of research in these topics. We found that lack of physician education on these topics, and sociocultural bias contributes to delay or absence of healthcare access for LGBTQIA+ individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: This work emphasizes the impact clinicians have for healthcare education. Our future research will find ways to address health disparities that pelvic cancer patients face, develop strategies in diagnosing and treating pelvic cancer, and inform healthcare professionals and curricula on the importance of socioeconomic, sociocultural, and communication in patient-centered care.

IF YOU BUILD IT, WILL THEY COME? LESSONS LEARNED FROM DEVELOPING A MOBILE APP FOR HISTOLOGY

Jonathan Fisher | Emil Maric | Sarah Donohue | Jenna Regan | Kyle Formella | Jakob Plotts | Eric Ou | Jeffrey Cheung
University of Illinois College of Medicine Peoria | University of Illinois College of Medicine Peoria | University of Illinois College of Medicine Peoria | University of Illinois College of Medicine Peoria | JUMP Simulation Center | JUMP Simulation Center
PURPOSE: Electronic learning aids for medical education are expanding rapidly, and educational mobile applications (apps) are becoming more popular at all training levels. We developed a novel app to supplement student learning of gastrointestinal (GI) histology during the first year of our undergraduate medical curriculum.
METHODS: The Histology Game was developed using Unity software. The app contained explore mode to supplement histology classes and gaming mode with multiple choice questions. The gaming mode had three difficulty levels with 30 questions each, and questions were randomized for each use of the app. Half the students gained app access in the first 3 weeks of the GI course (group A) while the control group gained access 3 weeks prior to the exam (group B). App users completed a 20-item test to assess knowledge before and after app introduction. Further information on app usage was evaluated using an anonymous survey and student interviews.
RESULTS: Sixty-three of 301 first-year students installed the app and 50 filled out the survey. Both A and B groups showed improvements on the post-test, but the difference in improvement was significantly higher for group A (p = 0.035). Forty-four of 50 surveyed students rated the app 3 or more stars out of 5, 34/50 students said the game mode was the most valuable feature, and 37/50 students said they would use the app to study even after the final exam. Students requested more organ systems be incorporated and recommended introducing the app during class to increase use.
CONCLUSIONS: Student adoption of the app was low even with favorable reviews. The group with app access showed significant increases in post-test scores compared to the group without the app. During development we learned the importance of close contact with programmers, being flexible with design, and recruiting student feedback at multiple points.

MAXIMIZING LEARNING OPPORTUNITIES WITH THE USE OF PRERECORDED SIMULATION FOR IN-PERSON OR REMOTE LEARNING

Mark Hernandez | Martin Clemmons | Deanna Averett | John Giannini
Alabama College of Osteopathic Medicine | Alabama College of Osteopathic Medicine | Alabama College of Osteopathic Medicine | Alabama College of Osteopathic Medicine
PURPOSE: In 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, health sciences educators around the world had to rapidly innovate to continue to deliver authentic educational experiences that are meaningful for their students. We previously showed that teaching with the use of pre-recorded simulation scenes can be an effective pedagogy during in-person teaching. Here we pursued an alternative hybrid approach with the aid of online learning platforms in combination with video conferencing tools for use of the previously developed pre-recorded simulated scenes to promote active learning experiences.
METHODS: We previously developed several pre-recorded scenes which had been used in the past several years to create meaningful learning experiences during in-person teaching. For this study, we selected pre-recorded scenes which were embedded onto an active learning platform (Top Hat) as part of a clinical presentation. With the aid of video conference software (Zoom), access to pre-recorded scenes and online activities was made available to student groups. Student groups, using social distancing guidelines, also met in-person to complete different clinical cases involving pre-recorded scenes. Voluntary Likert-style questions for student satisfaction were then distributed.
RESULTS: Although pre-recorded clinical cases had been developed and used previously to create unique experiences during in-person teaching and/or during team-based learning. With the aid of video conferencing technology and other commercially available active learning platforms, we found a new use for pre-recorded simulated scenes during remote teaching.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of pre-recorded simulated scenes, with the aid of video conferencing tools and online active learning platforms can be an alternative for providing unique and meaningful active learning experiences while teaching remotely.

ENHANCING PHYSICAL EXAM CLINICAL SKILLS IN MEDICAL EDUCATION VIA A BOOTCAMP EXPERIENCE

Anne Crowner | Jennifer Stiff, MD, FAAP | Susan Sawning, MSSW | Emily Noonan, PhD | Jennifer Daily, MD | Craig Zeigler, PhD | Jennifer Stephens, MEd | Emily Carr, MA
Medical Student, University of Louisville School of Medicine | University of Louisville School of Medicine | University of Louisville School of Medicine | University of Louisville School of Medicine | University of Louisville School of Medicine | University of Louisville School of Medicine
PURPOSE: Due to disruptions of COVID-19, two medical classes must learn hands-on physical exam maneuvers in 2021–22, creating an increased need for instructors. Therefore, we cultivated peer teachers through a Summer 2021 physical exam boot camp (PEB), which has been shown to improve the knowledge and confidence of medical and dental students. The study’s aim is to determine if PEB participation increases student comfort with and knowledge of physical exam clinical skills.
METHODS: A PEB was offered to ULSOM Class of 2024 students and involved working with standardized patients to learn and practice physical exam maneuvers, with the goal of having participants serve as peer teachers in 2021–22. A pre- and post-PEB survey using Likert scale responses and a ten-question quiz on physical exam skills knowledge were utilized to measure students’ comfort with and knowledge of physical exam techniques. Twenty-four students were randomly selected to participate in the PEB; 21 attended. Wilcoxon signed ranked test compared Likert items pre- and post- (n = 14) for both participants and nonparticipants. A summation of the 10-question knowledge-based quiz was analyzed using repeated measures ANOVA. Statistical significance was set by convention at p < 0.05. Four PEB students participated in a post-experience focus group.
RESULTS: Participants had significant pre- to post- improvement on the knowledge quiz, p < 0.001. Participants reported improved confidence, understanding and recall for all clinical skills, p < 0.05 to p < 0.001, depending on specific skill, except for “recalling how to take an accurate heart rate.” Non-participants did not significantly improve.
CONCLUSIONS: The PEB increased participants’ confidence with and knowledge of physical exam skills, as well as helped them understand how to demonstrate these. Participants are now acting as peer teachers in physical exam skills labs for two classes of medical students. PEB instruction can develop peer teachers and serve as an important intervention to provide additional support in physical exam skills labs.

IDENTIFY AT-RISK STUDENTS AT EARLY STAGE OF THE MEDICAL SCHOOL

Shiyuan Wang
Rowan University School of Osteopathic Medicine
PURPOSE: Struggling medical students often face academic, mental and financial difficulties. The purpose of this study is to look at the relationship between first year medical school performance in an integrative system-based curriculum and COMLEX Level 1 performance to find areas that can help identify at-risk students at early stage of their medical school, so the school can intervene early and allocate sufficient supporting resources to help them succeed.
METHODS: Performance data from 205 students who took COMLEX Level 1 in 2021/22 testing cycle were analyzed. A series of T-tests were used to compare the number of exam failures and whole course failures between those who passed and failed the Level 1. Specific pattern and profile of course failure was also analyzed among those who failed Level 1 to identify the content area that can best predict at-risk students.
RESULTS: Students who failed Level 1 had an average of 8 exam failures which was significantly more than those who passed Level 1 (an average of 3 exam failures). Particularly, 30.8% of them (who failed Level 1) failed at least 1 course in the first three courses at beginning of their medical school, and 7.7% of them failed both of the first two courses.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that in the first several weeks of the medical school, those who are likely to struggle with their first board exam already showed the sign of academic risk. Results will be used to guide school policy and allocate resources accordingly to help struggling students at the early stage of their medical school.

INTERPROFESSIONAL EDUCATION (IPE): IMPACT OF ACTIVE PATIENT ENGAGEMENT ON STUDENT PARTICIPATION AND PERCEPTION

Parth Desai | Mark J. Hernandez | Joseph D. Baker
Alabama College of Osteopathic Medicine | Alabama College of Osteopathic Medicine | Alabama College of Osteopathic Medicine
PURPOSE: Interprofessional Education (IPE) has become increasingly emphasized as an important aspect of medical education. The premise of IPE involves students of different healthcare professions working together in collaborative sessions. The hope among medical educators is to create IPE events that build a strong foundation in aspects of teamwork and communication. This study aims to investigate trends in both satisfaction and participation in IPE among graduating osteopathic medical school seniors. Moreover, this study aims to identify the reasons for these trends, including curricular design.
METHODS: The annual national data of graduating seniors published by the American Association of Colleges of Osteopathic Medicine (AACOM) was analyzed for response trends to selected survey questions regarding IPE. The three main areas of focus included participation in IPE, setting/type of IPE events students participated in, and overall satisfaction in IPE events.
RESULTS: Analysis of the data for the past decade indicated that students are participating in more IPE events; however, student perception of benefit from these events has decreased. Furthermore, among the events that were implemented, it was seen that events classified as “Active Engagement with Patients” saw a steady decline mirroring the same years that student benefit was declining. From these trends, a correlation study was run between Active Patient Engagement IPE events and Student Perception of IPE yielding a 0.99 correlation constant R-value.
CONCLUSIONS: The data highlight a concerning trend as graduating osteopathic medical students are participating in more IPE events, but do not find the events as beneficial. Further investigation will be necessary on the impact of a reduction in “Active Patient Engagement” events and their impact on student benefit from IPE events. Overall, these trends of IPE across the past decade and potential reason of curricular design can provide insight into future IPE design and research.

MEDICAL STUDENTS’ EXPERIENCE WITH AN ONLINE SARS-COV-2/COVID-19 ELECTIVE

Jessica Chacon | Houriya Ayoubieh | Jorge Cervantes | Cynthia Perry | Curt Pfarr
Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center El Paso | Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center El Paso | Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center El Paso | Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center El Paso, Paul L. Foster School of Medicine, El Paso, TX 79905 U.S.A. | Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center El Paso
PURPOSE: We developed an online elective: “COVID-19: Utilizing basic sciences to implement what you need to know as a physician.” This was the first online elective course developed at Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center Paul L Foster School of Medicine that aimed to increase student knowledge of COVID-19.This elective was designed to enable students to further their understanding of COVID-19 through directed self-study prompts that required them to research the latest scientific literature.
METHODS: The online SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 elective consisted of an interactive discussion board, and student presentation to faculty and peers with a question and answer session. Students addressed 6 topics: (1) Clinical features; (2) At risk populations; (3) Modalities for detection; (4) Management plan for infected patients; (5) Approaches at vaccine development for COVID-19; (6) Novel COVID-19 therapies.
RESULTS: Edical students who completed the elective agreed it enhanced their knowledge regarding SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 and their readiness to manage patients with COVID-19 disease during residency. Ninety-five percent of students felt more knowledgeable about management plan for a patient with a confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection. Ninety-percent of students agreed that the amount of information covered in the elective was appropriate to fill SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 gaps in knowledge. All students agreed that they felt more knowledgeable about the modalities for detection of SARS-CoV-2. Seventy-five percent of students strongly agreed/agree the elective enabled them to critically think about developing a novel therapy for SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19. Ninety-five percent of students felt more knowledgeable about the at-risk populations for SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19.
CONCLUSIONS: Virtual electives that tackle basic science and clinical questions may be an effective substitute when clinical activities are limited because of pandemics and/or other disasters that disrupt medical education. Limitations: it is unknown if students who participated in the elective felt more competent taking care of patients with COVID-19 disease once clinical restrictions were lifted.

COLLABORATIVE ASSESSMENT IN THE GROSS ANATOMY LAB

Nathan Rotundo | Felicia Bozman | Ryan Tubbs | Amber Heard-Booth
MSU CHM | MSU CHM | MSU CHM | MSU CHM
PURPOSE: Collaborative learning is increasingly employed as an instructional modality in undergraduate medical education, while assessment continues to be an individual exercise. Two-stage examinations, where students complete an exam individually before completing the same exam collaboratively in assigned groups, were incorporated into the MSU-CHM gross anatomy curriculum in 2018. Previous analysis demonstrated that students’ performance improved during the collaborative stage, and analysis of post-assessment comments revealed themes related to benefits of and barriers to collaborative testing. Here, we use a mixed-method approach to further investigate the feasibility and student experience of two-stage examinations in the gross anatomy lab.
METHODS: Three student cohorts were assessed at the end of their first-year anatomy experience utilizing the two-stage examination. Students were invited to complete a survey regarding their experience. A subset of survey respondents volunteered to provide additional insight through semi-structured interviewing. Interviewers explored the students’ perceptions of collaboration, value of immediate feedback, and barriers to achieving a consensus.
RESULTS: Survey results indicate the majority of students found the two-stage exam to be a positive experience. Student comments suggest that group collaboration during the exam contributes significantly to the educational experience, retention, and understanding of the tested material. However, students that performed in the highest quartile during the individual exam were more likely to earn a lower score during the group examination, indicating that group dynamics during collaborative assessment are complex.
CONCLUSIONS: Two-stage examinations provide an opportunity to incorporate collaborative assessment into the gross anatomy lab. The collaborative stage of the examination was rich with active discussion. Students enhanced the educational experience through peer-to-peer teaching, resulting in deeper understanding and clarification of misconceptions. Groups were able to move quickly through the exam while reaching a consensus in the allotted time frame. The increase in scores on group exams demonstrates the value of collaboration during assessment activities and most students valued this experience.

DEI INITIATIVES IN A NEW OSTEOPATHIC MEDICAL CURRICULUM

Douglas J. Koch, EdD | Valerie Cadet, PhD | Stacie Fairley, PhD
Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine | Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine, Georgia | Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine, South Georgia
PURPOSE: The purpose of this session is to describe the efforts taken by the Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine to implement and measure diversity, equity, and inclusion in the Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine program. In 2021, PCOM consolidated the three medical campuses into one centrally administered program. With this consolidation, a concerted effort was made to address the needs of diverse students and populations through curricular changes, hiring and retention practices, and training and development initiatives.
METHODS: Guided by PCOM’s 2025 Strategic Plan, the President’s Commission on Racial Justice, training and development initiatives offered through the Office of Human Resources and the Department of Diversity and Community Relations, as well as a newly created Medical Education Center of Excellence department, the medical program implemented their new curriculum in 2021.
RESULTS: Some of the efforts undertaken by the college include recruiting and retaining diverse faculty and staff; enhancing a climate of respect and inclusion; launching workgroups focused on addressing issues related to underrepresented minorities in healthcare, bias and discrimination reporting, and a retention plan geared towards underrepresented minorities; LGBTQIA+ training for faculty, staff, and students, an unlearning racism program, and a cultural competency certificate; the creation of a Director of Health Equity Curricular initiatives position, the review of assessments through the lens of DEI to include images of diverse populations, reducing bias, and evenly distribution gender in questions, implementing a course evaluation to assess diversity efforts in the program, and including a diversity statement in syllabi.
CONCLUSIONS: Preliminary data suggests that students recognize the importance of DEI and respond positively to the program's efforts. Updated data will be presented at the conference.

FACTORS ASSOCIATED WITH MEDICAL RESIDENTS’ ACADEMIC ATTRITION IN POSTGRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION

Carlos Felix Arce | Mary Ana Cordero Diaz | Antonio Davila Rivas | Ana Lucia Melchor
Tecnologico de Monterrey, School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Mexico | Tecnologico de Monterrey, School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Mexico | Tecnologico de Monterrey, School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Mexico
PURPOSE: A main challenge in postgraduate medical education is how to prevent academic attrition and increase medical residents’ retention to successfully complete their medical specialty program. Studies have described factors associated with severe thoughts of deserting residency including the strong relationship between burnout, depression symptoms, and career-choice regret.
METHODS: The objective of this study was to analyze and correlate collected data from medical residents’ desertion in the Multicentric Program of postgraduate medical education in northern Mexico. The participants in this study include six training centers in 17 medical specialties programs. A transversal retrospective and descriptive analysis was made; data was collected from interview answers made at the moment of desertion.
RESULTS: Since 2014, a total of 40 medical residents have deserted from 10 of the 17 total programs. The program “Quality of Care of Medical Care” had the highest rate of desertion (n = 13 [32.5%]), being 2020 the year with most desertions from this program (n = 6) and experiencing at least one desertion since 2017 to 2021. General surgery has had 6 residents’ desertions and at least one desertion in 5 of the 8 years analyzed.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggested that nonclinical specialties may have a higher attrition ratio than surgical ones, and that the main factors mentioned by residents who quit the programs were burnout, mental health issues and career-choice regret. More data needs to be obtained to find accurate risk factors associated with residency desertion. Next steps will also focus in the design of a comprehensive strategy to prevent academic attrition and promote a clinical learning environment that reinforces wellbeing, selfcare and mentoring.

AN INTEGRATED APPROACH TO TEACHING ACID–BASE HOMEOSTASIS IN A TWO-PASS, SPIRAL CURRICULUM

Robert B Mackin, PhD | Leslie C Watters, MD | Donald W Scott, MD
AU/UGA Medical Partnership | AU/UGA Medical Partnership | AU/UGA Medical Partnership
PURPOSE: The AU/UGA Medical Partnership is a branch of the Medical College of Georgia with an innovative curriculum that integrates basic science and clinical medicine. Our spiral, organ-based pre-clerkship curriculum emphasizes normal structure and function in the first year and abnormal states in the second year. While this approach has advantages, it created challenges for teaching acid-based homeostasis across the two years. We recently set out to improve the teaching of acid–base homeostasis within our curriculum.
METHODS: Three faculty members with overlapping expertise, a biochemist, a pulmonologist and a gerontologist, alternated group discussion with individual deconstruction of their respective areas. The goal of these sessions was to develop a series of teaching activities that would allow students to develop diagnostic expertise by combining the principles of human biology with simple algebra.
RESULTS: We began by agreeing to utilize the Henderson-Hasselbalch model of acid–base homeostasis in place of the Stewart model. Lab values are interpreted using a standardized set of equations instead of a nomogram. And a set of reference values was agreed so that calculations performed by different individuals would be concordant. In terms of timing, students were taught basic biochemistry in their first semester, physiology and simple acid–base disorders were introduced early in their second semester, and a few examples of mixed disorders were provided later that semester. During their third semester, students were given a review of basic principles along with both guided and independent problem solving of more advanced, mixed disorders.
CONCLUSIONS: In this scholarship of integration report, we outline a unified approach to improve the teaching of acid–base homeostasis in our curriculum. We will also share the lessons we learned about our process. Future studies include measuring the effectiveness of this new arrangement via testing outcomes and a student survey.

CORRELATION BETWEEN MEDICAL STUDENT PERFORMANCE ON LOW-STAKES, FORMULATIVE, FREQUENT QUIZZING V. HIGHER STAKES SUMMATIVE COURSE EXAMS

Jennifer Brown | Alice Akunyili
Noorda College of Osteopathic Medicine | Noorda College of Osteopathic Medicine
PURPOSE: It is often difficult to identify at-risk students early in the curriculum. A traditional student evaluation typically occurs after a high-stakes exam or at the end of the course, missing the opportunity to meaningfully impact students in real time. We have pursued a novel strategy, providing frequent, low-stakes testing that provides early feedback to both students and faculty. This abstract describes the project and potential outcomes.
METHODS: The program has run for 4 months at this point, starting in August of 2021. Every first-year medical student is offered frequent, low stakes quizzing on topics as they occur throughout the curriculum. Quizzes combine topics from all courses students are enrolled in. Thorough answers and explanations are provided for each quiz question so that learners can use each item as a learning opportunity. Students then take traditional midterm and final exams for each course. Students and faculty are provided with amalgamated data that reflects quiz performance over time and can be broken down by topic to identify learning strengths or challenges.
RESULTS: Based on 2 courses with complete data, there is a correlation between initial performance on low-stakes quizzes and performance on midterm and final exams. At the end of the year, we expect to have additional data-points to determine how strong the correlation is, and if there is a stronger correlation between results for different categories of students. At this point, students have praised the quizzes as a very valuable learning tool and have requested more and harder quizzes in the future.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on initial data, we postulate that the positive correlation between initial performance on quizzes and performance on midterm and final exams will be significant, and that students that perform lower on the quizzes increase their scores on midterm and final exams by a greater ratio.

INCORPORATING NUTRITION IN THE MEDICAL CURRICULUM

Maria J. Barnes | Noreen O'Shea
Des Moines University | Des Moines University
PURPOSE: A medical school curriculum prepares students to address the most common ailments that will present. However, nutrition, the underlying cause of many of these ailments is usually ignored. A warranted concern is the inability to add additional lecture hours to an overcrowded curriculum. Thus, we investigated different approaches to teach nutrition that could be easily implemented. In addition, students’ feedback was obtained to gauge the most impactful approach in augmenting their effectiveness of utilizing nutrition to treat patients.
METHODS: Second year students were required to take a three week course which consisted of lectures, an OSCE, SKIPP (active learning, small group, case-base), and dietary counseling practice. Students were given the opportunity to take four surveys. The first occurred prior to the start of the course, the second at the end of the course, the third survey was presented during year 3 after finishing their first year of clinical rotation and the last survey was offered during their second year of rotation. All survey responses were anonymous.
RESULTS: Prior to the intervention, majority of the respondents had not taken a course in nutrition (67%); believed that nutrition would play a significant role in the patients they will treat (100%); and believed that physicians should take an active role in being a dietary counselor. After taking the course, < 80% of the respondents believe that just the right amount of time was spent discussing nutrition. During their clinical years, students stated more opportunities to practice what they learned in lectures would have been beneficial.
CONCLUSIONS: After completing the course, students felt that the lectures were most effective in preparing them for their clinical years. However, once they completed their clinical years, they shared how beneficial it would have been for them to receive more opportunities to practice what they learned in lectures.

CRAFT IT - NAILED IT! - ACTIVE LEARNING ACTIVITIES FOR MEDICAL BIOCHEMISTRY CURRICULUM

Esther Nuebel | Sarah Worlton | Alice Akunyili
Noorda College of Osteopathic Medicine | Noorda College of Osteopathic Medicine | Noorda College of Osteopathic Medicine
PURPOSE: Biochemistry is one of the challenging parts in medical curriculum. It is perceived to lack the opportunity to engage with “hands-on-learning-activities.” Here we present how we got the students engaged, while improving their learning success.
METHODS: The Foundations of Medicine course used video-module and problem-based learning, allowing the introduction of “hands-on-activities.” The biochemistry content was clustered in cycles divided into modules containing 5 to 20 videos and learning activities. The presented example was in the cycle DNA and RNA module: Transcription and Translation and focused on understanding codon recognition, and translation into amino acids to form a protein as well as 3 and 1 letter codes of amino acids. Hard materials required were a color-coded codon table, string, and beads. The students were given an RNA code to translate into the coded amino acid. This amino acid was color coded indicating which colored bead the students had to thread. To be able to control their result they had to translate the 3 letter- into the 1 letter code which revealed the message: NAILED IT! Uploading a photo and the resulting word finalized the activity.
RESULTS: Ninety students completed the activity in pods of 2–8 students. A total of 30 craftwork-photos were uploaded. Compared to the average performance in molecular biology of 67%, here, 82% of students got assessment items related to the learning objective correct. Course evaluation by students revealed this activity as strength.
CONCLUSIONS: The effort to create a curriculum incorporating hands-on-activities resulted in very high student satisfaction and learning experience. We can show that integration of hands-on activities contributes to a higher level of understanding and learning satisfaction.

ENHANCING SOCIAL CONNECTEDNESS WITH A MULTICULTURAL MEDICAL STUDENT POPULATION DURING COVID-19

Karie Gaska | Christina Salama | Laurie Helgoe
Ross University School of Medicine | Ross University School of Medicine | Ross University School of Medicine
PURPOSE: Medical students experience significant isolation and distress, a barrier to professional success, and sometimes more pronounced for students from underrepresented backgrounds. COVID-19-related disruptions in education increased the risk of depression, anxiety, and stress among students worldwide who were physically separated from campus, and forced to quickly change their learning habits. To promote social connectedness and improve wellbeing, Mind–Body Medicine (MBM) groups were implemented at Ross University School of Medicine (RUSM), a uniquely culturally diverse campus. The current presentation reports on student qualitative experiences of enhanced connectedness through MBM participation.
METHODS: MBM is an eight session, 2-h weekly intervention. Sessions include learning a new mindfulness skill and present moment emotional awareness in a non-judgmental atmosphere. Groups were led by a faculty or staff member using a participant/facilitator model. Focus groups and interviews were conducted with student participants (n = 18) from spring 2020 through summer 2021 implementation. Participants were racially/ethnically diverse (33% Asian/South Asian American, 28% white, 28% Black/African American, 11% Latino/Hispanic), representative of the student body.
RESULTS: Students described a medical school culture that promoted isolation, stress, and lack of genuine connection prior to COVID-19. MBM provided the groundwork for connection to others. This included (1) an opportunity to genuinely connect with peers beyond typical interactions, (2) meaningful connection with faculty members, (3) self-awareness and awareness of others, and (4) impacting outside relationships through increased empathic understanding. Many reported that participating in their online MBM group eased the transition back to on-campus learning.
CONCLUSIONS: Lessons learned in this pilot implementation include: the importance of group facilitators modeling vulnerability, voluntary student participation, and the need for institutional support for optimum impact. Connectedness is critically important for medical students’ overall wellbeing, and new ways to promote connectedness must be evaluated to rise to the mental health challenges of COVID-19.

PREDICTING STUDENT SUCCESS ON SUMMATIVE EXAMS USING FREQUENT FORMATIVE ASSESSMENT

Lindsay Benedik | Michael Matott
Department of Medical Education, Wright State University Boonshoft School of Medicine | Department of Medical Education, Wright State University Boonshoft School of Medicine
PURPOSE: As part of a backwards-design strategy, the WrightCurriculum at Wright State University Boonshoft School of Medicine (BSOM) uses frequent in-course formative multiple choice exams (MCEs) prior to end-of-course summative National Board of Medical Examiners (NBME) customized assessments. Formative MCEs, which include a group component, are intended to promote greater learning and higher performance on future summative assessments. BSOM requires a minimum score of 70% on all module coursework to take the final NBME assessment. The purpose of this study was to determine whether MCE scores were predictive of NBME and Step 1 score as well as an early identifier of poor performance.
METHODS: MCE data for four modules with NBME assessments were compiled for three cohorts (AY 2017–18 to 2019–20). Student’s individual and group MCE scores were averaged for each module; students who did not complete all exams or modules were excluded from analysis. Average MCE, NBME, and Step 1 scores were then compared using linear regression and correlation analysis to determine the predictive value of MCEs.
RESULTS: Pearson correlation coefficients to Step 1 for individual MCE and NBME were 0.79 and 0.83 respectively. Linear regression analysis of MCE to Step 1 provided an R2 value of 0.629 (p < 0.0001) corresponding to an individual MCE average of 70 leading to a predicted Step 1 score greater than 200. Evaluation of group data are ongoing; initial analysis indicates group performance improves NBME outcomes, especially for students in the lower half of the class. Further analysis is required to isolate individual effects.
CONCLUSIONS: MCE performance strongly correlated with NBME and Step 1 scores suggesting formative MCEs predict future student performance. This can facilitate identification of students requiring early intervention to improve Step 1 outcomes. Even with Step 1 going P/F, the ability to predict success will still be important for medical schools.

EVALUATING THE UTILITY OF AN INFORMATIONAL WEBINAR IN AIDING THE PROGRAM SELECTION PROCESS FOR OBGYN RESIDENCY APPLICANTS DURING THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

Anna Weinstein | Mira Hellmann | Sara Bittman | Min-Kyung Jung | Shelley Saber
Hackensack University Medical Center | Hackensack University Medical Center | Hackensack University Medical Center | New York Institute of Technology College of Osteopathic Medicine | Hackensack University Medical Center
PURPOSE: To evaluate the impact of our institution’s webinar on medical student experience during the COVID-19 pandemic, and to characterize its success for quality improvement measures. We hypothesized that a live webinar would create an equitable platform for fourth year medical students in their quest to determine compatibility with coveted programs prior to the start of the residency application cycle.
METHODS: Participants completed pre- and post-webinar questionnaires assessing familiarity with different OBGYN career pathways, as well as familiarity with our institution’s OBGYN residency program. Surveys were filled out for quality assurance. Responses were measured retrospectively using a 5-point Likert scale, and differences between variables were analyzed using a related-samples Wilcoxon signed-rank test. The analyses were conducted using SPSS with = 0.05.
RESULTS: Eighty-two students attended the webinar, and 57 respondents completed both the pre- and post-webinar surveys. For all sixteen question items on the survey, the mean responses were improved in the post-webinar survey. The change was statistically significant for all questions assessing student familiarity with distinct subspecialties and with our residency program (p < 0.001). On a Likert scale of 1–5, the overall mean student participation experience was 4.63.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that our informational webinar significantly increased participants’ familiarity with all OBGYN subspecialties and with our specific OBGYN residency program. The reproducibility of this type of webinar by any specialty program offers medical students an equitable opportunity to determine potential compatibility with programs prior to the start of the residency application cycle. Additionally, medical students’ overall satisfaction with this webinar may impact programs’ decisions to continue virtual opportunities in the post pandemic era.

CAPTURE AND ANALYSIS OF SMALL GROUP DISCUSSIONS FOLLOWED BY INDIVIDUAL FEEDBACK IMPROVES COMMUNICATION SKILLS AND PARTICIPATION IN TEAM-BASED LEARNING

Jenna Regan | William Cope | Andrew Darr | Sarah Donohue | Richard Tapping | Yerko Berrocal.
University of Illinois College of Medicine Peoria, Peoria IL, 61605 U.S.A. | University of Illinois, Champaign IL, 61820 U.S.A. | University of Illinois College of Medicine Peoria, Peoria IL, 61605 U.S.A. | University of Illinois College of Medicine Peoria, Peoria IL, 61605 U.S.A.
PURPOSE: Team-based learning (TBL) application exercises promote inter- and intra-team discussion by testing both reasoning skills and mastery of subject content. However, the informal, verbal format of team discussions precludes capture of participation or team contribution at the level of an individual learner. This study explored the feasibility of capturing team discussion dynamics and providing learners with individualized feedback as a strategy for promoting growth in communication skills.
METHODS: TBL modules were delivered remotely during the first year of a preclinical medical curriculum. In one TBL module per course, two application question discussions were conducted through written communication and captured using the web-based educational platform CGScholar. Learners could opt in to receive individual feedback following each written discussion module. The feedback provided included data on length of their initial response to the question (communication) and the total number of subsequent comments they made during the team discussion (participation). These metrics were analyzed in aggregate by Friedman ANOVA to evaluate change over three TBL modules of written discussion with individualized feedback.
RESULTS: Thirty-seven of 65 learners opted to participate in receiving individual feedback on their participation during application exercise discussions. Learners who received feedback increased the length of their responses (p = 0.001 and p = 0.064 for first and second application questions, respectively) over three TBL modules. Number of comments posted during team discussion also significantly increased (p = 0.001 and p = 0.023).
CONCLUSIONS: Capture and analysis of learner participation in team-based discussions yielded insight into communication dynamics during TBL application exercises. Learners who received feedback showed statistically significant growth in the communication and participation metrics measured here. Analysis of an individual learner’s activity within small group discussions may represent an opportunity for quantifying and providing early feedback on critical communication skills such as teamwork and professionalism.

A GRASSROOTS INITIATIVE COMBATING COVID-19 VACCINE HESITANCY AND MISTRUST IN A MAJORITY-MINORITY SUBURBAN COMMUNITY: AN INTERPROFESSIONAL SERVICE-LEARNING EXPERIENCE

Naima Bibi,BS, MS,2022 | Marisela S. Plascencia, DO'24 | Jessica L. Mulbah, Pharm.D €˜22 | Krysten A. McNaught, Pharm.D €˜22 | Edo-Abasi McGee, PharmD, BCPS. | Valerie E. Cadet, PhD | Landon Mediavilla, DO’24
Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine, Georgia, School of Health Sciences | Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine, Georgia | Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine, Georgia, School of Pharmacy | Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine, Georgia, School of Health Sciences
PURPOSE: Vaccine reluctance is a significant problem impacting public health, particularly during the COVID-19 pandemic. Management is critical and presents a challenge requiring effective communication and awareness. Skepticism regarding vaccine safety, hasty vaccine manufacturing, personal concerns and viewpoints, misconception, misinformation, and at times, religious leaders deterring congregants have all been key themes. The goal of this study was to investigate and address identified barriers to COVID-19 vaccine uptake reluctance among unvaccinated people visiting community health fairs.
METHODS: The study was conducted during two Gwinnett County, GA, health fairs in August and September 2021, with participants being health fair attendees. Throughout each fair, interactive sessions were led by a team of health professional and graduate students, under faculty supervision. All individuals were presented with an educational component highlighting advantages of COVID-19 vaccinations and offered an opportunity to complete an anonymous questionnaire (Qualtrics, LLC) that collected demographic information, thoughts on COVID-19 vaccinations, and key sources of COVID-19 vaccine knowledge. Emphasis was placed on unvaccinated participants completing the survey. All participants received evidence-based student-created pamphlets debunking frequent COVID-19 vaccination fallacies, which complemented the discussion.
RESULTS: Of approximately 250 people that interacted at our events, 48 completed the survey; 43% were unvaccinated; 39% indicated COVID-19 had not harmed them personally; and 49% reported learning about immunizations via family and friends, social networking sites, and media sources. Data reveal that certain barriers to vaccine uptake may be due to a lack of perceived COVID-19 dangers and individual susceptibility to misinformation prevalent on networking and social mainstream press sources.
CONCLUSIONS: Vaccine uncertainty continues to be a barrier to adequate immunization coverage rates. Individual opinions and uncertainties may be addressed and lessened by raising awareness and educating people. Experts may address this issue by conducting public debates about the benefits of vaccines.

PERCEPTION AND EMOTIONAL EXPERIENCES OF MEDICAL STUDENTS TOWARDS HUMAN CADAVERIC DISSECTION ACROSS CULTURE

Jickssa Gemechu | Abdo Jurjus | Jason Wasserman | Abay Zenebe | Eiman Abdel Meguid | Inaya Hajj Hussein
1Oakland University William Beaumont School of Medicine, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Rochester, MI, USA | American University of Beirut, Faculty of Medicine, Beirut, Lebanon | 1Oakland University William Beaumont School of Medicine, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Rochester, MI, USA
PURPOSE: Anatomy is the oldest discipline of medical sciences. It is based on human cadaveric dissection since the twelfth century. The teaching of anatomy to medical students, as part of the curriculum, has been maintained despite all odds. Such dissection experience has always been associated with evoked emotions particularly with the first exposure. The aim of this multicenter study is to assess the perception, emotional experiences, and cultural attachment of medical students across different curricula.
METHODS: Individual surveys were filled by medical students at 2 different time points: Time 1 (a week before initial exposure to cadaveric dissection) and Time 2 (one week after cadaver dissection. The survey was implemented in multiple countries: Ethiopia (Addis Ababa University), United States (Oakland University William Beaumont School of Medicine), Lebanon (American University of Beirut), and Northern Ireland (Queen's University Belfast). The survey assessed the self-rated importance of cultural views and emotional reactions among medical students from different cultural backgrounds.
RESULTS: Our findings showed that the perception and emotional reactions altered over time with a remarkable decrement during the course. They also exhibited significant differences among students in various curricula with the highest in USA and Lebanon and the lowest in Northern Ireland, among who worked mostly on prosected specimens with little dissection. Cultural attachment was associated with difference in several evoked emotional experiences while religious and ethnic affiliations did not manifest any significant effect across the different curricula. Cultural attachment was also found to influence students coping mechanism over time.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that while perceptions of cultural attachment appear to affect the rate of change over time in several different self-rated emotional responses, religious affiliation or ethnic background per se, do not manifest any significant differences across these emotional experiences, and various curricula. Moreover, previous experience also lessened greatly such emotions.

MICROSCOPE SESSIONS AS A PATHOLOGY LEARNING TOOL FOR PRE-CLINICAL MEDICAL STUDENTS

Christina Shreve
Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center El Paso Paul L Foster School of Medicine
PURPOSE: Microscope sessions are a learning tool in which pathologists review whole microscopic slides with medical students in real time. This project was conducted to determine whether these sessions are effective tools to teach the subject of pathology to pre-clinical medical students.
METHODS: A microscope session was conducted in which pathologists reviewed renal histology slides with 40 first-year medical students. A survey was distributed after the session to determine how helpful the session was.
RESULTS: The results of the survey were positive, with the majority of students reporting that they understood the role of the pathologist better, felt they were better prepared for their exam, and understood renal diseases better. Most reported that they wish there were similar future sessions, and that they wished these sessions were part of the curriculum. Some said that they would consider pathology as a future specialty due to the session.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicated that these sessions may be helpful for teaching pathology effectively. Students reported better understanding of renal diseases, which may lead to better exam performance. Students understanding a pathologist’s role in patient care can lead to more effective collaboration with pathologists in their future specialties, and lead to better patient treatment outcomes. This session also lead to students considering pathology as a future career when they otherwise might not have. Due to the success of this session, future sessions may be held to further study their effectiveness and determine how the subject of pathology can best be taught to medical students.

LONGITUDINAL CASE REVIEW: PRE-CLERKSHIP BASIC SCIENCE AND CLINICAL SKILLS CASES

Stefanie Carter, EdD | Daniel Griffin, PhD | Lauren Fine, MD | Vijay Rajput, MD
Nova Southeastern University Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine | Nova Southeastern University Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine | Nova Southeastern University Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine | Nova Southeastern University Dr. Kiran C. Patel College of Allopathic Medicine
PURPOSE: An informal review by faculty and administrators identified a need for further exploration of cases used in the pre-clerkship curriculum. The purpose of this project is to conduct a student-centered longitudinal case review of biomedical, behavioral, socioeconomic, psychosocial and other impactful case content to identify gaps and unwanted redundancies. Students can provide essential insights and observations pertaining to important areas such as their intellectual and emotional response to how this material was delivered, potentially uncovering hidden curriculum.
METHODS: A diverse group of medical students will review 115 cases used during the pre-clerkship phase of their program. Sixty of the cases appear throughout the integrated organ system courses in Problem-Based or Inquiry-Based Learning groups. Fifty-five of the cases are utilized in the Pre-Clerkship Clinical Skills Courses. The review utilizes a rubric developed from a modification of the LCME curriculum content areas found in standard 7.1–3. In addition to the curriculum content areas, the rubric evaluates student experiences as participants who completed all of the cases. A student focus group follows to provide an opportunity for evaluators to clarify student responses and brainstorm how to modify and improve case delivery of these essential content areas.
RESULTS: The results of this study include a holistic review of the data collected, identifying key themes for inclusion. Identified categories and perceptions from student feedback will be coded and analyzed to be used for continuous quality improvement of case content and integration.
CONCLUSIONS: Cases used in the pre-clerkship curriculum are under review and will be modified based on the identified themes from this student-centered case review. It is anticipated that this intervention will provide an important resource for institutions interested in developing a more robust, inclusive case-based learning experience.

HOW IS THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC IMPACTING THE PROFESSIONAL IDENTITY FORMATION & VALUES OF MEDICAL STUDENTS?

Jennifer L. Hotzman, Ph.D. | Andrea N. Belovich, Ph.D. | Anne E. Weisman, Ph.D., M.P.H. | Mariluz M. Henshaw, M.D., Ph.D.
Idaho College of Osteopathic Medicine | Idaho College of Osteopathic Medicine | Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV | Touro College of Osteopathic Medicine
PURPOSE: The purpose of this study is to examine how allopathic and osteopathic medical students’ Professional Identity Formation (PIF) and values were impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
METHODS: Once IRB approval is obtained, participants will be recruited using snowball and convenience sampling. Participants must be enrolled in an allopathic or osteopathic medical school program in the United States during the COVID-19 pandemic. Informed consent will be obtained electronically. Participants will have access to the online survey. The survey consists of demographic information as well as a series of questions designed to gather information on social interactions, interactions with faculty, residents, staff and students throughout their time in medical school during the pandemic. The data will be examined using phenomenology. The themes that emerge from the phenomenological analysis will suggest some effects on PIF and values.
RESULTS: Specific areas of interest that will be explored include the values students hold, whether these values change as they progress in their undergraduate medical education, and how these values contribute to the preclinical development of their professional identity.
CONCLUSIONS: PIF and values of medical students are shaped throughout their training. During the preclinical years, medical students begin to form their professional identities through interactions with their peers, faculty, residents and staff. Once students reach the clinical years, their encounters with the patients, families, medical professionals and staff enhance the formation of their professional identities and values. The emergence of the COVID-19 pathogen shifted both the preclinical and clinical encounters medical students experienced. The impact of the pandemic on undergraduate medical education on PIF for this cohort of students is not fully understood. Furthermore, there is a gap in the literature about PIF and values of medical students that this study seeks to fill.

MAXIMIZING MEDICAL BIOCHEMISTRY, GENETICS, AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY UNDERSTANDING THROUGH INSTITUTIONAL RESOURCES

Benjamin Cundick
Indiana University School of Medicine
PURPOSE: Despite having extremely knowledgeable faculty in the didactic years of medical education, many students have trouble understanding concepts taught in medical school. A significant number of students pay monthly fees to test prep companies to learn foundational medical concepts. Examples of these resources include UWORLD, Sketchy Medicine, Boards and Beyond. My research is geared towards generating effective learning tools inside the classroom to increase student success and decrease the need for expensive, outside resource o pass medical courses. My study uses mixed methods dataset from a course in the medical curriculum that is known for being one of the most difficult courses for medical students.
METHODS: Thirty-five (35) first year medical students at the Bloomington campus were administered relevant teaching resources for their course (e.g. spatial mnemonics) After completing the Molecules to Cells and Tissue course, participants were administered a survey that consisted of Likert-scale and open-ended questions to assess learning improvements and resource benefits. This data was coded to establish themes and evaluate resource effectiveness for future cohorts.
RESULTS: Thematic analysis found students were more likely to build connections between higher-order course topics. Looking at overall understanding, students felt more confident and knowledgeable upon leaving the course. In addition, students frequently used the devices and encouraged them to create their own. These strategies also helped reduce student stress. They also appreciated having an extra resource provided by the school for learning topics.
CONCLUSIONS: This study serves as a pilot study to help understand how beneficial extra resources provided by institutions can benefit medical students learning and reduce the financial burden of alternative learning resources on top of medical school tuition. Please contact support@iamse.org regarding any questions you may have regarding this submission

INTERSECTIONS: ARTS, HUMANITIES AND DIAGNOSIS

Martha Eugenia Garcia-Osorio
San Juan Bautista School of Medicine
PURPOSE: A collective hybrid exhibition of literary, visual, or performing arts featuring students’ experiences in the medical diagnostic process of individual, family, and communities was developed by the SJBSM’s Health Humanities Program, the Clinical Skills Department and the Diversity and Inclusion committee. This is an ongoing project and this abstract describes the design, its outcomes, and future directions.
METHODS: Student interest groups were invited to present their ideas through their own works or use works from other artists. The groups must submit a preliminary sketch for the corresponding feedback. The final submissions are curated by a team composed by the organizer group, art curator, education curator, medical writers, and historiographer. The final proposals are portrayed as an ongoing series of events and a first large-scale event open to the community is scheduled for March 2022. Satisfaction surveys are collected at the end of each activity. The events are also formally designed learning activities for medical students taking clinical skills courses. A tool from the Society to Improve the Diagnosis in Medicine is used to assess the learners’ clinical reasoning skills acquisition. A panel of reviewers with expertise in healthcare, art, and humanities will anonymously select the top three projects and the Project of the year.
RESULTS: Fifteen interest groups are participaing with innovative ideas including visual arts, narrative medicine and storytelling, theater, music, and painting. Participant groups include Clinical Reasoning, Precision Medicine, LGBTQI2, Dermatology, Mental Health, Lifestyle Medicine, Bioethics, Health Policy, Psychiatry, and Plastic Surgery. Participants have positively evaluated the experience. Analysis of clinical reasoning skills acquisition has shown improvement after participation in these activities.
CONCLUSIONS: This project has resulted in an interdisciplinary tool to build learning scenarios and promote observation, diagnostic skills, empathy, team building, communication skills, resilience, and cultural sensitivity. Successful partnerships have been also developed.

A STANDARD-SETTING STUDY FOR PHASE I CLINICAL SCIENCE ASSESSMENT

Brock Mutcheson | Tarin Schmidt-Dalton
Virginia Tech Carilion School of Medicine | Virginia Tech Carilion School of Medicine
PURPOSE: Research on performance evaluation highlights the importance of using multiple measures to develop accurate and reliable profiles of students. The VTCSOM Clinical Science Domain assesses students in Phase I by creating a compensatory composite domain score in each block, and then compares it to established thresholds. Composite domain scores consist of multiple weighted measures of student performances, including Multiple Choice Assessments; Interview and Physical Exam Performance; Communication and Interpersonal Skills Performance; Written Presentation Skills; Clinical Reasoning Skills. This poster includes a review of empirically supported absolute, compromise, and relative standard-setting methods. We also describe the application of a specific standard-setting study conducted to classify performance for VTCSOM Phase-I Clinical Science Domain Honors.
METHODS: We conducted a comprehensive review on absolute, compromise, and relative standard-setting methods. Next, subject matter experts (SME) described the content and value of each of the multiple measures used in determining compensatory composite domain scores. We conducted and described a Hofstee standard-setting study to determine the Clinical Science Honors Threshold. Finally, we recommended opportunities for a follow-up longitudinal study to develop additional sources of validity evidence.
RESULTS: This study highlights the advantages and disadvantages of various standard-setting categories and approaches in medical education assessment. The use of multiple measures to create a compensatory composite domain score combined with the application of the Hofstee method resulted in a 90% threshold for VTCSOM Phase-I Clinical Science Honors.
CONCLUSIONS: The Hofstee method engages SME in setting boundaries to apply to the cumulative distribution function. The standard-setting process described provided adequate empirical support for the established standard. Authors recommend a follow-up, retroactive and longitudinal study in order to establish further validity evidence for the VTCSOM Clinical Science Domain.

YOUTH PERSPECTIVES ON HEALTHCARE CAREERS IN THE PROVINCE OF BRITISH COLUMBIA DURING COVID-19

Sean Maurice | Alishia Lindsay | Neil Hanlon
University of Northern British Columbia | University of Northern British Columbia | University of Northern British Columbia
PURPOSE: Health professionals raised in rural communities are more likely than their urban counterparts to choose a rural practice, but rural youth face barriers in pursuing healthcare career training. Additionally, the COVID-19 pandemic created widespread stress, uncertainty and disruption, and the implications of these will be felt in many areas of society. This study was designed to help us understand youth perspectives on healthcare careers and barriers that youth perceive, in an interprofessional context, across the diverse demographics of British Columbia.
METHODS: We distributed a Qualtrics survey to six high schools across the province between December 2020 and April 2021. The survey asked youth about their awareness of healthcare careers, sources of information about career opportunities, their own level of interest in pursuing healthcare career, and potential barriers to education and training. Quantitative data were analyzed descriptively. Qualitative data were analyzed thematically using an inductive approach to coding, and themes were generated through a semantic approach to summarize the data.
RESULTS: In total, 71 students in four schools completed the survey, with 25 responses coming from two small town schools, 26 from a school in a medium-sized city, and 20 from a school in a larger urban centre. Results reveal a generally high level of awareness of healthcare careers, with no geographical variation. However, students in the two rural schools were less likely to indicate that they would pursue postsecondary training and less likely to consider themselves qualified to do so. COVID-19 did not appear to affect student interest in healthcare as a career option.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that, although rural youth have awareness of healthcare careers comparable to urban youth, rural youth are less likely to pursue a healthcare career. This study supports the need for initiatives to attract rural youth into healthcare careers.

LECTURE CAPTURE IN HEALTH SCIENCE EDUCATION, AND ITS IMPACT ON ATTENDANCE AND ACHIEVEMENT: A PRELIMINARY SCOPING REVIEW

Patience Wieland
University of North Texas
PURPOSE: Lecture capture media's impact on attendance and achievement has concerned educators. These are preliminary results of a scoping study to analyze existing, pre-pandemic literature.
METHODS: The Arksey and O’Malley framework was used, with questions exploring attendance, achievement, and interprofessional differences in technology adoption. Over 2 years (9/2018–9/2020), 25 databases and 5 additional journals were searched for study keywords. Over 80 articles were collected by the end of 2018; 20 more articles were published through 9/2020, covering pre-pandemic use of lecture capture media.
RESULTS: There are significant research gaps. Many studies concluded after a semester or less. Few studies explored distinct learners (differentiated by field, or characteristics like second language, career change, learning disabilities) and media use. Just one study explored evidence based multimedia strategies that improve memory recency. Evidence in this review suggests lecture capture does impact attendance, but often does not correlate to achievement. In three studies, a subset of students had superior achievement with no in-person attendance. Despite the growth of learning analytics, few studies incorporated this data, such as analyzing where students were more likely to abandon or repeat viewing.
CONCLUSIONS: There is a distinct need for longitudinal studies. Future protocols should always pair student self-reporting with actual data, and collaborate with educational technology staff on learning analytics. There is a need to explore interprofessional and developmental differences. Lecture capture in dentistry, veterinary, pharmacy, and allied health students should be a research priority. Future research should also explore practices for faculty that incorporate Mayer’s cognitive theory of multimedia learning.

INSTRUCTOR-CURATED DIGITAL FLASHCARDS IMPROVE STUDENT SATISFACTION AND EXAM PERFORMANCE

Eva Garringer
University of Oklahoma - Tulsa, School of Community Medicine
PURPOSE: Many students use digital flashcards as either core or supplementary study tools; the common and accessible program Anki is one option for creating digital shareable flashcards. Most Anki “decks” are created by students and suffer in effectiveness in that they (1) are time-consuming to create, which takes away from study time, (2) are usually not course-specific, and (3) contain inconsistencies and errors. To determine the effectiveness of instructor-curated Anki decks, I provided course-specific Anki decks for physician’s assistant PA1 Clinical Anatomy students (n = 24) and for medical MS2 Neurosciences students (n = 168).
METHODS: Course-specific “decks” were created using either the “image occlusion” add on or the “cloze deletion” feature of the Anki software. Images were obtained from existing lab manuals and eLabs. The decks were made available to all students in the respective 2021 courses.
RESULTS: Student response was positive and students were eager to get newly made decks as soon as they were available. While MD exam averages between 2020 and 2021 were similar, there approximately twice as many scores of 100% and nearly half as many scores below 70% (D and F grades). Due to changes in course structure and consequent to COVID-related modifications, direct performance comparisons are difficult to assess. PA student scores exhibited a similar upshifting of exam scores. Upon completion of the course, 24/25 PA students reported using decks to study, 22/24 agreed or strongly agreed with the statement “I feel like the Anki decks helped me learn the neuroanatomy portion of the course,” and multiple students provided positive written feedback for the Anki decks.
CONCLUSIONS: Student responses to instructor-provided course-specific digital flashcards were overwhelmingly positive and exam score distributions were shifted up with fewer failing grades.

CHALLENGES TO DEVELOPMENT OF A QUANTITATIVE MEASUREMENT SUITE FOR TEAMWORK

John T. Paige | Kathryn E. Kerdolff | Qingzhao Yu | Deborah D. Garbee | Laura Bonanno
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center-New Orleans | Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center-New Orleans | Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center-New Orleans | Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center-New Orleans | Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center-New Orleans
PURPOSE: Teams are a foundational component of healthcare delivery. Having a reliable, valid, efficient, and effective method of evaluating team function is essential to improving team performance. As part of an International Association of Medical Science Educators’ educational grant, we attempted to develop a quantitative measurement suite for assessing teamwork.
METHODS: We employed a quasi-experiment pre-/post-intervention comparison design to assess inter-professional student teams participating in the Student Operating Room Team Training (SORTT) curriculum. Teams of nurse anesthesia, senior medical, and senior undergraduate nursing students completed a dual scenario session with immediate after action debriefing focusing on team-based competencies. Evaluation of team performance involved both quantitative measurement as well as observer-based evaluation using the Quick Teamwork Assessment Scales (Q-TAS), a 5-item, 3-subscale tool using a 6-point Likert-type scale (1 = definitely no to 6 = definitely yes). Changes in quantitative measurements from scenario 1 to scenario 2 were determined and compared to mean item changes in Q-TAS ratings.
RESULTS: In 2020, Q-TAS evaluation of 49 students divided into 7 simulated OR teams occurred. Statistically significant improvements were present in all 3-subscale ratings. Due to the unavailability of the sociometric badges included in the original protocol, an alternatively developed quantitative measurement suite incorporated dosimeters, radio frequency identification badges, and video recordings. Data analysis has proven challenging due to limitations in the manner in which data collection and recording occurs with the instruments. In addition, the sheer volume of data has proven difficult to sort out. Work continues related to overcoming these issues.
CONCLUSIONS: The SORTT program is effective in improving student team performance. The successful creation of a quantitative measurement suite for team function must take into account the manner in which data collection occurs, data presentation happens, and the volume of data involved.

INFLUENCES OF A STUDENT-CREATED HISTOLOGY BOOK USED IN THE GROSS ANATOMY LAB

Kensley Grant | Amberly Reynolds
Sam Houston State University College of Osteopathic Medicine | Sam Houston State University College of Osteopathic Medicine
The goal of this research is to use the dynamic atmosphere of Gross Anatomy Lab to gauge learning outcomes when histology is integrated into active dissection and study. Integration will be achieved by giving students opportunity to engage with a novel resource provided during lab and online. This resource is a student created histology guidebook that presents differently than an ordinary resource. It is sectioned by system, lecture, and lab list, includes typed and handwritten labeled images, charts, mnemonics, tips from medical students, with careful consideration to brevity. There is also focus on information retrieval via reference links and self-directed study questions without changes to curriculum framework. The inaugural class will serve as the control group where scores on the same questions will be compared between classes. A post-course assessment will also be delivered at the end of course for 1st and 2nd year students to determine retention rates. At this point, we are not to the stage of collecting quantitative data, due to course completion, but do have qualitative data via student feedback. The objective is to determine if this novel resource integrated in Gross Anatomy can provide students alternative ways to integrate knowledge. Additionally, we are interested in garnering whether this would provide objective benefit in understanding, applicability, and retention for medical students across coursework. The guidebook was provided to students during Gross Anatomy Lab and online. Currently, we have gathered intriguing qualitative data, via student feedback forms, with evidence of positive outcomes. Data collection will continue with quantitative data collection in the spring following course completion and future analysis will look at the following: efficacy of the resource, perceived benefits, and scores on post-assessments. Qualitative data supports our hypothesis that this novel resource would provide benefit to medical education. Future analysis will be focused on retention rates.

USING EXPERIENTIAL LEARNING TO UNDERSCORE INTERPROFESSIONAL EDUCATION IN NUTRITION

Aaron M. Marshall | Heather R. Christensen | Joanna C. Rebitski
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine
PURPOSE: Nutrition as a component of patient care is widely recognized for contributing to optimal clinical outcomes. Despite increased efforts to teach nutrition basics to trainees, nutrition counseling remains woefully underutilized. This study assessed the impact of an immersive medical nutrition therapy (MNT) experience on medical students.
METHODS: Student volunteers attempted an MNT diet for 2 weeks and participated in focus groups (n = 3), from which transcripts were evaluated for themes. Participants completed the Nutrition in Patient Care Survey (n = 3) as a reliable measure of attitudes about nutrition, and custom surveys regarding knowledge, confidence and application of MNT.
RESULTS: Eighty percent of participants mostly or completely adhered to their two-week diet regimen. ‘Attempting the diet’ and ‘peer discussions’ were ranked as the most impactful project components. Compared to non-participant peers (n = 60), participants (n = 26) reported significantly more confidence using nutrition counseling (n = 60, p < 0.001, t-test). Participants felt comfortable advising future patients on the specific MNT diet attempted (95% agree or strongly agree), but only half (46%) felt they could advise patients on MNT diets attempted by other participants, while a mere 16% reported confidence advising patients about other MNT diets (not encountered during the study). Taken together, the increased participant confidence in using MNT was specific to diets attempted or experienced second-hand through focus groups. Secondary analysis of student responses revealed an interprofessional theme. Participants claimed that through personal experience came the recognition that MNT was best handled by nutrition professionals (100% reported to more likely use nutrition referrals because of this experience).
CONCLUSIONS: This experience increased students’ knowledge of, confidence in, and intent to use nutrition counseling. Unexpectedly, the intent was to use interprofessional nutrition services. These data demonstrate the power of experiential learning, and that even a brief immersion experience has the opportunity to significantly impact medical student education, including emphasizing the importance of interprofessional healthcare teams.

OBESITY STIGMA IN ANATOMY AND OSTEOPATHIC MANIPULATIVE MEDICINE

Shelby Hall,MPH and Amberly Reynolds,PhD
Sam Houston State University College of Osteopathic Medicine, Conroe, Texas, 77301, USA
PURPOSE: Weight stigmas are discriminatory ideologies targeted towards individuals because of size. Medical students must confront bias so as not to compromise appropriate medical care. Data show medical students perceive obese cadavers as “difficult” and “evoking disgust”. 4 Several studies have focused on overcoming weight stigmas but with marginal success 2,3. Although these studies do provide information regarding weight stigmas in medical schools, the limited focus on osteopathic schools is what garners interest. The purpose of this study is to assess how obesity stigma arises in OMM, a course reliant on surface anatomy.
METHODS: An extensive literature review was conducted for body and weight stigma in OMM, producing no results. Further investigation into body and weight stigmas in OMM will occur through a survey of osteopathic medical students. A sample of survey questions:

Do you feel OMM performed on an athletic individual would be the same quality as that performed on an overweight individual?
Do you have concerns about treating overweight patients with OMM?
RESULTS: Current results include qualitative observation, and the following are some of our resultant data:

Faculty members commenting on a student used for an OMT demo as being “fit and athletic”
Students expressing concern about difficulty finding anatomical landmarks on an overweight student
Observations that the largest student in the class was not chosen quickly as a practice partner
CONCLUSIONS: Future directions of this study following survey results could lead to curricular changes that address weight stigmas in osteopathic medicine. When medical students begin practicing with weight stigmas, the effective and empathic care of patients is compromised. Something must be done to reverse the stigma and even prevent the stronghold it could occupy in future physicians. Action can be taken in both the anatomy and OMM labs.

## Footnotes
Publisher's Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.