pmcSoc Stud SciSoc Stud Sci464sageopen7506743SSSSocial Studies of Science0306-31271460-3659pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleSage ChoicePMC9315181PMC9315181.1931518193151813573517610.1177/0306312722110492910.1177_030631272211049291ArticlesEnvironmental Malthusianism and demography
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4747-4177MerchantEmily Klancher ). Some bioethicists argue that, because ‘we are threatened with
more population than the planet can bear’, humans simply ‘don’t have a right to
more than one biological child’ ( : 2). Some recommend that
governments act to uphold this limit ( ). Even feminist
historians and sociologists of science, including some sharp critics of the
population control projects of the late 20th century, now call for measures to
reduce childbearing as a means of combatting climate change ( ).
Environmental Malthusianism, the idea that human population growth is the primary
driver of environmental harms and population control a prerequisite to
environmental protection, is experiencing a resurgence ( ; ; ; ).
Over the past 20 years, historians have uncovered the intellectual, social and
political roots of environmental Malthusianism, tracing it to the first decades of
the 20th century ( ; ; ; ). While
these accounts document the relationship between environmental Malthusianism and
the broader 20th-century population movement, they generally overlook the tensions
between environmental Malthusianism, promulgated primarily by natural scientists,
and demography, the quantitative social science of human population dynamics. By
including only the very few demographers who aligned themselves with environmental
Malthusianism (most prominently Kingsley Davis), these histories create the false
impression of scientific consensus regarding the relationship between human
population and the natural environment. Historical critiques of population control
further promote this illusion by conflating environmental Malthusianism and
demography into an undifferentiated population science ( ; ).
Histories of demography, for the most part, largely ignore the natural environment
and environmental Malthusianism ( ; ; ; ). This
omission makes sense, as demographers – social scientists who worked in and/or
received their graduate training in university-based population research centres –
had little to say about the natural environment before the mid-1990s ( ). Even
as late as 2018, Amy Tsui, the outgoing president of the Population Association of
America (PAA, demography’s primary professional organization), acknowledged that
‘the one area we [PAA] somehow never captured, and maybe we need a celebrity for
this, so to speak, an advocate, is environment’ ( : 11). Despite
demographers’ overwhelming silence about the natural environment, however,
environmental Malthusianism was integral to the history of their field.
Environmental Malthusianism generated public concern about overpopulation, which
translated into massive funding for research and training in demography after
World War II. It is likely because environmental Malthusianism was such a boon to
demography that demographers largely kept their scientific critique of
environmental Malthusianism to themselves.
This article traces the relationship between environmental Malthusianism and
demography from the interwar period to the early 21st century, drawing on the
archives of environmental Malthusians, demographers, their employers and their
funders, and on oral history interviews completed over the past 40 years. In so
doing, it reveals more distance and opposition between demographers and
environmental Malthusians than historians and other scholars of population and the
environment have previously recognized. It contends that, since the 1920s,
demography has taken a non-Malthusian approach to human population dynamics that
continually challenges facile equations between human population growth and
environmental degradation. Further, it demonstrates that environmental
Malthusianism, though often promoted by scientists, has been motivated more by
opposition to environmental and economic regulation than by scientific analysis.
This article focuses on US-based actors, because environmental Malthusianism
originated in the United States and because, during the period of analysis, most
demographers publishing in English were trained in the United States.
 

The purpose of this article is not to valorize demography or to suggest that
demographers got it ‘right’ and environmental Malthusians got it ‘wrong’. Both
groups of scientists promoted overpopulation narratives that attributed some of
the world’s most pressing problems to its most vulnerable citizens and justified
repressive family planning and population control programs ( ; ; ). For demographers,
however, overpopulation was an economic phenomenon, not an environmental one.
Critiques of demography’s economic version of overpopulation abound ( ; ; ). This
article focuses its critique on environmental Malthusianism, demonstrating that
there has never been a scientific consensus about the relationship between human
population and the natural environment.

## The interwar birth of population science
Histories of environmental Malthusianism typically begin between the world
wars, with two biologists: Johns Hopkins University’s Raymond Pearl and
Harvard University’s Edward East (e.g. ). formalized Malthus’s theory that
subsistence resources drive and constrain human population growth, while
 linked population growth to soil erosion and other signs
of environmental degradation. Both men used their scientific credentials to
call public attention to the threat of impending overpopulation in the
United States. What existing histories often fail to acknowledge is that
biologists were not the only scientists dealing with human population
between the wars.
 
 Also in the 1920s, Metropolitan Life Insurance statisticians Alfred J
Lotka and Louis I Dublin developed a non-Malthusian approach to population
growth that would form the mathematical foundation for demography. On the
basis of their analysis, Lotka and Dublin challenged Pearl and East’s claims
that the population of the United States was growing too quickly ( ;
 ).
Demography was thus born from controversy at a time when the science of human
population was up for grabs ( ). Scholars of
science and technology studies look to controversies as moments when the
co-production of science and the social order is uniquely visible and when
politics get embedded into science in ways that can be harder to recognize
after the controversy settles (e.g. ; ;
 ; ; ). In
the case of interwar population science, the biologists and statisticians
developed competing population problematizations, a term coined by : 164) to refer to ‘particular formulations of the population
problem at hand, together with its solution’ that ‘constitute a new
demographic and policy reality by shaping what is thinkable in the domain of
population’. Each problematization articulated a specific mode of data
analysis to a specific population theory, generating divergent population
problems with diametrically opposed solutions.
As biologists working before the rise of what terms ‘the molecular
vision of life’, Pearl and East focused on organisms, considering
national populations, not the humans that comprised
them, organic entities and therefore the appropriate level of analysis.
 
 They conceptualized population change as a top-down process, driven
by the availability of subsistence resources: When resources were plentiful,
populations grew quickly, but when resources became scarce, growth slowed.
They were not concerned with the vital processes that produced growth,
namely birth, death and migration, assuming that vital rates would adjust
automatically to maintain the correct aggregate growth rate. Dublin and
Lotka, on the other hand, specialized in death and its most reliable
predictor, age. Extending life table analysis from mortality to fertility,
they found that births, too, were much more likely to occur at some ages
than at others.
 
 Their level of population analysis was the age-specific vital rate.
Both analytic approaches indicated that, although the population of the
United States was still expanding, the rate of growth had
started to slow after World War I. Brookings Institution statistician identified the same pattern in most countries of Western
Europe.
Biologists and statisticians agreed on these empirical facts, but interpreted
slowing population growth very differently, drawing on competing population
theories and exhibiting the kind of ‘interpretative flexibility’ that 
describes as characteristic of science in the making. understood the
decreasing rate of growth in Malthusian terms: If populations inevitably
grew to the limits of subsistence, a declining growth rate could only mean
that the population in question was nearing its biological limit. The
statisticians interpreted the slowing of population growth through the lens
of mercantilism (see : 8), a population theory that antedated Malthus
and cast population growth as a sign of good government and the primary
source of economic dynamism and geopolitical strength. They attributed
population change to a variety of social, economic and political factors
acting on vital rates and feared that declining rates of population growth
in the United States and Western Europe would weaken those countries
relative to the faster-growing countries of Eastern Europe and East Asia
( ; ).
These theories pointed to competing problem-solution pairings. For the
Malthusian biologists, slowing population growth signalled impending
overpopulation. For the mercantilist statisticians,
it signalled impending depopulation. In the early 1920s,
these problems were underdetermined by the data. They depended on
scientists’ preferred population theory, which aligned with the scientists’
positions on immigration, one of the most pressing political issues in the
United States after World War I. Industrialization had drawn workers from
all over the world to the US, where race and national origin structured the
labour market and constrained opportunity. As social inequality grew at the
end of the 19th century, socioeconomic status became strongly correlated
with race and national origin. In the first decades of the 20th century,
many reformers began to locate the causes of poverty and its sequelae in the
bodies of the poor, theorizing that people from different parts of the world
had different levels of innate quality ( ). Pearl and East
marshalled their predictions of impending overpopulation as evidence for
their preferred solution to poverty, immigration restriction ( ;
 ). Dublin, Lotka and Kuczynski, all of whom had been born
in Europe (though Lotka to American parents), used their predictions of
impending depopulation to advocate against immigration
restriction ( ; ).
Despite their competing approaches to population, Pearl, East, Dublin, Lotka
and Kuczynski worked together to establish the International Union for the
Scientific Investigation of Population Problems (IUSIPP, forerunner to
today’s International Union for the Scientific Study of Population) in 1928
and the PAA in 1931. Within the IUSIPP and the PAA, the division between the
overpopulation and depopulation perspectives largely mapped onto age and
disciplinary background. Biologists and older social scientists preferred
Pearl and East’s aggregate approach and Malthusian theory, while
statisticians and younger social scientists, particularly those with
quantitative training, preferred Lotka, Dublin and Kuczynski’s vital rate
approach and mercantilist theory. This latter approach required considerable
mathematical sophistication and was inscrutable to many biologists and older
social scientists (e.g. ). It was, however, more attractive to the
private and public funders of population science, whose support went almost
entirely to the younger, mathematically oriented social scientists who had
embraced Dublin, Lotka and Kuczynski’s vital rate approach to population
analysis and the mercantilist perspective that travelled along with it.
During the 1930s, these social scientists began to identify themselves and
one another as ‘demographers’.
 

Demographers’ warnings about depopulation became more plausible in the 1930s,
when the population of the US grew more slowly than the biologists had
predicted, despite abundant food resources. In the 1920s, Pearl and East had
pointed to the temporal coincidence between population growth and soil
erosion in the US as empirical evidence of overpopulation. In so doing, they
elided the fact that erosion resulted not from too many people
subsisting on US agriculture, but rather too many
people trying to profit from it ( ). In the
first decades of the 20th century, American farmers aggressively mined the
soil to produce grain for export, in the process undercutting more
sustainable production methods in other countries ( ). In the 1930s,
demographer warned that slowing population growth would
soon result in agricultural overproduction across North America and Western
Europe, a view very much at odds with Pearl and East’s predictions of
impending food scarcity, but one that was borne out during the Great
Depression, when the US government paid farmers to take land out of
production to address erosion and resulting dust storms and to avoid price
collapse. Millions of people starved, not because there wasn’t enough food,
but because the market failed to allocate resources effectively, implicating
the numerous social, economic and political institutions that mediate
between population and food supply.
As depopulation came to seem more plausible than overpopulation, East shifted
his focus back to plant genetics and Pearl realigned himself with
demography, renouncing theories he had previously espoused ( ).
By the time World War II began, the controversy over population science had
reached closure. Social scientists became the primary authorities over human
population in the United States, and their problematization of population
excluded a Malthusian link between human population and the natural
environment. However, the controversy had a long afterlife that continues to
reverberate today.

## The survival of environmental Malthusianism
During the 1940s, environmental Malthusianism remained alive at the margins of
science largely through the work of one man: anti-immigrant eugenicist Guy
Irving Burch, founder of the Population Reference Bureau (PRB).
 
 Though not a scientist himself, Burch aimed to present population
science to the American public in ways that would promote the perception of
a rapidly-growing US population straining at the limits of natural
resources, thereby producing popular support for ongoing immigration
restriction. In PRB materials and other publications of the 1930s, ,
 )
introduced the term ‘population explosion’ to describe the rapid population
growth he predicted on the horizon, at the same time that demographers
warned about the threat of depopulation and agricultural overproduction.
 dismissed these warnings as efforts by ‘small-fry
academics led by foreign born scientists’ – specifically naming Dublin and
Kuczynski – to discredit immigration restriction. In the second half of the
20th century, Burch and the PRB facilitated the uptake of environmental
Malthusianism by natural scientists, philanthropists and businessmen.
Immediately after World War II, Burch, together with sociologist Elmer Pendell,
wrote a book that aimed to provide scientific legitimacy to eugenics and
immigration restriction in a post-Holocaust world. Initially self-published
in 1945 under the title Population Roads to Peace or War,
it was republished in 1947 by Penguin as Human Breeding and
Survival. Citing interwar publications by Pearl and East, the
book contended that the world had already passed its carrying capacity, a
number pinpointed at 2.5 billion. They gleaned this
number from the fact that, in 1940, when the Earth’s population was around
2.5 billion, experts Burch and Pendell described as ‘the technologists’ had
claimed that the Earth could provide for everyone. People starved not
because there were too many of them, but because the Earth’s resources were
not being distributed effectively. Burch and Pendell interpreted this claim
to mean that 2.5 billion was the maximum number for which
the Earth could provide. It was considerably lower than the 5.2 billion
 had previously calculated as the Earth’s carrying
capacity. Currently, there is no scientific consensus regarding how many
people the Earth can support, with estimates ranging from 500 million to
well over 1 trillion ( ).
Burch and Pendell described the recent war as a natural result of population
growth and, therefore, evidence of overpopulation. However, overpopulation
was not limited to the belligerent powers, they maintained. According to
Burch and Pendell, Russia had turned to Communism in response to population
pressure. Even the United States was not immune: drawing on ,
Burch and Pendell pointed to soil erosion as evidence that this country,
too, was overpopulated. They described the New Deal as the beginning of
tyranny creeping into the US in response to the resource scarcity and
ecosystem degradation caused by population growth.
Burch and Pendell’s critique of the New Deal reveals the ultimate target of
their work: economic regulation. They decried any limitations on economic
activity as a violation of democracy necessitated by out-of-control
population growth. Instead, they recommended that population be regulated
through eugenic measures such as further restrictions on immigration,
sterilization of those they deemed unfit, and birth control for the world’s
poor. Burch and Pendell called on the US to impose these measures on other
countries through the new United Nations. In effect, they asked the United
States and the United Nations to curtail the reproduction of the world’s
poor in order to protect the economic freedom of wealthy Americans.
Demographers paid little heed to Human Breeding and Survival,
but environmental Malthusianism spread far and wide through the book’s
influence on two 1948 bestsellers, Road to Survival by
ornithologist William Vogt and Our Plundered Planet by
Fairfield Osborn, president of the New York Zoological Society. Historians
have credited these books with launching the modern environmental movement
and focusing it on human population ( ;
 ).
Vogt and Osborn portrayed humans as part of an ecological web, dependent for
their very existence on the flora and fauna with which they co-existed. They
contended that human greed, which promoted the mismanagement of natural
resources, had begun to destroy this web. The solutions they proposed,
however, like those proposed by Burch and Pendell, privileged the regulation
of reproduction over economic or environmental regulation. Though aware of
the role played by global capitalism in environmental destruction, Vogt and
Osborn placed the ultimate blame not on industrial production, the
capitalist impulse toward growth or insatiable consumer demands in the US,
but on the quantity of the world’s inhabitants. Reducing the number of
people on the planet, they contended, would automatically reduce production
and consumption without inconveniencing producers or consumers. Vogt and
Osborn thereby naturalized profit-seeking and excessive consumption as
quintessential and unavoidable human activities and blurred the distinction
between inhabitants of the Global North, whose productive and consumptive
activities drove environmental devastation worldwide, and inhabitants of the
Global South, who were increasing in number more quickly but had much
smaller ecological footprints.
 openly
acknowledged that he aimed to limit the world’s poor and nonwhite
populations for the benefit of wealthy Americans. In addition to reducing
birth rates, he advocated increasing death rates by withholding public
health measures and food aid to countries in the Global South ( ).
In contrast, called for population control across the board and
worked hard to distance himself from the eugenic policies espoused by his
father, Henry Fairfield Osborn, long-time director of the American Museum of
Natural History. Despite these differences, Osborn and Vogt came together in
the 1950s to slow population growth in developing countries through the
Conservation Foundation, an organization Osborn founded in 1948 with the
help of Laurance Rockefeller, grandson of the co-founder of Standard Oil
( ). The Conservation Foundation worked with the Planned
Parenthood Federation of America, of which Vogt served as executive director
in the 1950s, shifting the organization’s focus from developing birth
control technologies for American women to developing population control
technologies for the rapidly-growing countries of the Global South ( ).
 

It would be difficult to overestimate the impact of Road to
Survival and Our Plundered Planet on postwar
environmental Malthusianism. Each sold millions of copies and garnered
considerable attention in the American press. Both books won awards and were
widely translated. Their population analysis came entirely from
Human Breeding and Survival and other PRB
publications and was therefore at odds with contemporary research in
demography. The popularity of these books, however, made them impossible for
demographers to ignore. PAA President Conrad Taeuber devoted the dinner
session of the 1949 annual meeting to the critique of Vogt and Osborn ( ).

## Demography defines overpopulation
When Vogt and Osborn published their books, demographers were in the midst of
developing their own problematization of overpopulation. It differed from
the Malthusian problematization in that it focused on the relationship
between national populations and economies, rather than global populations
and ecosystems, and included no concept of a natural limit to population
growth. Nonetheless, as demographers and their supporters invested in
slowing population growth overseas, they found that the popularity of
environmental Malthusianism facilitated acceptance of their work and helped
them secure support from American foundations. For that reason, they
silenced their scepticism about environmental Malthusianism through most of
the 1950s and 1960s.
Demography’s version of overpopulation emerged from demographic transition
theory, first articulated in the early 1940s by Princeton University
demographers to describe the supposedly-predictable demographic consequences
of modernization ( ).
 
 Mid-twentieth-century social scientists viewed modernity – epitomized
by the United States – as the pinnacle of social, political and economic
development, the terminus of a linear trajectory that all countries would
eventually traverse ( ; ; ).
According to demographic transition theory, the supposedly universal process
of modernization stimulated a brief period of population growth by reducing
death rates, but also increased the number of people a society could support
and eventually led to the adoption of small-family norms that would halt
population growth ( ). Demographic transition theory depended on the
vital rate models developed by interwar statisticians, but replaced their
mercantilist veneration of population growth with a modernist faith in
industrialization as the source of economic growth and military might.
By 1949, Princeton demographer and his
erstwhile colleague had noticed that death rates were falling
dramatically in some colonial territories, stimulating population growth in
the absence of the modernization that they expected would trigger
demographic transition. If population growth outpaced economic growth, they
feared, these countries would never modernize. Rising population density
would increase their vulnerability to natural disasters and economic shocks.
In contrast to environmental Malthusians, who understood overpopulation as
an absolute excess of population relative to natural
resources on a global or regional scale, demographers understood
overpopulation as a condition in which population growth
outpaced economic growth on a national scale ( ; ).
 
attributed the mismatch between population growth and economic growth not to
the limits of the natural environment or to excessive reproduction, but to
the structure of global capitalism. Multinational corporations extracted
labour and resources from agricultural countries to enrich industrial
countries. By funnelling profits back to the Global North, Notestein
contended, these corporations prevented modernization and promoted
population growth in the Global South. Although Notestein did not address
the natural environment, he implicitly challenged Vogt and Osborn’s
assumption that population growth in agricultural countries of the Global
South drove the too-rapid consumption of the Earth’s natural resources.
Rather, in Notestein’s assessment, rapacious extraction of those resources
and unequal sharing of the profits therefrom fuelled population growth.
To solve this problem, initially proposed decolonization and local
control over economic development, which he expected would stimulate the
growth of indigenous middle classes worldwide and thereby trigger
demographic transition. He found little support for this solution within the
United States, however; perhaps this was the case because environmental
Malthusianism had already captured the popular imagination. Instead of
further developing his demographic critique of imperialism and global
capitalism, soon began to recommend family planning as a means of
promoting economic development in the colonial and decolonizing world.
Although most demographers aligned themselves behind Notestein’s version of
overpopulation, Kingsley Davis, who left Princeton for Columbia University
in 1948, instead embraced environmental Malthusianism ( ). When Osborn
established the Conservation Foundation, Davis and his students were among
the first recipients of research funds ( ). collaborated on articles for The Wall Street
Journal that attributed starvation in the Global South to
population growth and argued against allowing more immigrants into the
United States on environmental grounds. Historians have cited Davis’s
advocacy for environmental Malthusianism, along with that of some of his
students, as evidence that demographers generally supported environmental
Malthusianism (e.g. ). This could not have been further from the
truth. Davis’s commitment to environmental Malthusianism did not bring this
perspective into demography’s mainstream but rather reflected and
facilitated his retreat from mainstream demography when he left Princeton.
He moved even farther away – both geographically and conceptually – when he
relocated to UC Berkeley in 1955.
Notestein, on the other hand, was the mainstream of
demography. He directed Princeton’s Office of Population Research (OPR) from
its 1936 inception until 1959, and directed the UN Population Division in an
interim capacity when it was established in 1947. In 1952, he teamed up with
John D Rockefeller, 3rd, older brother of environmentalist Laurance
Rockefeller and Chairman of the Rockefeller Foundation, to establish the
Population Council, a nongovernmental organization that channelled money
from large US-based foundations into overseas family planning programs,
promising to stimulate economic growth by reducing population growth.
Together with the Ford Foundation – with which it closely coordinated its
programs – the Council quickly became the largest source of funding for
demography in the United States. With this funding, the Council shaped
demography in OPR’s image, expanded it dramatically, and focused its
attention on slowing population growth in the Global South ( ; ).
Notestein and the Population Council did not publicly challenge environmental
Malthusianism, nor did they oppose its popularization in the 1950s. Burch
died in 1951, but his life’s work continued through the efforts of Hugh
Everett Moore. A businessman and peace activist, Moore got interested in
population when he read Vogt’s Road to Survival. Following
the footnotes to Burch and Pendell’s Human Breeding and
Survival, Moore became a supporter of the PRB and a friend of
Burch ( ). During the last 2 years of Burch’s life, Burch imparted
his population anxieties to Moore. These anxieties shifted from Europe,
where feared that starving and displaced people would seek
refuge in the United States, to Africa, Asia and Latin America, where public
health measures had reduced death rates, portending rapid population growth.
With the opening of the Cold War, worried that this
‘explosion in world population … could easily bankrupt the United States in
its efforts to support the large increase in population to prevent these
areas from becoming communistic’. He feared that continued population growth
would spark warfare, which promised further environmental devastation. 
confided to Moore that ‘if the population explosion continues (we are really
already in it), the atomic explosion cannot be suppressed indefinitely’.
After Burch’s death in 1950, self-published a
pamphlet titled The Population Bomb, which popularized
Burch’s explosive view of population and updated Human Breeding and
Survival for the Cold War era. The first edition came out in
1954, and Moore frequently reissued it over the next 15 years. Moore’s
Population Bomb described population growth in
Africa, Asia and Latin America as leading inevitably to the spread of global
communism and nuclear war, and called on the US government to limit
population growth in these parts of the world. Moore circulated the pamphlet
throughout his wide social and professional network, securing the
partnership of influential businessmen and diplomats ( ). Best-known
among these partners was General William Henry Draper Jr., chair of a 1958
committee charged by President Eisenhower with evaluating the US military
aid program. Directly influenced by Moore’s Population
Bomb, the Draper Commission included in its final report a
recommendation that the United States add population limitation measures to
its foreign policy ( , ). Through the 1960s, and
Draper ran full-page ads in the country’s major newspapers, demanding that
the US government actively forestall population growth overseas.
Even though most demographers never signed on to environmental Malthusianism,
the demographically-oriented Population Council collaborated with the three
Malthusian organizations – the Conservation Foundation, Planned Parenthood
and the PRB – to stoke public anxiety about overpopulation ( ;
 ). The Council funded Planned Parenthood’s efforts
to develop contraceptive technologies that could be imposed on women in the
Global South, such as the IUD, and helped secure funding for the PRB from
the Ford Foundation ( ; ; ). The leadership of the Council and the PRB
maintained backchannel communications while keeping the two organizations
formally separate ( ). These groups collaborated because their
separate problematizations of population – economic and environmental –
appeared to point to a common solution: nominally voluntary family planning
programs that employed small-family propaganda to promote uptake of the
IUD.
A fragile but symbiotic relationship between environmental Malthusianism and
demography emerged from this collaboration. Environmental Malthusianism
generated public opinion favourable to demography and the Population
Council’s family planning programs, while demography provided tacit support
to environmental Malthusianism by refraining from public critique. The
Council worked quietly at first, fearing that public attention to its
overseas family planning activities would generate opposition, both in the
United States and abroad. Its leaders soon found, however, that Vogt and
Osborn’s books, Moore’s pamphlet and Moore and Draper’s advertising campaign
softened public opinion toward family planning ( ).
Probably the most successful collaboration between the Council and the
Malthusian organizations resulted in the publication of Population
Growth and Economic Development in Low Income Countries: A Case Study
of India’s Prospects, known informally as the Report after its authors, Princeton demographer Ansley J
Coale and CIA economist Edgar M Hoover. Inspired by Moore’s
Population Bomb and funded by the World Bank, the
Coale-Hoover Report published the results of a simulation study finding that
India’s per capita national income over the next 30 years would be 40%
higher if birth rates could be cut in half ( ; ;
 ). Although the study’s initial assumptions entirely
determined its outcome, Moore, the PRB and the Population Council presented
it to the US government and the governments of developing countries
worldwide as definitive proof that ‘continued high fertility is an
impediment if not a total barrier to economic and social development’ ( :
164).
This study served for the next 30 years as empirical evidence that slowing
population growth could spur economic development. No comparable study
demonstrated that slowing population growth could protect the natural
environment, but the Coale-Hoover Report generated enough support for family
planning to satisfy Moore and Draper and the Malthusian organizations for a
while. With the Coale-Hoover Report supposedly having established the
necessity of reducing birth rates overseas, demography’s patrons turned the
field’s attention to research on how exactly to do that ( ,
 ).
Flush with funding generated by public concern about overseas population
growth, demography programs in US universities recruited international
students, who were expected to return home and lobby for government family
planning programs ( ). American demographers also worked in the Global
South, collaborating with the Population Council to launch family planning
programs under the guise of demographic research ( ;
 ; ). In 1965, after the Population Council had
funded a panel that reiterated the results of
the Coale-Hoover Report without any further research, the US government
established an Office of Population within the US Agency for International
Development (USAID), offering family planning assistance worldwide and
funding nongovernmental organizations that were already in the family
planning business, beginning with the Population Council and Planned
Parenthood ( ; ; ).
Working together, the Population Council and the Malthusian organizations had,
by the late 1960s, generated the widespread perception – not just in the
United States, but throughout much of the world – that human numbers were
rising too quickly and that something needed to be done. This was, however,
primarily a victory for demography and the Population Council, which largely
controlled the terms of the solution to the perceived population problem.
Before long, Moore and Draper grew frustrated with the slow results of the
nominally voluntary family planning programs promoted by demographers and
the Population Council. Beginning in the late 1960s, they enlisted new
environmentalist and scientific allies, in an effort to increase the
intensity of the US government’s population control efforts, both at home
and abroad, alienating demographers in the process.

## The other population bomb drops
Environmental Malthusianism became a mass movement in the late 1960s,
galvanized by two 1968 publications, both clearly influenced by Vogt and
Osborn: a bestselling paperback by Stanford University biologist Paul
Ehrlich titled The Population Bomb and a brief article
titled ‘The tragedy of the commons’, published in Science
by UC Santa Barbara biologist Garrett Hardin. Although these works are today
remembered as the foundational texts of environmental Malthusianism, they
were in their time anything but original ( ).
Ehrlich’s Population Bomb wove together popular concerns about
population growth, the ever-looming possibility of a nuclear world war and
the destruction of the natural environment. It claimed that the Earth was
already overpopulated from an environmental perspective and that nothing
could prevent widespread famine in the next decade. According to Ehrlich,
only a massive ‘die back’ of people could avert imminent nuclear war. For
that reason, he recommended that the United States cut off food aid to
countries that were already ‘beyond hope’, including India and Egypt ( :
72–80). Ehrlich also saw overpopulation in developed countries, attributing
the social, economic and environmental ills that had mounted in the United
States across the previous decade – including the recent wave of urban
uprisings – to domestic population growth.
As was true of the environmental Malthusians who shaped his worldview, Ehrlich
pointed to the world’s challenges as indicators of overpopulation without
any empirical evidence of causality. The claims he made for the effects of
population growth were capacious enough that empirical evidence would have
been hard to come by and, within the epistemic space of the Malthusian
population problematization, the ills themselves were the evidence. 
had theorized that all of the world’s problems stemmed from the pressure of
population on natural resources, and had therefore viewed all of the world’s
problems as proof that human population was pressing on
natural resources. Nearly 200 years later, Ehrlich made the same kind of
claim. To convince an audience that hadn’t already accepted the Malthusian
perspective, Ehrlich might have attempted to correlate population growth
with environmental degradation, either cross-sectionally between locales or
longitudinally within locales. He might have also carried out a simulation
study, as Coale and Hoover had done to establish the relationship between
population growth and economic development. He did none of these things,
however, perhaps because questions of human population and the environment
were far afield from his specialty in butterfly biology.
 
 Instead, : 43) simply asserted that ‘the causal chain of
deterioration is easily followed to its source. Too many cars, too many
factories, too much detergent, too much pesticide, multiplying contrails,
inadequate sewage treatment plants, too little water, too much carbon
dioxide – all can be traced easily to too many people’.
Yet, if Ehrlich had actually tried to trace the causal link to ‘too many
people’, he might have found what Barry Commoner did in 1971, namely that
the increase in pollution in the United States since World War II had
stemmed almost entirely from new production methods and rising per-capita
consumption rather than from population growth ( ).
In ‘The tragedy of the commons’, Hardin refuted Adam Smith’s proposition that
the emergent effect of individuals acting in their own interest would
benefit society as a whole, arguing that the ‘invisible hand’ of the market
fails to effectively allocate resources held in common, such as air, water
and land. However, most of the article treats these environmental resources
as a metaphor for the material resources Hardin argued were being unfairly
transferred from the more to less deserving by the welfare state as a result
of the excessive childbearing of the poor. : 1245) connected
welfare to the natural environment with the unsubstantiated contention that
‘the pollution problem is a consequence of population’. As a solution to the
tragedy of the commons, : 1247) proposed governmental regulation of
childbearing, which he described as ‘mutual coercion, mutually agreed upon
by the majority of people affected’. Hardin’s formulation elided the fact
that such limits typically fall heaviest on the poor and nonwhite, though
for him this was a feature rather than a bug. He favoured governmental
regulation of childbearing because he believed that poor women and women of
colour were least likely to use birth control on their own and he feared
their increase as a proportion of the world’s population. Hardin thus cast
the supposedly excessive existence of the world’s poor as a threat to the
very survival of the world’s wealthy.
Recent scholars have recognized the influence of Vogt and Osborn on Ehrlich and
Hardin ( ; ; ),
but less so that of Moore and Draper. Just before 1968, Moore and Draper had
begun a new advertising campaign in American newspapers under the auspices
of a new organization, the Population Crisis Committee (PCC). Moore and
Draper had founded the PCC in response to a request from Reimert Ravenholt,
director of USAID’s Office of Population, to generate public pressure to
raise USAID’s population control budget ( ; ). Although they ultimately aimed to increase funding for
overseas population control, and Draper believed
they could more effectively pique American concern by bringing the
population problem home. They accomplished this by focusing their
advertisements on population growth in the United States, pointing to social
strife and environmental degradation as evidence that the US population had
surpassed its natural limit.
 

 
book borrowed more than its title from Moore’s Population
Bomb pamphlet. It also seamlessly combined the themes of
Moore’s pamphlet, which warned that continued population growth would
inevitably lead to nuclear war, with those of Moore and Draper’s PCC
advertisements, which blamed population growth for environmental
degradation, rising crime rates and the social strife that threatened to
tear the United States apart at the end of the 1960s. mailed Ehrlich’s
book to his supporters with a letter stating that it ‘expresses my [Moore’s]
own view of the frightening prospects of the world population out of
control’. Hardin’s contention that the reproduction of the poor in the
United States would drain public resources echoed an advertisement run by
Moore and Draper on April 15, 1968, warning taxpayers that population growth
would lead to rising tax rates in order to meet ‘the ever-mounting costs of
welfare, education, pollution control, conservation and other services’
( ).
Demographers and environmental Malthusians began to part ways when
environmental Malthusians decided that the solution to the
economic population problem – nominally voluntary
family planning – would not solve the environmental
population problem. Kingsley Davis made a presentation to the National
Academy of Sciences, later published in Science, contending
that the Population Council’s family planning programs were incapable of
reducing population growth quickly enough to prevent ecological catastrophe
( ).
 
 This presentation revived the slogan ‘zero population growth’ to
describe the goal of environmental Malthusianism. It subsequently became the
name of a grassroots organization led by Ehrlich that pressed for explicit
limits on childbearing worldwide, beginning in the United States. Davis was
the only prominent demographer to join its board.
With the publication of Ehrlich’s Population Bomb and Hardin’s
‘Tragedy of the Commons’ and the simultaneous turn to domestic issues in the
PCC’s advertising campaign, most demographers felt that environmental
Malthusianism had gone too far. Their problematization of population
excluded the possibility that the United States was overpopulated and
eschewed explicit limits on childbearing. Demographers and the Population
Council defined such limits as coercive and warned that ‘coercive measures
to force contraceptive practice are more likely to bring down the government
than the birth rate’ ( ). They saw population growth as a threat to
economic development and political stability in the Global South, but viewed
coercive population control as an even greater threat.
Demographers initially spoke out against environmental Malthusianism and Zero
Population Growth (ZPG) primarily amongst themselves, fearing that more
public opposition would undermine the broader population movement. Princeton
demographer president of PAA, devoted his presidential address
to the question ‘Should the United States start a campaign for fewer
births?’ His answer was ‘no’. Implicitly critiquing Ehrlich’s
Population Bomb and PCC newspaper ads, :
467) complained that ‘it has become fashionable to explain almost every
national failure or shortcoming by rapid population growth’, when the vast
majority of the country’s problems had little to do with population. He
refuted Hardin’s equation of population with pollution, pointing out that ‘a
population one-half or three-quarters the size of the current one in the
United States could ruin the potability of our fresh water supplies and
poison our atmosphere by the unrestricted discharge of waste’ just as easily
as could a larger one ( : 470). Population control would not necessarily
help the environment.
The 1970 PAA meeting featured a roundtable on ZPG, where Notestein contested
Ehrlich and Hardin’s attribution of environmental degradation to population
growth, demonstrating that increases in pollution had far outpaced increases
in population. He called population control ‘a distraction from an immediate
attack on pollution’ by more direct means ( : 445).
Proponents of environmental Malthusianism often portray their critics as
ideological opponents of birth control or as deniers of the environmental
crisis. Coale and Notestein were neither. Coale had been a student of
Notestein’s at Princeton and had replaced Notestein as director of OPR when
Notestein retired to head the Population Council. Both were committed to the
promotion of family planning as a means of stimulating economic development
in the Global South. Both men also favoured environmental protection, but
preferred such economic solutions as ‘cap and trade’ systems for
pollutants.
Even Ehrlich viewed population control as an indirect approach to environmental
protection. He had embraced it only after his earlier attempts to promote
the regulation of pesticide use in US agriculture failed ( ).
Ehrlich’s ZPG colleagues advocated for population control not because they
perceived it as the most effective means of protecting the environment, but
because they perceived it as the most effective means of staving off
environmental regulation. The organization’s leaders explained that, ‘to the
extent that we can protect the environment for future generations only at
expense to the present generation in material standards, government controls
and loss of freedom or dependence upon foreign sources of supply, we will
choose less environmental protection’ ( ). As had been the case for Burch, Vogt, Osborn, Moore and
Draper, the leaders of ZPG sought population control to protect their access
to environmental resources, not to protect the environment itself.
Demographers also contested Moore, Draper, Ehrlich and Hardin’s attribution of
domestic social strife to population growth. University of Chicago
demographer : 455) described ‘the population explosion’ as ‘a
smoke screen to obscure other problems that should have priority, including
the problems of the slums, racism and the “urban crisis” in general’.
Demographer Conrad Taeuber, who supervised the 1970 US Census, agreed,
announcing that ‘economic and social factors are more important than
population growth in threatening the quality of American life’ ( ).
The demographers of President Nixon’s Commission on Population Growth and
the American Future shared Hauser and Taeuber’s perspective ( ).
By the time the Commission released its final report in 1972, the US birth
rate had fallen below replacement and had turned its
attention to immigration restriction as the most effective means of
population control, reconnecting environmental Malthusianism with its
interwar anti-immigrant roots ( ; ).
Although demographers of the 1960s and 1970s generally attacked environmental
Malthusianism in professional venues rather than public ones, their critique
was open enough among demographers, and between demographers and
environmental Malthusians, as to shine through clearly in the archival
record. In 1970, an internal Population Council memorandum described ZPG as
‘a cult paying lip service to ecology but rather lightly based in science
and deeply rooted in emotion’ ( ). 
knew exactly what the Council thought of him, telling his ZPG associate
Richard Bowers that ‘the Population Council (or at least its biggest wheels)
hates my guts, those of Kingsley Davis, Garrett Hardin and indeed anyone
else who has taken an approach to population control except their “go slow
and use family planning” one’. declined to
review Ehrlich’s Population, Resources, Environment,
reasoning that ‘I’ve been saying such nasty things about Ehrlich and doing
so publicly, my friends would never believe I could give him an honest
break’.
The tension between demography and environmental Malthusianism mounted in the
early 1970s, coming to a head at the 1974 UN Population Conference. By that
time, Moore had passed away and Draper had become US representative to the
UN Population Commission. With the 1974 conference, Draper aimed to bring
world leaders together to agree on a World Population Plan of Action. Yet,
the US delegation, led by Draper, could not agree with the Population
Council, whose demographers served as expert advisors to the UN Population
Commission, on the goals of the Plan. Draper pushed for quantitative birth
rate targets for all countries of the world ( ). Instead, the
Population Council sought commitments from the world’s governments to make
contraception widely available to those who wanted it.
At the meeting, however, representatives of nonaligned countries joined with
communist and Catholic countries in rejecting both US proposals ( ).
Instead of family planning programs or quantitative population targets,
leaders of nonaligned countries recommended implementation of the New
International Economic Order that had been proposed in 1972 by the UN
Conference on Trade and Development and adopted earlier in 1974 by the UN
General Assembly ( ; ). While many of these
leaders had accepted family planning assistance from USAID and such
nongovernmental organizations as the Population Council and Planned
Parenthood, they rejected the idea that family planning or other approaches
to population control could alleviate international inequities, instead
demanding more control over the terms of international trade ( ). They laid responsibility for the worsening global
environmental crisis on the countries of the Global North, as they had done
2 years earlier at the UN Conference on the Human Environment in Stockholm
( ).

## Conclusion
Despite the wholesale rejection by most of the world’s leaders of the idea that
rapid population growth was the primary cause of either poverty or
environmental degradation, both population problematizations remained firmly
lodged in the American popular, policy and scientific imaginaries. In 1992,
the issued a joint statement laying the blame for the
ongoing environmental crisis at the feet of human population growth.
Although natural scientists spoke publicly about the effects of population
growth on the natural environment, however, they did little empirical
research on the topic. Having established that human activities drove
ecosystem decline, they simply assumed that fewer people would mean fewer of
those deleterious activities ( ). In the last two
decades of the 20th century, critiques of environmental Malthusianism came
primarily from the anti-racist feminist Committee on Women, Population and
the Environment, which promotes reproductive and environmental justice and
mounts scientific challenges to claims that population growth promotes
environmental degradation or prevents economic development (e.g. ).
US-based demographers began to venture into environmental research only in the
1990s. Some were young scholars who had grown up in an age of popular
concern for the world’s ecosystems. Others took inspiration from a request
for applications issued by the National Institutes of Health in 1994, which
sought to promote research that would specify the reciprocal relationship
between population dynamics and the environment at the micro level ( ). Demographers soon found, however, that the
obvious publication venue for this research – Population and
Environment, the only scholarly journal purporting to focus
on the relationship between human population and the natural environment –
had become a safe haven for eco-fascism and white nationalism, rather than
an organ for responsible scholarly research in either demography or the
environmental sciences.
Population and Environment had been launched in the early
1980s by the American Psychological Association (APA) to publish research on
the social environment as a determinant of childbearing and
other demographic behaviour. The journal broke its ties with the APA and
shifted its focus to the natural environment toward the end of the decade,
when Virginia Abernethy, described by the Southern Poverty Law Center ( ) as ‘push[ing] repugnant, race-based
politics from behind an academic veneer’, took over as editor. In 1998, the
journal replaced Abernethy with psychologist Kevin MacDonald, who the SPLC
describes as ‘the neo-Nazi movement’s favourite academic’ ( ). During Abernethy’s editorship, the
journal focused on immigration, taking a nativist stance and painting
immigration to the United States as a key driver of ecosystem degradation.
During the MacDonald period, the journal became an outlet for racist
evolutionary scholarship sponsored by the Pioneer Fund ( ).
When Springer acquired Population and Environment in 2004, the
publisher worked with demographers to oust the journal’s editorial board,
redesign its cover, rewrite its mission statement and clear out its
publishing queue, turning it into the reputable demography journal it is
today (Evelien Bakker, 2019, personal communication; Lori Hunter, 2018,
personal communication). Since then, its editors have fostered the
development of high-quality research that explores reciprocal links between
environmental and demographic processes. Although such research continues to
demonstrate that the relationship between population growth and
environmental degradation is much more complicated than natural scientists
tend to assume, and although scientists have repeatedly failed to identify a
direct relationship between population growth and greenhouse gas emissions
(e.g. ), environmental Malthusianism is currently enjoying a
resurgence. Today, as in the times of Ehrlich and Hardin, Vogt and Osborn as
well as Pearl and East, environmental Malthusianism provides scientific
legitimacy for policies that police the reproduction of the world’s most
vulnerable people while leaving more proximate causes of environmental
devastation unaddressed ( ).
Since the end of World War II, environmental Malthusians have pointed to
ecosystem degradation as supposedly obvious evidence that the Earth is
already overpopulated and have called for population control as an
alternative to environmental regulation and economic redistribution. Despite
their scientific opposition, demographers collaborated with environmental
Malthusians just long enough in the 1950s and 1960s to create a global
population movement that advanced the agendas of both groups.
 
 The harms caused by that movement – both by governments that
explicitly limited childbearing, such as China, and by supposedly voluntary
programs that nonetheless imposed contraception where it was not desired –
have been well documented ( ; ; ). However, even the most critical histories of the
population control movement largely fail to recognize the illusory nature of
the scientific consensus that claimed to undergird it.

Many thanks to Jade Sasser, Rajani Bhatia and Ellen Foley, who helped me work
through multiple drafts of this article. I am deeply indebted to Lori Hunter
and Evelien Bakker, who relayed to me some of the sordid history of
Population and Environment. Thanks are also due to
Sergio Sismondo, Donna Haraway and the anonymous reviewers at Social
Studies of Science, who provided generous and constructive
feedback.
Funding: The author disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the
research, authorship and/or publication of this article: This work was
supported by the National Science Foundation (grant number 1229051);
the Society for Historians of American Foreign Relations; the
Population Studies Center at the University of Michigan; the American
Philosophical Society; the Consortium for History of Science,
Technology and Medicine; the Rockefeller Archive Center; the Marshall
Weinberg Research Endowment; and UC Davis.
ORCID iD: Emily Klancher Merchant https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4747-4177

## Author biography
Emily Klancher Merchant is an assistant professor of Science and
Technology Studies at the University of California, Davis. Her research
combines archival research, oral history and computational text analysis to
explore the history of the quantitative social sciences in the twentieth and
twenty-first centuries. She is the author of Building the Population
Bomb (Oxford University Press 2021) and co-editor of
Navigating Time and Space in Population Studies
(Springer 2011).
1.This article focuses on Anglophone demography because it was
Anglophone demographers whose work was most relevant to
environmental Malthusianism. Hispanophone demographers, located
primarily in Latin America, focused on critiques of the economic
overpopulation narrative, while Francophone demographers, in
both France and Africa, took a pronatalist approach that was
explicitly at odds with population control.
2. excellent account of demography’s
‘economization of life’ incorrectly portrays Raymond Pearl as
the interwar progenitor of demography.
3.The analysis of human population, whether by biologists or
statisticians, assumed in advance (and generally continues to
assume) that populations follow the boundaries of nation-states,
simply because the analysis of human population dynamics relies
largely on data collected by states, typically through censuses
and vital registration systems. This national object of analysis
was so natural to those involved as to go unmentioned.
4.These statisticians modelled fertility as a function of female
bodies, a convention that became standard in demography ( ).
5.This story parallels the one 
tells about the rise of population science in China in the
1970s. In both cases, social scientists and natural scientists
vied for authority over population, and in both cases the more
quantitative group – the one whose analysis seemed more
‘scientific’ – won. In the interwar US, that group was the
(younger) social scientists; in 1970s China, that group was the
natural scientists.
6.This was not a case of ‘undead science’, as described by . By the end of the 1930s, professional
scientists had either adopted the demographic perspective or
abandoned population science. Mid-twentieth-century champions of
Malthusianism were primarily gentleman science enthusiasts
working through public opinion and policy channels.
7.For the distinction between birth control and population control,
see and .
8.The pattern of demographic change formalized in demographic
transition theory had previously been noted by and .
9. I = P*A*T (environmental impact is
equal to the product of population size, affluence and
technology) equation is often cited as evidence for the impact
of population growth on the environment, but it is a heuristic,
a formalization of theory, not an empirical finding.
10.The following advertisements in The New York Times
are examples: ‘Have you ever been mugged?’ (3 Oct, 1968), ‘How
many people do you want in your country?’ (12 May, 1969),
‘Warning: The water you are drinking may be polluted’ (12 June,
1968) and ‘This is the crime explosion’ (8 Dec, 1968).
11. , a propaganda expert who became president of
the Population Council in 1968, published a response titled
‘Beyond family planning’ in 1969. Historians frequently point to
this article as evidence of the Population Council’s efforts to
step up their population control efforts, but it is in actuality
a reaffirmation of the Council’s commitment to (supposedly)
voluntary family planning.
12.For a more recent version of this kind of ‘structured disunity’ in
the population field, see .