pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC9997958PMC9997958.1999795899979583689316110.1371/journal.pone.0280540PONE-D-21-078751Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesDiagnostic MedicineVirus TestingBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyMedical MicrobiologyMicrobial PathogensViral PathogensImmunodeficiency VirusesHIVMedicine and Health SciencesPathology and Laboratory MedicinePathogensMicrobial PathogensViral PathogensImmunodeficiency VirusesHIVBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsVirusesViral PathogensImmunodeficiency VirusesHIVBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsVirusesImmunodeficiency VirusesHIVBiology and life sciencesOrganismsVirusesRNA virusesRetrovirusesLentivirusHIVBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyMedical MicrobiologyMicrobial PathogensViral PathogensRetrovirusesLentivirusHIVMedicine and Health SciencesPathology and Laboratory MedicinePathogensMicrobial PathogensViral PathogensRetrovirusesLentivirusHIVBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsVirusesViral PathogensRetrovirusesLentivirusHIVPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsSexuality GroupingsMen WHO Have Sex with MenMedicine and health sciencesPublic and occupational healthPreventive medicineHIV preventionPeople and PlacesGeographical LocationsAfricaKenyaMedicine and health sciencesEpidemiologyHIV epidemiologyMedicine and health sciencesDiagnostic medicineHIV diagnosis and managementSocial SciencesEconomicsLabor EconomicsEmploymentEvaluation of factors associated with HIV self-testing Acceptability and Uptake among the MSM community in Nairobi, Kenya: A cross sectional study
Evaluation of factors associated with HIV self-testing Acceptability and Uptake among the MSM communityhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-9919-7012NdunguKingoriConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologySoftwareWriting – original draft GichangiPeterConceptualizationMethodologySupervisionValidationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2069-8752TemmermanMarleenConceptualizationMethodologySupervisionValidationWriting – review & editing 1
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium2
University Administration, Technical University of Mombasa, Mombasa, Kenya3
International Centre for Reproductive Health, Mombasa, Kenya4
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Aga Khan University Hospital, Nairobi, KenyaAluisioAdam R.Editor files.

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the paper and its files.

## Background
There has been significant progress in HIV prevention efforts across Africa [ – ], however men who have sex with men (MSM) continue to bear a disproportionately heavy burden of HIV infection compared to the general adult population [ ]. The risk of acquiring HIV is 27 times higher among MSM compared to other heterosexual men [ ]. Surveillance data from low and middle-income countries (LMIC), shows that MSM are 19.3 times more likely to be living with HIV than the general population [ ]. Kenya has the third largest population of people living with HIV in sub-Saharan Africa and the highest national HIV prevalence of any country outside of Southern Africa [ ]. HIV in Kenya is characterized as a generalized epidemic among the adult population, and a concentrated epidemic among key populations [ ]. The MSM population in Kenya commonly encompasses a range of sexual and gender identities, including homosexual, gay, bisexual, transgendered, and heterosexual. MSM may be married, gay, or sex workers [ ]. The Kenya AIDS Strategic Framework 2014/15–2018/19 identified MSM and male sex workers (MSWs), as key populations and has prioritized these populations for HIV/AIDS prevention [ ]. HIV prevalence among the MSW and MSM in Kenya is 4 to 5 times higher than in the among the general population [ ]. HIV prevalence in 2010 among MSM in Kenya was an estimated 18.2% [ ]. According to the Kenya HIV Prevention Response and Modes of Transmission Analysis (2008), 15.2 percent of new infections were attributed to MSM [ ]. In 2007, HIV prevalence among MSM/MSWs with exclusively male partners was 41 percent in Mombasa [ ]. The above findings further confirm the assertion by the Kenya AIDS Strategic Framework 2014/15–2018/19, that the MSM and MSW should be prioritized in controlling the HIV epidemic in Kenya.
More than half (53%) of the 1.6 million people living with HIV in Kenya are unaware of their HIV status [ ]. The 2019 HPTN 075 study, aimed at evaluating the accuracy of self-reported HIV status among African men who have sex with men, indicated that self-report of HIV positive status at screening was less common among participants who reported sex with men and women compared to men who reported sex with men only, perhaps due to concerns about inadvertent disclosure about their same-sex behaviors [ ]. In this report, approximately one third of the HIV-infected MSM who did not report a prior HIV diagnosis to study staff had ARV drugs detected and were classified as previously diagnosed [ ]. It is estimated that new HIV infections could be reduced by 30% per year, if all HIV positive individuals were aware of their serological status [ ].
The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends that all MSM test for HIV at least annually and those MSM who have multiple or anonymous partners or use illegal drugs should test at least every 3 or 6 months [ ]. Additionally, the United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) advocates that at least 90% of people should know their HIV status, 90% of those diagnosed linked to anti-retroviral (ARV) treatment and 90% of those on treatment achieving viral suppression [ ]. Achieving “the first 90%” is a critical step in the elimination of new infections by 2030 [ ]. However, more than 75% of MSM in low and middle-income countries lack access to HIV testing services [ ]. There is therefore urgent need to develop and implement innovative initiatives that promote HIV testing, especially among the MSM community. HIV self-testing (HIVST) is a process where an individual conducts a HIV test on their own specimen (oral fluid or blood), and interprets the result. HIVST can be performed in a private setting, either alone or with a trusted person. Since HIV self-testing does not provide a definitive diagnosis, individuals whose tests positive for HIV are advised to seek confirmatory testing with a health provider, in line with the national HIV testing algorithm [ ].
Recent research conducted in Zimbabwe, Zambia, Lesotho and Kenya revealed that HIVST is feasible, acceptable among health workers and the general population [ , , , – ]. The Kenyan government introduced self-testing kits as part of “Be Self Sure campaign in May, 2017. The kits are now available to buy from pharmacies for around 8–10 United States Dollars (USD). There is potential for HIVST to enhance access to HIV testing especially within the MSM community [ ], even though uptake of HIV Testing Services (HTS) among the MSM is low, compared to those in the general population due to barriers such as stigma, discrimination and poor quality of services [ ].
Countries around the world are at different stages of development and implementation of HIVST guidelines. There is however no optimal approach for implementing HIVST targeting the MSM community. Very few studies have examined any aspect of HIVST among MSM in Sub-Saharan Africa [ , ]. In Kenya studies have been conducted to understand the feasibility of scaling up HIVST within the general population, including among sero-discordant couples and FSWs, yet there is little information on HIVST among MSM specifically [ , ]. Although global evidence suggests that introduction of HIVST can benefit MSM, evidence is limited on how, when, and in what contexts the delivery of HIVST to MSM could increase awareness of HIV status, and lead to early linkage to HIV treatment and prevention services in the African context [ ]. Innovative interventions geared towards promoting testing among the MSM community must overcome key barriers to testing such as stigma, fear about confidentiality of venue testing, distance to testing sites and opportunity cost [ ]. We conducted this research to explore acceptability and factors that would facilitate uptake of HIV self- testing among the MSM community in Nairobi.

## Methods

## Study design & population
The Conceptual Framework combining AIDS Risk Reduction Model (ARRM) and Modified Social Ecological Model showing the interconnectedness of the different factors informed this exploratory study [ ], S1 Fig in . A cross-sectional design in peri-urban settings of Nairobi and Kiambu counties in Kenya was used. The study target population was all adult men above 18 years living in Nairobi county, who self-reported having engaged in anal or oral sex with men, and were able to provide own informed consent. Nairobi city has the highest number of MSM/MSW, approximately 11,042 MSM (range 10,000–22,222) [ ], Kiambu borders Nairobi, hence a likelihood of interviewing residents from Kiambu in Nairobi county.

## Sampling techniques
Purposive sampling to identify the eleven data collection points frequented by the MSM community, such as the safe spaces/drop-in centres, hotels and massage parlors was used. Based on previous work in Kenya and elsewhere that indicates high mobility of this population, and given that hidden populations have networks within which they operate, data collections points which were likely to capture the same respondents or respondents with similar characteristics were not included in the study [ – ]. Snow balling or chain-referral sampling was then used to reach the interviewees [ , , ]. This method, despite its inherent flaws, was the most optimal to use to identify and reach this hidden population. The method has been previously used to reach similar populations elsewhere [ – ]. The study reached 391 MSM who responded to the self-administered questionnaires out of which 345 completed the information. The missing data was handled through the listwise approach that omit those cases with the missing data and analyze the remaining data. This approach is known as the complete case or listwise deletion. Listwise is a default option for analysis in most statistical software packages including the Statistical Package for the Social sciences (SPSS), we used for the analysis. However, if the assumption of missing is completely at random (MCAR) is satisfied, a listwise deletion is known to produce unbiased estimates and conservative results [ ]. The missing data for this study was random, hence produced unbiased estimates as demonstrated in the probability plot of normality tests graphs.

## Data collection
The questionnaire was developed through a consultative, participatory approach by consulting experts in the subject matter and the MSM/MSW. The questionnaire development process was also informed by previous research done on the thematic area [ – ]. The draft questionnaire was tested with a sample of 45 respondents for flow, comprehension, conciseness and the ability to adequately answer the research questions. All the MSM respondents completed the English paper based self-administered structured questionnaires between July 2018 and June 2019 after obtaining oral informed consent. These structured questionnaires consisted of three sections. The first section had questions on demographics of the respondents, the second section consisted of questions on HIV risk behaviors and the final section had question on HIVST preferences, acceptability and uptake.

## Measures
The dependent variable for the study was reported HIV self-testing. Self-reports on HIVST have been used in previous studies, either with or without verification that the tests were actually conducted as reported [ – ]. Prior to data collection, the meaning of HIV self-test was explained to the participants and it included a test that allows people to take a HIV test and find out their result in their own home or other private locations. Participants were then requested to indicate whether they had ever undertaken a HIV self-test prior to the study.
The independent variables included socio-demographics: Age, place/country of birth, religion, education level, employment status, marital status and income. While it is possible that there were false reports, checks were put in place to reduce the possibility of wrong reporting by excluding responses with inconsistencies in all the cascades. The questionnaires were also pre-tested and refined before the main data collection.
Besides the above, the following risk factors data were collected: Identify as MSM/MSW, number of sexual partners, preferred sex position (top or bottom), condom use, condom use after alcohol/hard drugs and type of lubricant. The following variables were of importance in measuring the acceptability and factors that facilitates the uptake of HIVST: Frequency of HIV/AIDS test, use of protection or condoms with partner if HIV/AIDS negative, ever heard of HIV self-test, would prefer to use the Oral or Blood self-test kit, cost of the HIV self-test kits, ever tested for HIV, type of facility for the last HIV test, reason for most recent test, ever heard of window period, and have you ever experienced stigma from healthcare providers.

## Data analysis & management
The questionnaires were serialized and data entered in a SPSS Version 23.0 data-base for analysis (IBM Corp, 2015). Using descriptive analysis, we summarized and presented data in tables. Cross tabulation and bivariate analysis were done. Prevalence Odds Ratio (POR) and multivariate analysis was done to get adjusted POR including variables statistically significant on bivariate analysis or those known to have impact on the variable of interest.
P-value of <0.05 was considered statistically significant.

## Ethical considerations
Ethical clearance was obtained from the University of Ghent Approval number (PA 2016/009) and the Mount Kenya University Ethics Review Committee (Approval number: MKU/ERC/0463). Informed consent was obtained from all study participants in a language that they could understand. We anonymized each record using unique identifiers during data entry and analysis. Access to the data was restricted to only those researchers responsible for analysis in password protected databases and computers.

## Results

## Demographics, social-economic factors
About (86.6%) of the interviewees were Kenyans. Two-thirds (64.0%) of the interviewees were aged 18–24 years of whom 86.6% were single and only 13.4% were married. A majority of the interviewees were Christians 244 (71.8%). Education attainment was high with (59.8%) reporting at least secondary education and (40.2%) tertiary level of education, however, employment status was low with (72.7%) reporting that they were unemployed. Slightly more than half (52.8%) reported earning more than 60 United States Dollars (USD), while (47.2%) earned less than 60 USD per month. More than half of all respondents (58.8%) self-identified as MSW, while the rest (41.2%) identified as MSM, ( ).
 

## Uptake of HIV self testing
Of all the participants, (55.9%) reported HIV self-testing. More older respondents aged >25 years (53.51%) reported having ever used HIV test kit, than those aged between 18–24 years (39.9%), POR 1.73 (1.09, 2.75). Some of the HIV risk behaviors for the interviewees include having multiple sexual partners and being MSW. A higher proportion of the interviewees (90.8%) affirmed that they used condoms during the last sex act. However, (57.7%) consistently used condoms. Regarding the preference in sex position, most of the interviewees were versatile, they preferred being either on top or bottom. Comparatively fewer Kenyans (42.96%) than non-Kenyans (57.78%) indicated that they had ever used HIV self-test kit. Cross-tabulation analysis of ever used HIV test kit by employment status showed that (40.43%) of the employed and (47.2%) of the unemployed had used the kit POR 1.32 (1.67, 2.60). There was a higher chance of employed respondents using the HIV test kits at (32%.) than the unemployed. The interviewees who were single were (86.61%) and married (13.39%) had statistical significance with POR 1.82 (1.96, 3.43) one use of HIV self test kit. There were more study participants who reported having used a condom during last sex and had used HIV test kit (47.21%), than those that had not used a condom during sex and had ever used an HIV test kit (29.03%) POR 2.19 (1.98, 4.90). Participants who reported condom use at last sex were nearly 2-times more likely to have had a self- HIV testing POR 2.19 (1.98, 4.90). Half the respondents (50.63%) indicated that they considered the window period in deciding when to test POR 1.47 (1.96, 2.25). The participants who reported that if they test positive on self-HIV testing were more than 2-times likely to report they would use protection or condoms with their partner POR 1.32 (1.67, 2.6). On univariate analysis, sex position, POR 1.01 (0.94, 1.08) did not influence uptake of HIV self-testing, .
 

## HIV self-test acceptability, uptake & associated factors
About (77%) of the respondents were willing to self test for HIV. Among the factors influencing HIV self-testing that had a statistically significant association at Pearson Chi-Square P-value <0.05 at 95% confidence interval were frequency of HIV/AIDS test, considered the window period in deciding when to test, use protection or condoms with partner if HIV/AIDS positive, ever heard of HIV self-test, ever heard of oral HIV Self-test, heard of blood sample HIV Self-test, would prefer to use the Oral or Blood self-test kit and what do you think of the current cost, .
 

## Multivariate analysis for HIV self-testing among MSM
We used the measure of association (Chi-Square) and Prevalence Odds Ratio (POR) to inform the variables included in the multivariate analysis. The covariates of HIV self-testing were: respondent’s age, MSM aged 25 and above were more likely to have used HIVST than those 24 years and below; place of birth, frequency of testing for HIV/AIDS- habitual testers were more likely to have used HIVST kits than non-habitual testers; if HIV positive through HIV self-test, would go for a confirmatory test, if confirmatory test shows negative, after how long would you seek a re-test after the current negative result test. Those that would test regularly even if previous HIV test was negative, were more likely to have used the test kit, .
 

## Discussion
The findings of this study significantly contribute towards the generation of evidence on HIV self-testing among the MSM in Kenya as proposed by World Health Organization (WHO) 2016 guidelines [ ]. This study majored on HIVST among MSM and MSW in Nairobi and the peri-urban neighboring.
The study suggests that there is a significant association between HIV self-testing and frequency of testing. MSM who used HIV self-test kits had a higher frequency of testing. Habitual HIV testers were more likely to have used the HIVST kit than the non-habitual testers and this finding is consistent with other findings that suggest that regular testing is often associated with other protective measures such as education, fewer sexual partners as well as the mindset to care for self and partners [ , ]. Our findings are also in agreement with MSM randomized to HIVST access Vs. standard clinic-based testing in Seattle, the mean number of HIV test and quarterly testing increased significantly among those in the HIVST, with no increase in risk behaviors [ ]. Kenya’s National HIV testing guidelines recommends re-testing of HIV negative MSM every three months [ ]. To achieve the above target, both clinic-based setting and HIV self-test options should be scaled up within the MSM community.
Our study findings show that most of the MSM preferred blood sample self-test kits as compared to oral self-test kits, most of the interviewees preferred blood sample self-test kits, since they believe the blood test will be more accurate than oral self-test. These findings are in line with a study conducted in South Africa among the MSM community that showed higher preference for fingerstick tests over oral fluid tests among the interviewees [ ]. Our findings differ from study findings conducted in the US emergency department, where most of the respondents prefered oral fluid testing [ ]. Given the diversity of preference for either blood sample or oral test kits and the ovewhelming support for HIVST, we would highly recommend the availability and distibution of both types of self kits to the MSM community in Kenya.
The Non-Govermental Organisations (NGO) facilities/drop in centres were the most preferred distibution points for the HIV self- test kits. Other distibution points include the private sector and the public/government facilities. Our findings differ slightly with a study conducted by Okal et al., [ ], that’s showed that most of the respondents preferred public health care facilities but for the general population. The variance in the findings can be attributed to the fact that the MSM community feel stigmatized and also due to the illegal nature of homosexuality in Kenya, hence the MSM would want to stay far away from the public/Government healthcare providers. Site preference is also largely based on proximity and cost. A study conducted among general adult population showed that “easily available” as the strongest reason for which ever pick up point [ ]. A study conducted in Nigeria found that MSM prefer to pick the kits from the MSM friendly drop in centers, and community health clinic (CHC) [ ]. Future HIVST distribution should consider drop in centers and community pharmacies as options of distribution sites. Peer educators or Key Opinion Leaders (KOL) are still an option to be considered, though this approach would have high cost implications.
A high proportion of the respondents (80%) indicated that if they tested for HIV positive through HIV self-test, they would go for counselling and confirmatory test. Our findings are consistent with findings from a cross-sectional study done in Kenya, that showed that 74% of the respondents would seek counselling services, confirm results or seek medication after a positive HIVST [ ]. Pre-test counselling should be offered before dispensing the HIV self-test. This would provide an opportunity for client to get all the information they would need before testing. The provision of information before testing would be crucial in guiding the clients on how to use the test kits, so as to reduce invalid results also the clients would know what to do depending on the results and where to seek for the healthcare services. Pre-test counseling data can also be used for monitoring the patients and for follow-ups.
A significantly high proportion of the respondents (92%) would go for confirmatory test within one month of testing. Our findings are slightly higher than a study conducted in Kenya in 2014, [ ] that reported 61% of the general population sampled and 40% of MSM would go to a clinic for a confirmatory test. This demonstrates that the MSM who self-test are willing and will still link to the healthcare system. A major concern for HIVST is whether self-testers will seek care and treatment depending on the results. Being able to link to care within a week is considered optimal behavior given that linkage to care is defined as “having visited a health care provider within 30 days of being diagnosed with HIV [ ]. There is therefore a challenge and a potential in enhancing uptake of HIVST among MSM. The opportunity is that, during the implementation of HIV self-test, home visits by the healthcare workers, encouraging the MSM to visit MSM friendly clinics, and calls and short message service (SMS) can potentially be utilized to ensure that the MSM that test HIV positive are not only linked to care, but are not lost in follow-up. A study conducted in Nigeria among the MSM community showed a 100% linkage to HIV and treatment [ ], indicates potential viability of the suggested strategy to link and retain MSM in care. The high linkage in that study was likely due to follow-up calls after HIVST distribution, the ease of participant’s access to the opinion leaders and also the linkage to a well-trusted MSM-friendly facility that offers HIV prevention services. Studies conducted in other areas reported both fairly low [ ] and high [ ] linkage to HIV care and treatment after self-testing.
The use of a “test buddy” may potentially increase uptake of HIVST. A significantly high number of MSM indicated that they would prefer a testing “buddy” on the first time of self-test kit use. There was a statistically significant association between respondents who had never used a HIV self-test kit and the respondents’ need of a testing partner on first time use of HIV self-test kit. A HIVST validation study was conducted in Kenya, that reported a higher rate of invalid HIV results (37/ 239 = 15.5%) [ ]. The findings are also consistent with another study done among Chinese MSM, that showed significant errors during the process of conducting HIVST that rendered almost half of the test results invalid [ ]. According to that study, failure to follow the manufacturers instructions was the main cause of invalid results both for oral self test and blood sample test kits. For the finger prick users, most of the errors occurred during the stage of collecting specimen and for oral fluid users made most of the errors during the stage of testing the collected specimen. A testing partner or “buddy” would also help the MSM first time testers get accurate results.
The high cost of the test kits, lack of knowledge on correct usage of the test kits, fear, stigma and inaccessibility of HIV self-test kits were the main hindrances on the use of the kits. Most of the respondents indicated that the estimated current market cost of the self-test kit was expensive at 8–100 USD. The preferred cost of the HIVST kit was about half to one USD. Lack of appropriate knowledge on the use of HIVST kits would prevent the MSM from using the kits. This correlates to studies showing several ways in which errors would happen, this would include during sample collection using the swab, also the handling of the swab and following the procedures [ , ].
This study has some limitations. The study is based on respondent self-reports on HIVST use, and as such the veracity of such reports could not be easily determined within the design of this study. Despite the fact that the respondents, were recruited through methods designed to generate a representative sample, the sample is unlikely representative of all MSM in Kenya, since most of the respondents were young and of low and medium economic status. Demonstrating that the older and MSM with higher economic status were not represented. There is likelihood of bias in the sample as this was response driven and typically referrals through such a strategy implies that potential respondents will be drawn from friends, colleagues and known networks of the individuals making such referrals. The respondents were also drawn from Nairobi and the neighboring county, where the MSM community has been receiving considerable support from the NGOs as compared to MSM in other regions of the country. Future studies should prioritize the elder generations and also the MSM with higher income status and also from other regions of the country with few HIV prevention interventions.

## Conclusions
This study has showed that age, habitual testing, self-care/partner care, as well as confirmatory testing and immediate introduction into care if found seropositive were associated with having used an HIVST kit. All the above are factors that potentially would also encourage prompt enrollment into linkage to care and treatment after self-test. Some of the key facilitating factors for HIVST uptake among the MSM community in Kenya include; awareness creation on the importance of frequent HIV testing, counselling pre and/ or post testing, emphasizing the importance of testing buddies for first- time testers and reducing the cost of the current HIV self-test kits. A potential strategy to increase the uptake of HIV-self testing would be using sexual and social networks as an entry point. This is based on the conceptual framework, the importance of testing buddies as well as the existence of sexual networks through which respondents were identified and recruited. Blood sample test kits are more preferred than Oral test kits. This study contributes to the pool of knowledge on the characteristics of MSM that would adopt and embrace HIVST, and demonstrates that the MSM are self and partner care aware and conscious. The challenge however remains on how to encourage those that are not self/partner care aware to embrace HIV testing and particularly HIVST as routine practices. Future studies may need to explore potential motivators to self-test among the young, elder MSM generations and the MSM with higher economic status.

## Supporting information
S1 Study tool

## Study questionnaire.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Data

## Study dataset.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Graph

## Theoretical framework.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Plot

## Probability plot.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.

We thank all participants for supporting this study.

## Abbreviations
ARTAntiretroviral Therapy
AIDSAcquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
HIVHuman Immunodeficiency Virus
HIVSTHuman Immunodeficiency Virus self -test
HTS HIVTesting Services
LMICLow and middle- income countries
MSMMen who have sex with men
MSWMen who are sex workers
 10.1371/journal.pone.0280540.r001Decision Letter 0
MalesJamieStaff Editor© 2023 Jamie Males2023Jamie Maleshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
16 Nov 2021

PONE-D-21-07875What determines HIV self-test Acceptability and Uptake within the MSM community in Nairobi and its Environs? A cross sectional studyPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Ndungu,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
 Three reviewers have evaluated your submission and have identified a number of concerns that need to be addressed carefully in a revision. Please pay particular attention to responding to the points raised regarding the presentation of the manuscript and the need for additional clarity about your study's limitations.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Dec 19 2021 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Jamie Males
Staff Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf.
2. In the Methods section, please provide additional information regarding the questionnaire development process, including the theories or frameworks which were employed. And finally please include additional details regarding the questionnaire validation.
3. PLOS requires an ORCID iD for the corresponding author in Editorial Manager on papers submitted after December 6th, 2016. Please ensure that you have an ORCID iD and that it is validated in Editorial Manager. To do this, go to ‘Update my Information’ (in the upper left-hand corner of the main menu), and click on the Fetch/Validate link next to the ORCID field. This will take you to the ORCID site and allow you to create a new iD or authenticate a pre-existing iD in Editorial Manager. Please see the following video for instructions on linking an ORCID iD to your Editorial Manager account: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_xcclfuvtxQ.
4. Please amend the manuscript submission data (via Edit Submission) to include author, Peter Gichangi, Marleen Temmerman.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: I Don't Know
Reviewer #3: No
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: No
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: I appreciate the opportunity to review and provide feedback on the draft manuscript entitled, “What determines HIV self-test Acceptability and Uptake within the MSM community in Nairobi and its Environs? A cross sectional study” by Ndungu et al. The topical matter of the manuscript is important spanning the burgeoning field of HIV self-testing (HIVST) in a key population of MSM/MSW within an Africa context. I commend the authors for undertaking this research particularly in a setting where the population of interest must exist in non-open manner given the legal statutes. The report has valuable information to put forth in the literature and with appropriate revisions (outlined below) will likely be suitable for publication.
General:
There are numerous typos throughout the draft that should be addressed with careful proofreading. Related there are many instances in the prose where the authors write out a numeric result and then immediately report it as numerals, this is not needed and is redundant. See lines 222, 316, 324, and many more.
The database provided has the participant date of birth listed THIS MUST BE REMOVED AS IT IS PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION.
Title:
The title is a bit definitive, suggesting that the report will answer the question posed. A preferable phrasing might be “Evaluation of factors associated with HIV self-test Acceptability and Uptake within the MSM community in Nairobi, Kenya: A cross sectional study”
Abstract: The last sentence of the background is a fragment and unclear. The objective seems to be to identify both facilitating and barrier factors for HIVST aspects the way written it only states “facilitating”. There is no description of the analysis here there needs to be at least some. The conclusion that “A significant number of MSM community in Kenya are willing to use HIVST and are likely to seek for care within 30 days and this is a good indicator of linkage” is a bold statement given the data and this should be more tempered given the sample studied.
Introduction: There are a few typos that need to be addressed but overall is well constructed and appropriate for the work.
Methods: Need more detail in all sections. For the Study population it could not have been “all adult men aged 16-60” years as the author’s state. The last two sentences in this section are introduction information and do not belong in the methods section. The sampling technique is not clear and needs more details on when the sampling occurred, over what time period and with what frequency for each of the sites. As well the snowball technique is not a standard approach for a cross-sectional design and is more often used in qualitative sampling so it would be good to have more rational and information on how this was achieved. How was the questionaries administered was it in English or Kiswahili or a different language? The analysis choice to use POR would benefit from some reasoning as to why. It is not wrong to do so mathematically but not overly common so some more information for the reader would be preferable. The number of inferential comparisons preformed is immense (~20) and as such the authors should adjust down their p-value used to make assertions around assumptions and “significant” associations. A simple Bonferroni correction would be acceptable but there are more advanced methods that could be chosen. The reporting of the POR
Results: The prose section of the results is long and can be cut down, the authors should focus in on highlighting only the most key findings in this section. To achieve this focusing in on the inferential analysis with the proportional differences between comparison groups and the PORs would be helpful. As well for all numeric values there is no need to provide more than three significant digits (save for p values <0.001). When describing a POR that is a finding showing lower likelihood of HIVST use it would be easier to understand if the result was framed as a value <1 (see lines 332,333 for example).
Discussion: The discussion raises good points throughout however the authors should aim to be more tempered in their interpretation of the results given the overall limitations. I am not sure if the sub-headings are needed but that is up to the journal. The limitations section should be expanded on there is most certainly selection bias given the sampling approach (snowball) and although this is mentioned more elaboration on this point is needed. Additionally consideration of responder bias and the impact of missing data should be discussed.
Tables and Figures:
Given the design a figure 1 flow diagram to understand those that were screened and did not consent/participate as well as the 22 who were lost to follow up and did not complete data collection.
Table 3 is entirely too large to be digestible by the reader. Recommend breaking up the inferential portions of the analyses and reporting them as separate tables.
Reviewer #2: The article had important problems regarding language.
The use of numbers in parenthesis should be revised. For example, authors said: "The majority of interviewees were Kenyans at (92.6%), followed....".
Numbers of the tables should be revised (Table 1 does not exist).
I do not understand how 6 participants that "used HIV test kit before", answer "no" when asked about "Ever tested for HIV". How did they used the self-test if they were never tested?.
In the same way, 136 participants that "used HIV test kit before", answer "no" when asked about "Ever heard of HIV self test". How did they used the self-test if they never heard about it? It does not make sense.
Reviewer #3: The authors aimed to determine facilitating factors for HIVST acceptability and uptake among MSM community. This area is of great interest and important, however, the manuscript will need significant improvement
Major comments
On abstract
Introduction
• Integrate objective within the introduction section and remove sub heading objective
Methods
• Add the study outcome of interest and how it was defined or measured, and statistical methods used to analyze the data, this will help simplify follow up of the results
Results
• The objective was to determine facilitating factors for HIVST acceptability and uptake among MSM community, however, I don’t see results that support this objective. It looks like you did a simple descriptive analysis. Is it possible to do a regression model on data collected? You present hindrance to testing more than facilitators
Conclusion
• Conclusion is not backed by results and not aligned with the main objective and title of the study of the study. Please, clarify
Background
• The opening statement needs figures to back that urgent of “There has been significant progress in HIV prevention efforts across Africa, however men who have sex with men (MSM) continue to bear a disproportionately heavy burden of HIV infection compared to the general adult population”.
• Reference two is so old, please, cite the most recent data and citation
• The back ground is too long, and not clearly written in line with objective and title of study. I suggest, they write in funnel shape- start with MSM global HIV risk and testing rates, narrowing to Kenya, then to HIV self-testing acceptability and uptake, finally state the clear problem they intent to address/study and end with what they did to address this problem
Methods
• Start with study design, then study area etc. I have seen study design is under sampling techniques which makes following up of the manuscript difficult.
• Under data analysis, I think it can be improved better by using a suitable regression model depending on how they will define their outcome of interest
• Results too are too long, I suggest the author aligns the results to study objectives and topic and concentrate on that. For now, the authors present a lot of data which is good, but should be aligned to the topic/objectives. The results are broad ranging from HIVST Acceptability, Uptake, Facilitators, willingness and Barriers
Discussion
• The entire opening paragraph is not necessary. The first paragraph should summarize the main findings of your study and then you continue to compare it with other published studies.
• Again, the discussion is very long and discusses different themes that are not aligned with the topic and objective of the study. Too much data presented
• Conclusions needs to be aligned with topic and main objectives
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: Adam R. Aluisio
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0280540.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
4 Jun 2022

Reviewers & Authors Comments.
PONE-D-21-07875
What determines HIV self-test Acceptability and Uptake within the MSM community in Nairobi and its Environs? A cross sectional study
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Ndungu,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Three reviewers have evaluated your submission and have identified a number of concerns that need to be addressed carefully in a revision. Please pay particular attention to responding to the points raised regarding the presentation of the manuscript and the need for additional clarity about your study's limitations.
Please submit your revised manuscript. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Reviewer #1
2. In the Methods section, please provide additional information regarding the questionnaire development process, including the theories or frameworks which were employed. And finally, please include additional details regarding the questionnaire validation.
Response
The questionnaire was developed through a consultative, participatory approach by consulting experts in the subject matter. The questionnaire development process was also informed by previous research done on the thematic area. References have been provided. The questionnaire was validated through a pre-test. The researchers also employed a Theoretical Framework combining AIDS Risk Reduction Model (ARRM) and Modified Social Ecological Model showing the interconnectedness of the different factors. (See attached the Theoretical framework).
3. PLOS requires an ORCID iD for the corresponding author in Editorial Manager on papers submitted after December 6th, 2016. Please ensure that you have an ORCID iD and that it is validated in Editorial Manager. To do this, go to ‘Update my Information’ (in the upper left-hand corner of the main menu), and click on the Fetch/Validate link next to the ORCID field. This will take you to the ORCID site and allow you to create a new iD or authenticate a pre-existing iD in Editorial Manager. Please see the following video for instructions on linking an ORCID iD to your Editorial Manager account: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_xcclfuvtxQ.
4. Please amend the manuscript submission data (via Edit Submission) to include author, Peter Gichangi, Marleen Temmerman.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
 Technical Comments:
Reviewer #2: I appreciate the opportunity to review and provide feedback on the draft manuscript entitled, “What determines HIV self-test Acceptability and Uptake within the MSM community in Nairobi and its Environs? A cross sectional study” by Ndungu et al. The topical matter of the manuscript is important spanning the burgeoning field of HIV self-testing (HIVST) in a key population of MSM/MSW within an Africa context. I commend the authors for undertaking this research particularly in a setting where the population of interest must exist in non-open manner given the legal statutes. The report has valuable information to put forth in the literature and with appropriate revisions (outlined below) will likely be suitable for publication.
Reviewers Comments Response
Reviewer # 2 
General
There are numerous typos throughout the draft that should be addressed with careful proofreading. Related there are many instances in the prose where the authors write out a numeric result and then immediately report it as numerals, this is not needed and is redundant. See lines 222, 316, 324, and many more.
The database provided has the participant date of birth listed THIS MUST BE REMOVED AS IT IS PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION. The researchers have taken time to carefully go through the paper and addressed the typos. The redundancy through repetitions of numerals and reporting on the same has been addressed. The date on birth on the database has been removed
Title:
The title is a bit definitive, suggesting that the report will answer the question posed. A preferable phrasing might be “Evaluation of factors associated with HIV self-test Acceptability and Uptake within the MSM community in Nairobi, Kenya: A cross sectional study The researchers have deliberated on the papers title and have decided to adopt the below;
Evaluation of factors associated with HIV self-test Acceptability and Uptake within the MSM community in Nairobi and its environs, Kenya: A cross sectional study
Abstract:
The last sentence of the background is a fragment and unclear. The objective seems to be to identify both facilitating and barrier factors for HIVST aspects the way written it only states “facilitating”. There is no description of the analysis here there needs to be at least some. The conclusion that “A significant number of MSM community in Kenya are willing to use HIVST and are likely to seek for care within 30 days and this is a good indicator of linkage” is a bold statement given the data and this should be more tempered given the sample studied. The authors have noted the comments, and reorganized the background as well as tempered the conclusion
Introduction:
There are a few typos that need to be addressed but overall is well constructed and appropriate for the work. The typos have been addressed
Methods:
Need more detail in all sections. For the Study population it could not have been “all adult men aged 16-60” years as the author’s state. The last two sentences in this section are introduction information and do not belong in the methods section. The sampling technique is not clear and needs more details on when the sampling occurred, over what time period and with what frequency for each of the sites. As well the snowball technique is not a standard approach for a cross-sectional design and is more often used in qualitative sampling so it would be good to have more rational and information on how this was achieved. How was the questionaries’ administered was it in English or Kiswahili or a different language? The analysis choice to use POR would benefit from some reasoning as to why. It is not wrong to do so mathematically but not overly common so some more information for the reader would be preferable. The number of inferential comparisons preformed is immense (~20) and as such the authors should adjust down their p-value used to make assertions around assumptions and “significant” associations. A simple Bonferroni correction would be acceptable but there are more advanced methods that could be chosen. The reporting of the POR 
The methods have been carefully looked at and better presented. The study population comprised MSM aged 18 and above to allow for individual informed consent. The reason for excluding minors from the study has also been well presented. The sampling techniques has been redone. An attempt has also been made to explain reasons for choice of sampling methods.
The researchers distributed English paper based self-administered structured questionnaires between July 2018-June 2019 after obtaining oral informed consent.
The researcher’s used POR because we wanted to know the odds on the different risk and the data collection was cross-sectional, hence we would not use direct odds ratio. The P-Value has been adjusted in the revised paper.
Results: The prose section of the results is long and can be cut down, the authors should focus in on highlighting only the most key findings in this section. To achieve this focusing in on the inferential analysis with the proportional differences between comparison groups and the PORs would be helpful. As well for all numeric values there is no need to provide more than three significant digits (save for p values <0.001). When describing a POR that is a finding showing lower likelihood of HIVST use it would be easier to understand if the result was framed as a value <1 (see lines 332,333 for example). The results section has been trimmed down and only the key variables have been captured.
Inferential analysis has been done and better expounded on the revised paper
Discussion: The discussion raises good points throughout however the authors should aim to be more tempered in their interpretation of the results given the overall limitations. I am not sure if the sub-headings are needed but that is up to the journal. The limitations section should be expanded on there is most certainly selection bias given the sampling approach (snowball) and although this is mentioned more elaboration on this point is needed. Additionally, consideration of responder bias and the impact of missing data should be discussed. The discussion section has been re-organized and its now more precise. The subheadings have also been dropped. The limitation section has been better expounded and how the sampling bias was addressed.
Explanations on missing data have been provided
Tables and Figures:
Given the design a figure 1 flow diagram to understand those that were screened and did not consent/participate as well as the 22 who were lost to follow up and did not complete data collection.
Table 3 is entirely too large to be digestible by the reader. Recommend breaking up the inferential portions of the analyses and reporting them as separate tables. 
This section has been better presented and requested information provided
All the tables including table 3 have been re-analyzed
Reviewer # 3: 
The article had important problems regarding language.
The use of numbers in parenthesis should be revised. For example, authors said: "The majority of interviewees were Kenyans at (92.6%), followed....".
Numbers of the tables should be revised (Table 1 does not exist).
I do not understand how 6 participants that "used HIV test kit before", answer "no" when asked about "Ever tested for HIV". How did they used the self-test if they were never tested?.
In the same way, 136 participants that "used HIV test kit before", answer "no" when asked about "Ever heard of HIV self-test". How did they used the self-test if they never heard about it? It does not make sense The language has been adjusted throughout the paper, and presentation. The tables have been properly numbered, and the figures re-checked
Reviewer # 4: 
The authors aimed to determine facilitating factors for HIVST acceptability and uptake among MSM community. This area is of great interest and important, however, the manuscript will need significant improvement 
Introduction
• Integrate objective within the introduction section and remove sub heading objective The authors have adjusted the introduction accordingly
Methods
• Add the study outcome of interest and how it was defined or measured, and statistical methods used to analyze the data, this will help simplify follow up of the results The variables of interest have been enumerated and statistical methods employed better expounded.
Results
• The objective was to determine facilitating factors for HIVST acceptability and uptake among MSM community, however, I don’t see results that support this objective. It looks like you did a simple descriptive analysis. Is it possible to do a regression model on data collected? You present hindrance to testing more than facilitators The findings have been reorganized to reflect the objectives of the study
Conclusion
• Conclusion is not backed by results and not aligned with the main objective and title of the study of the study. Please, clarify The authors have re-written the conclusions
Background
The opening statement needs figures to back that urgent of “There has been significant progress in HIV prevention efforts across Africa, however men who have sex with men (MSM) continue to bear a disproportionately heavy burden of HIV infection compared to the general adult population”.
• Reference two is so old, please, cite the most recent data and citation
• The back ground is too long, and not clearly written in line with objective and title of study. I suggest, they write in funnel shape- start with MSM global HIV risk and testing rates, narrowing to Kenya, then to HIV self-testing acceptability and uptake, finally state the clear problem they intent to address/study and end with what they did to address this problem The authors have included additional citations to support the opening statement. Additionally, explanations about the rates and infection differentials have been expounded in the subsequent text.
The background has been rewritten accordingly
Methods
• Start with study design, then study area etc. I have seen study design is under sampling techniques which makes following up of the manuscript difficult.
• Under data analysis, I think it can be improved better by using a suitable regression model depending on how they will define their outcome of interest
• Results too are too long, I suggest the author aligns the results to study objectives and topic and concentrate on that. For now, the authors present a lot of data which is good, but should be aligned to the topic/objectives. The results are broad ranging from HIVST Acceptability, Uptake, Facilitators, willingness and Barriers The authors have adjusted the methods section as per the reviewer’s suggestions. The results have also been adjusted to reflect the study objectives.
Discussion
• The entire opening paragraph is not necessary. The first paragraph should summarize the main findings of your study and then you continue to compare it with other published studies.
• Again, the discussion is very long and discusses different themes that are not aligned with the topic and objective of the study. Too much data presented
• Conclusions needs to be aligned with topic and main objectives The authors have adjusted the discussion section and attempted to align it to the objectives of the study. Data has also been reduced and conclusion better aligned
AttachmentSubmitted filename: HIVST Response to Reviewers comments June 4th, 2022 .docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0280540.r003Decision Letter 1
AluisioAdam RGuest Editor© 2023 Adam R Aluisio2023Adam R Aluisiohttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
14 Jun 2022

PONE-D-21-07875R1Reviewers & Authors Comments.
Evaluation of factors associated with HIV self-testing Acceptability and Uptake within the MSM community in Nairobi, Kenya: A cross sectional study.PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Ndungu,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jul 29 2022 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Adam R Aluisio, M.D MSc., DTM&H
Guest Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (if provided):
I served as an initial reviewer on this submission and now as a guest editor. Good progress on this work but there was inadequate response to some of the reviewers' comments. Specifically no information on bias or missing data although the response letter states this was done. As the primary outcome is based on self-report of past HIVST use this needs to be acknowledged at least in the limitations. Also the main outcome metric of HIV self-testing needs to be better described in the methods. It seems that is based on participant report solely, which is fine but needs to be more clearly stated and how that also could suffer from bias. The updated draft with the regression model is difficult to follow on how it was constructed and run. Associated with that the reporting of the model is confusing as to what the main findings are and the tables have too much information on statical outputs (there is no need to report coefficients and the aPOR or the SE and the CIs). These aspects need to be corrected for publication.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0280540.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
30 Jul 2022

Reviewer Comments & Response
Reviewers Comments Response
Reviewer #1 
Specifically, no information on bias or missing data although the response letter states this was done. 
 This comment is well received.
Statement on management of missing data on the questionnaires has been included in the abstract (line 41-43) and the methods (line 171-177).
As the primary outcome is based on self-report of past HIVST use this needs to be acknowledged at least in the limitations.
 The study is based on respondent self-reports on HIVST use, and as such the veracity of such reports could not be easily determined within the design of this study. The above statement has been included in the discussion (Line 399-401)
The main outcome metric of HIV self-testing needs to be better described in the methods.
It seems that is based on participant report solely, which is fine but needs to be more clearly stated and how that also could suffer from bias
 The operational definition of HIV self-testing has been in-cooperated in the methods (Line 192-197)
The updated draft with the regression model is difficult to follow on how it was constructed and run. Associated with that the reporting of the model is confusing as to what the main findings are and the tables have too much information on statical outputs (there is no need to report coefficients and the aPOR or the SE and the CIs). These aspects need to be corrected for publication.
 The multivariate analysis has been explained how it was constructed and organized and was based on measure of association (Chi-Square) and risk ratio (POR) captured in the multivariate analysis (Line 284-285).
The table has also been reduced and only key outputs have been retained. Columns on S.E, Wald have been deleted
AttachmentSubmitted filename: HIVST Reviewers comments & Response July 29th.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0280540.r005Decision Letter 2
AluisioAdam RGuest Editor© 2023 Adam R Aluisio2023Adam R Aluisiohttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
12 Aug 2022

PONE-D-21-07875R2Evaluation of factors associated with HIV self-testing Acceptability and Uptake within the MSM community in Nairobi, Kenya: A cross sectional study.PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Ndungu,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Sep 26 2022 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Adam R Aluisio, M.D MSc., DTM&H
Guest Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Additional Editor Comments (if provided):
Good progress by the author team. This is an improved draft.
Two required points to revise.
1.) The authors state the missing data were MCAR to justify the listwise deletion. Please provide the information on how this was assessed and add that to the methods and/or results as appropriate. If a graphical method was utilized this can be provided as a supplement for the readers.
2.) The tables are more understandable in this format. For the aPOR table please indicate (perhaps footnotes) what the reference categories are. All tables and figures should be interpretable by themselves.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
N/A
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0280540.r006Author response to Decision Letter 2
Submission Version3
21 Dec 2022

PONE-D-21-07875R2
Evaluation of factors associated with HIV self-testing Acceptability and Uptake within the MSM community in Nairobi, Kenya: A cross sectional study.
Reviewers & Authors Comments.
Good progress by the author team. This is an improved draft.
Reviewers Comments Response
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice. 
The references have been carefully checked to ensure they are complete and non-has been retracted. 
Reviewer #1
The authors state the missing data were MCAR to justify the listwise deletion. Please provide the information on how this was assessed and add that to the methods and/or results as appropriate. If a graphical method was utilized this can be provided as a supplement for the readers.
 Graphical method was utilized to inform the adoption of listwise deletion. Graphs have been attached in the appendix 
The tables are more understandable in this format. For the a POR table please indicate (perhaps footnotes) what the reference categories are. All tables and figures should be interpretable by themselves.
 The comment is well received. All the tables have been reformatted to be self -explanatory We have Introduced borders and the Ref. to distinguish the reference variables.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers Dec 15th, 2022.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0280540.r007Decision Letter 3
AluisioAdam RGuest Editor© 2023 Adam R Aluisio2023Adam R Aluisiohttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version3
4 Jan 2023

Evaluation of factors associated with HIV self-testing Acceptability and Uptake among the MSM community in Nairobi, Kenya: A cross sectional study.
PONE-D-21-07875R3
Dear Dr. Ndungu,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Adam R Aluisio, M.D MSc., DTM&H
Guest Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
The revisions have been completed with no additional major concerns. I thank the authors for their hard work and contribution to the field.
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0280540.r008Acceptance letter
AluisioAdam RGuest Editor© 2023 Adam R Aluisio2023Adam R Aluisiohttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
27 Feb 2023

PONE-D-21-07875R3 
Evaluation of factors associated with HIV self-testing Acceptability and Uptake among the MSM community in Nairobi, Kenya: A cross sectional study. 
Dear Dr. Ndungu:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Adam R Aluisio 
Guest Editor
PLOS ONE