3815pheelsevierInternational Journal of Hospitality ManagementInt J Hosp ManagPMC9756824975682497568243654068710.1016/j.ijhm.2021.102923Cruise ship dining experiencescape: The perspective of female cruise travelers in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic
RadicAleksandar LückMichael Al-AnsiAmr ChuaBee-Lia SeelerSabrina HanHeesup aGornji kono 8, 20000 Dubrovnik, CroatiabSchool of Hospitality & Tourism, Auckland University of Technology, Private Bag 92006, Auckland 1042, New ZealandcCollege of Hospitality and Tourism Management, Sejong University, 98 Gunja-Dong, Gwanjin-Gu, Seoul 143-747 KoreadDepartment of Food Service and Management, Faculty of Food Science and Technology, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 UPM Serdang, Selangor, MalaysiaeSchool of Business, DITF - German Institute for Tourism Research, West Coast University of Applied Sciences, Fritz-Thiedemann-Ring 20, 25746 Heide, GermanyfCollege of Hospitality and Tourism Management, Sejong University, 98 Gunja-Dong, Gwanjin-Gu, Seoul 143-747, Korea⁎Corresponding author.
1ORCiD: 0000-0001-7760-5495
2ORCID: 0000-0002-6473-8579
3ORCID: 0000-0001-8021-6749
4ORCID: 0000-0001-5268-2988
5ORCID: 0000-0003-2869-537X
6ORCID: 0000-0001-6356-3001
9420219510292310292316122022© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.

## Abstract
The cruise dining experience is one of the core elements of the overall cruise travel experience as guests fulfill their cognitive and affective needs in this pleasant environment. Nonetheless, the cruise dining experience has been sparsely researched. There is also no holistic model conceptualizing the cruise ship dining experiencescape. This study explores how under the influence of the COVID-19 pandemic, cruise ship dining environment stimuli dimensions are evaluated by female cruise travelers. Female travelers are the major spenders and travel decision-makers. They are also the dominant customer group in the cruise sector. Their perception of cruise ship dining environment is leading to their positive emotional responses and approach behavior. More precisely, this study demonstrates the potency of the moderating role of a perceived health risk from COVID-19, which strengthens female travelers’ perceptions of the dining atmosphere and interaction with other guests by evoking positive emotions and influencing their approach behavior.
Keywords: Cruise ship dining experiencescape, Female cruise travelers, Perceived health risk from COVID-19, Emotions, Approach behavior

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2020 Nov 10; Revised 2021 Jan 8; Accepted 2021 Mar 22; Issue date 2021 May.

1.

## Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic led to a serious crisis in medical, financial and psychological aspects ( , ). As a result, the world economy is on its knees ( ), exposing what Noam Chomsky describes as “another colossal failure of the neoliberal version of capitalism” ( ). The cruise industry was not spared from the pandemic and as argue that the current COVID-19 cruise tourism crisis has grown to unparalleled proportions placing the major cruise lines on the brink of insolvency. On March 14, 2020 the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) issued a No Sail Order that was extended on September 30, 2020 until at least October 31, 2020 ( ). As new COVID-19 cases surged across the USA, CDC initially recommended an extension of the No Sail Order up until February 2021, however, due to strong lobbying from major cruise lines, U.S. Vice President Mike Pence overruled the director of the CDC forcing him to extend the ban only until October 31, 2020 ( ). Under the strong pressure on the White House from 61 lobbyists paid by the cruise industry ( ) on October 30, 2020 the CDC issued the Framework for Conditional Sailing Order for a phased-in approach and return to service for the cruise industry in the United States ( ). Among many other things, the Framework requires cruise line companies to modify dining services to maintain physical distancing.
The CDCs’ Framework for Conditional Sailing Order provides a lifeline for a hemorrhaging cruise industry. However, have expressed serious concerns about the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on the cruise industry, due to its hedonic nature and the fact that the business-leisure traveler ratio is lowest in the cruise industry compared to the hotel, airline and car rental sectors ( ). suggests that cruise lines most likely will not be profitable until 2022, and it will take at least 10 years for the industry to recover to the levels prior to the pandemic. Nevertheless, as man cannot be defeated ( ) “and death shall have no dominion” ( , p.73), the COVID-19 cruise tourism crisis represents a crucial test for cruise industry leaders.
Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, self-service buffets on board cruise ships resembled a culinary cabaret, where food was displayed in theatrical fashion while the buffet ambience, food quality, and quality of service satisfied the hedonic needs of even the most critical of gourmets. However, the pandemic changed this as cruise ship self-service buffets provide a favorable environment for spreading COVID-19 ( ). Hence, the CDC expressed great concerns relating to self-service buffets and physical distancing on cruise ships ( ). As a response to the CDC’s concerns, the Cruise Lines International Association ( ) introduced a mandatory set of health protocols as a part of a phased-in, highly controlled resumption of operations, including discontinuing self-service buffets and reducing the occupancy rates as a way to facilitate physical distancing on board cruise ship facilities.
The dining experience on a cruise ship is one of the core elements of the overall cruise experience, as guests fulfill their utilitarian and hedonic needs in this pleasant environment. in their study on perceptions of Chinese tourists regarding the cruise tourism servicescape, found that atmospherics, social interactions and dining services were three out of six cruise tourism servicescape constructs. illustrates the cruise ship dining experience as a borderless multisensory environment where diners are simultaneously everywhere and nowhere. , argues that dining on board cruise ships provides guests with possibilities for “metaphorical travel” through ethnic and themed restaurants, where guests transcend themselves to other cultural identities through food consumption. The effect of tipping policies on the customer dining satisfaction was also explored by who concluded that guests rated their cruise more positively when they sailed under a voluntary-tipping policy. However, the dining experience on cruise ships itself has never been empirically tested and to this date a holistic model for cruise ship dining experiencescape, does not exist.
Gender is considered to be a salient factor that molds consumers’ behavior ( ). Thus, robust evidence demonstrates significant differences between men and women regarding the consumption of tourism products and services ( ). In contemporary societies women are relaying their free spirit into every pore of their life including travel and dining ( ). Females enjoy traveling as it provides them with an escape from daily routines, social bonding and pleasure ( ). Furthermore, with an increased number of female cruise travelers, there is a growing demand for female-centered itineraries based on interests and connecting women with other women ( ). According to female bachelor travelers tend to be attracted to cruises because these are notoriously romantic, featuring candlelit dinners and colorful sunsets. A further study by , conducted in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic showed that middle aged female travelers are willing to consider traveling to destinations affected by health risks. outline how leisure plays an important role in recovering mental health in women. More precisely, following the deterioration of women’s mental health during COVID-19 pandemic lockdowns, it is of paramount importance to acknowledge that psychological wellbeing of women may depend heavily on commercial tourism businesses ( ) including cruise line companies. Finally, as female oriented research articles attract less citations ( ), scholars should not be discouraged to pursue female oriented topics, as such papers are the cornerstone in creating gender equality in tourism knowledge ( ). In pursuit of gender equality, it is important to acknowledge that female oriented studies have improved academic knowledge as they have opened new avenues of thinking and knowing ( ).
The pioneering study described here sets out to investigate the cruise ship dining experiencescape under the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. In particular, this research explores a cruise ship dining experiencescape based on stimulus-organism-response (S–O–R) paradigm with respect to the relationships between perceived crowdedness, dining atmosphere and interaction with other guests, emotions and approach behavior, under the moderation of perceived health risks from COVID-19. The significance of moderators relates to their capacity to enhance comprehension of the relatedness that exists between independent and dependent variables ( ). To accomplish this task, the following research question is addressed: How is the COVID-19 pandemic changing the cruise ship dining experiencescape among female cruise travelers?
With the aim of enhancing academic literature on the topic of the dining experience and the COVID-19 pandemic effects on the dining experiencescape, coupled with strategic recommendations for improving guests’ dining experiencescape, the authors propose four main research objectives. In particular, the present research aimed 1) to develop a dining experiencescape model based on S–O–R paradigm, 2) to empirically test the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on cruise ship dining experiencescape among female cruise travelers, 3) to unearth the moderating role of the perceived health risk from COVID-19, and 4) to uncover the mediating role of emotional responses in the cruise context.
The theoretical value and originality of the present research it is evidenced by the uncovering of particular relationships within dining experiencescape under the influence of COVID-19 pandemic with reference to female travelers. Practically, this study can assist the struggling cruise industry by offering a dining experiencescape model grounded in empirical research that can guide cruise line companies on how to elicit guests’ positive emotions and approach behavior.

2.

## Literature review
2.1.

## Cruise ship dining experiencescape and proposed research framework
Experienscape is a relatively new concept based on a multidisciplinary approach with a special emphasis on the culture of hospitality where “sensory, functional, social, natural and cultural stimuli in a product or service environment, (…) result in positive or negative cognitive, affective, and behavioral reactions toward products, services, brands, and ﬁrms.” ( , p. 26). In this study, a cruise ship dining experiencescape is established based on S–O–R paradigm. The authors propose that an environment poses a particular feature that can induce stimuli (S) which have influence on organisms (e.g. guests; O) that fundamentally shape guests’ approach or avoidance response (R) behaviors toward the environment. By extension, a favorable cruise ship dining experiencescape can lead to behavior outcomes such as: booking a seat at a cruise ship dining room and/or themed restaurant, the intention to recommend the cruise ship dining rooms and/or themed restaurants, and a repurchase intention towards another cruise. Essentially, S–O–R paradigm can be used to uncover the nature of cruise ship dining environment prompts (e.g., human density, spatial crowdedness, music, ambient temperature, color, lighting, socialization among guests) and their analogous prevalence on guests’ emotional responses. These emotional responses can lead to approach or avoidance responses to the cruise ship dining environments. According to the S–O–R, we argue that guests experience an inner metamorphosis through positive or negative affective responses, which create the conditions of behavioral responses. Thus, if guests are exposed to cruise ship environment stimuli, their behavioral responses might change and eventually transformation occurs.
The cruise ship dining experiencescape is a context specific holistic concept that echoes the experienscape and expanded nomological network of experienscape. The validity of the notion of the dining experiencescape is supported by recent empirical studies in cruise experience ( , , ), dining experience ( , ) cuisine creativity ( ) theme park experience ( ), hot spring resorts experience ( ) lodging industry ( ), tourism event experience ( ), substantive and communicative servicescape ( ), upscale hotel experience ( ) and hotel lobby design ( ).
 demonstrates the effect of the physical and social environments on emotional responses and behavioral intentions. However, none of those studies have investigated the positive effect of the physical and social environments on the emotional response: a) under the moderating influence of perceived health risks, b) in the context of cruise ship dining, c) during a global health crisis, d) from the perspective of female travelers, and e) using expanded nomological network of experienscape. Thus, our study possesses originality as it offers important theoretical contributions.
 Drawing on S–O–R paradigm and conceptualization of expanded nomological network of experienscape, we developed a conceptual framework of the cruise ship dining experiencescape (
 ) that explains how under the influence of the COVID-19 pandemic, cruise ship dining environment stimuli dimensions (perceived crowdedness, dining atmosphere and interaction with other guests) are individually evaluated by the guests, leading to their emotional responses and behavioral intentions. In the aforementioned conceptual framework, these three independent stimuli dimensions are moderated by one independent factor, i.e. perceived health risks from COVID-19.
 Thus, based on the conceptual framework of this study ( ) and definition of experienscape, we argue how the cruise ship dining experiencescape is a manmade environment staged for theatrical interplay between the guests and between the service employees and the guests themselves, with the sole purpose of inducing multisensory and social stimuli, that provokes the positive or negative affective and cognitive responses, which ultimately lead to guests approach or avoidance behavior.

2.2.

## Hypothesis development
2.2.1.

## Perceived crowdedness
The notion of perceived crowdedness is based on the density of humans in a specifically arranged environment. Perceived crowdedness is an important part of social servicescape that encompasses social interactions between the guests, consequently the perception of human and spatial crowdedness acts as stimulus for customers’ emotional response ( ). Human crowdedness on cruise ship dining rooms is a common occurrence ( ). Accordingly, argue that guests experience positive emotions during fine dining with high spatial crowdedness due to a heuristic processing of dining atmospherics and the interaction with other guests. Spatial crowdedness in cruise ship dining rooms is associated with excessive pressure on dining rooms’ seating capacity induced by cruise lines’ marketing activities. Hence, the perception of a cruise ship dining room leaves the impression of an attractive, nonetheless, noisy and densely built environment ( ). The level of human density in a particular environment is a robust stimulus that evokes both, positive and negative emotional responses based on guests’ expectations for a particular venue ( ). Furthermore, in expanded nomological network of experienscape, these authors argue that human crowdedness can have a positive effect on consumers’ emotional responses. In a recent study on motivation and satisfaction of U.S. tourists in restaurants, has concluded that U.S. tourists are fun-seeking individuals who are comfortable with high human density in restaurants. Customers’ intention to choose dining with high spatial and human crowdedness can be understood through the concept of herd behavior where the effects of servicescape and social servicescape lead to positive emotional responses and approach behavior ( ). This type of behavior was also noticed during the COVID-19 pandemic when demonstrated how physical distancing and avoidance of spatial crowdedness in places such as restaurants was lowest among the precautionary behaviors. It is the human need for socializing that drives most people to choose crowded restaurants despite the COVID-19 pandemic ( ). Consequently, we put forward following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 1Perceived crowdedness of cruise ship dining rooms has a positive impact on female guests’ emotional responses.

2.2.2.

## Dining atmosphere
The cruise ship dining environment (e.g. color, background music, lighting, furniture, air quality and ambient temperature, cleanliness of dining room and seating arrangements) as a core aspect of food service, represents a principal component in framing the cruise ship dining experiencescape. The functional components of the service environment have a tremendous impact as they arouse consumers’ sensory reactions, hence influencing customer’s cognitive and emotional responses ( ). Dining atmospherics have a strong, robust influence on solo dining in Chinese restaurants where physical settings such as communal tables and solo tables evoke positive emotions such as relaxation and enjoyment ( ). argues that consistent and carefully designed environment color, background music, and decoration could be stimuli that incite customer perception of the uniqueness of the ambience which is an important starting point for creating guests’ positive emotions. Tangible and aesthetic elements of environment that enhance consumers’ hedonic consumption are strong stimuli that can lead to consequences in the form of positive emotions such as pleasure, and an overall favorable memorable experience ( ). Thus, based on the academic literature and empirical studies, we propose the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 2The cruise ship dining atmosphere has a positive impact on female guests’ emotional responses.

2.2.3.

## Interaction with other guests
Cruise ship dining rooms, ethnic restaurants and themed restaurants are places where guests, motivated by empathy, and the basic human drive to share resources and experiences, socialize with each other while they indulge themselves in hedonic consumption. Hedonic consumption always carries certain emotions attached to it, because endorphins correlated with positive emotions such as pleasure are stimulated by guests socializing ( ). Moreover, positive emotions such as pleasure are correlated with endorphins due to increased dopamine production. Thus, guests on cruise ships enjoy socializing in dining rooms because such behavior activates reward pathways in their brains. found that guests have a profound effect over each other’s emotional and cognitive responses. In the context of cruise ship dining experiencescape this is most likely intensified by the nature of the cruise experience where guests who are essentially strangers to each other, spend prolonged, close contact, repeatedly sharing dining facilities. Dynamic consumer interaction as a part of hospitality industry experiential innovativeness can lead to favorable outcomes such as positive emotional responses and long-term relationship ( ). ) in their study on solo dining intentions with respect to other consumers in a restaurant, found how other consumers take a part in the explanatory contribution that influences the emotional response from solo diners. Interaction between the guests through socialization in the form of food consumption, chatter and observation of others has a significant impact on individual emotional response and overall dining ( ). Hence, the aforementioned justification led to the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 3Interaction with other guests while dining on a cruise ship has a positive impact on female guests’ emotional responses.

2.2.4.

## The moderating role of perceived health risk from COVID-19
Risk is deep-rooted in our daily lives ( ) and it is even more influential during the COVID-19 pandemic as people are considering booking a cruise as their preferable choice of leisure ( ). Perceived health risk is the manifestation of the imminent reaction of tourists’ or hospitality customers’ when they feel that their physical health is threatened by the uncontrolled event such as a pandemic ( ). In a recent survey conducted by the CDC, the general public opinion related to the resuming of cruises in the U.S. was quite favorable ( ), despite the surge of new positive cases of COVID-19 across the U.S. Almost the entirety of 1616 participants indicated that improved public health safety protocols (e.g. medical screening prior to boarding, improved air ventilation and enhanced cleaning and sanitation frequencies) would significantly boost their confidence and positive perception related to high human and spatial density, dining atmosphere and interaction with other guests while being on cruise ships. Subsequently, on November 15, 2020 more than 100,000 people have applied for cruise trials ( ) despite CDC’s ( ) plea to stay at home and avoid crowded spaces considering the prevalence of COVID-19 health risk. Therefore, we propose the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 5a. Perceived health risks from COVID-19 have a signiﬁcantly positive moderating inﬂuence in the relationship between the perceived crowdedness of the cruise ship dining rooms and female guests’ emotional responses.
Major cruise line companies claim that booking trends have clearly demonstrated how cruisers are interested in sailing and dining on cruise ship despite the COVID-19 pandemic ( ). These results are supported by the recent record in daily bookings by Regent Seven Seas Cruises ( ) and consumers’ willingness in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic to pay US$496 to dine in a crowded parked airplane (BBC ). Nevertheless, perceived health risk does affect consumers’ confidence under the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic as only 22% of Americans are very confident to dine in crowded indoor restaurants and 23% are very confident to book a hotel or similar accommodation in next 30 days ( ). If cruise line companies can provide empirical evidence that the enhanced public health safety protocols are providing a safe dining environment, consumers' confidence may be boosted in a way that they reengage with the cruise ship dining services. Hence, the following hypothesis is proposed:
Hypothesis 5b. Perceived health risks from COVID-19 have a signiﬁcantly positive moderating inﬂuence in the relationship between cruise ship dining atmosphere and female guests’ emotional responses.
Cruise travel has been perceived as a safe holiday from a public health perspective ( , ). On November 21, 2020, the CDC issued a level 4 warning with the recommendation that all people should avoid travel on cruise ships because of the very high risk of COVID-19 ( ). Consequently, cruise line companies have been forced to reinvent their dining services by providing safe social servicescapes from a public health perspective ( ). Despite the health risk, passengers are motivated to take a cruise during the COVID-19 pandemic, believing that they could enjoy interacting with other passengers in dining rooms ( ). outlined how 40% of U.S. women are going out for socializing and are not worried that they might contract COVID-19. Moreover, argued how mature passengers feel devastated by losing a full year of socialization in cruise ship dining rooms, and thus they feel encouraged to book a cruise in 2021 ( ). Consequently, we put forward the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 5c. Perceived health risks from COVID-19 have a signiﬁcantly positive moderating inﬂuence in the relationship between interaction with other guests and female guests’ emotional responses.

2.2.5.

## Emotions and approach behavior
The cruise experience is a highly emotional, memorable event ( ) that is co-created by the multisensory servicescape and interactive social servicescape ( ). Thus, positive emotional responses evoked from hedonic consumption under the influence of dining stimuli have a direct influence on purchase intention ( ). have used neuromarketing techniques to measure the emotional response to haute cuisine in a Michelin starred restaurant, and these authors confirmed that emotional arousal had a positive effect on future behavior related to dining choices. The positive emotional response from dining can lead to a memorable experience, which has a long-lasting impact as it influences consumers’ future decisions and behavior ( ). Positive emotions elicited by the ethnic setting and cultural aspects of background music led to an enjoyable experience for customers who dined with their families to the point where such customers expressed positive behavioral intention ( ). Moreover, emotional responses such as pleasure, which are elicited under the influence of ambient stimuli, have a significant positive affect on customers’ approach behavior ( ). Similarly, positive emotions, both pleasure and arousal have a significant, positive, indirect effect on loyalty, and satisfaction has a significant positive direct effect on approach behavior ( ). Based on emotional contagion theory, guests’ social interactions positively affect guests’ emotional experiences, that lead to favorable behavioral intentions ( ). In tourism and hospitality it is considered that customers who exhibit approach behavior are more likely to revisit, repurchase and spread positive word of the mouth ( ). Consequently, the following hypothesis is proposed:
Hypothesis 4Female guests’ emotions have a positive impact on approach behavior.

3.

## Methods
This study adopted a post-positivistic paradigm which, as argue, anticipates the imperfection of observation in human behavior studies; accordingly, all theories can be amended. It also adopted an action research strategy which permits the researchers to apply various frameworks of contemporary knowledge in untangling actual industry concerns ( ). A cross-sectional survey and covariance-based structural equation modeling (CB-SEM) were applied to evaluate the research model. CB-SEM allows testing and validation of current theories and comparisons of different theories ( ). In nuce, a deductive approach accompanied by a cross-sectional time horizon and quantitative techniques for data collection were used in this study.
3.1.

## Sampling and data collection procedure
The community of our attention was composed of experienced female guests who had dined multiple times at cruise ship dining rooms, themed restaurants and ethnic restaurants in the previous 18 months. Female guests were chosen for this study because they represent the dominant gender within cruise travelers ( ) and due to their higher tendency for health risk perception ( ). To thoroughly explore the nature of the conceptual model of the dining experiencescape, data were collected via a self-administrated online survey using cloud-based software (SurveyMonkey®) over a seven week period between September and October 2020. A purposive sampling technique was applied in this study because as argue, such a technique provides well-chosen participants established according to certain criteria. Possible female participants were invited to take part in the survey via Facebook groups including “Carnival Cruise Dining,” ” Princess Cruises - Passenger Forum,“ “Celebrity Cruises,” “Royal Caribbean Cruising, “ “MSC Cruises Fan Page,” “Norwegian Cruise Line (NCL) Latitudes Members,” ” Holland America Line Fans,” “Costa Cruise Lines Fans,”” P&O Cruises - UK Fan Page”, and via the Cruise Critic group “Cruise Foodies”.
Potential female participants were introduced to the purpose of the study via a short explanatory section that was incorporated in the survey. Individuals that understood the purpose of the study and agreed to participate in the survey qualified to continue with the screening questions of the questionnaire. Screening questions were used to verify that only those guests who have cruised before and who had dined multiple times at dining rooms, themed restaurants and ethnic restaurants, participated in the survey. Individuals were asked to answer on a nominal scale (“yes” or “no”) to the following questions, “Have you cruised in the last 18 months?” and “Have you dined multiple times in one of the cruise ships’ dining rooms, themed restaurants and ethnic restaurants?”. A total of 402 questionnaires were valid and the average time taken by respondents to complete questionnaire was 18 min. Lastly, truthful revealing of undisclosed information while completing the survey, was encouraged, by assuring conﬁdentiality and anonymity of the respondents.
The sample was composed of 402 females from dominant cruise passenger markets (88% from North America and 12.0% from Europe). The participants’ ages fell within 30–60 + years old, with 70.4% being older than 60 + . Regarding the education level, 51.7% indicated that they have a university degree while 33.3% specified that they had a college degree. Moreover, 6.2% reported that they have a high school degree and 8.7% confirmed that they have a graduate degree. Lastly, the vast majority (98.8%) had cruised more than four times while 91.3% indicated that they cruised without children.

3.2.

## Measures
The survey contained a mix of multi-item and dual-item measures (see for a complete list of items). Scale items to measure the variables were adopted from validated measurement items from the existing literature and were anchored on a 5-point scale. Perceived crowdedness had three items (e.g.” Too many people are in this dining room”) and was measured with adjusted scales based on 
 . DINESCAPE scale was adjusted to measure dining atmospherics with four items (e.g. “The furniture, tablecloth and cutlery make me feel special”). Interaction with other guests had two items (e.g. “Interacting with other guests is interesting”) and was measured with an adjusted scale from . Emotions with pleasure and arousal components were measured with two items from an adjusted Pleasure-Arousal-Dominance (PAD) emotional state model ( ). Lastly, Perceived health risk with three items (e.g. “The thought of dining at a cruise dining place makes me anxious although the COVID-19 pandemic is completely under control (or ceased) in the future”) was measured with adjusted scale from , while approach behavior with three items (e.g. “When other people ask you about your dining rooms experience on board cruise ship you will tell them positive things”) was measured with an adjusted scale from . In a pre-test, the initial version of the survey questionnaire including these measurement items and questions about personal characteristics were thoroughly reviewed by academic experts and improved accordingly.

4.

## Results
4.1.

## Reliability and validity assessment
Scale validity and measuring model fit was achieved through a conﬁrmatory factor analysis (CFA). The result of the CFA showed that the model included a satisfactory level of the goodness-of-ﬁt statistics (χ2 = 278.170, df = 104, χ2/df = 2.675, p < .000, RMSEA = 0.065, CFI = 0.947, IFI = 0.948, TLI = 0.931). All standardized loadings between observed variables and latent factors were signiﬁcant (p < .01). Complete details of the CFA results are exhibited in
 .
 Values for composite reliability ranged from.701 to.960, thereby, the internal consistency of the construct measures was achieved as all values were above the suggested cutoff of.700 ( ). Regarding the average variance extracted, values fell between.149 and.75. Additionally, as manifested in , the average variance extracted AVE values were all greater than the square of between-variable correlations. Accordingly, the convergent validity and discriminant validity of the measurement items were apparent ( ).

4.2.

## Structural model and hypotheses testing
In this study structural equation modeling (SEM) with a maximum likelihood estimation approach was performed. The results of the SEM (
 ) revealed that the model had an adequate level of goodness-of-ﬁt statistics (χ2 = 236.091, df = 70, χ2/df = 3.373, p < .000, RMSEA = 0.077, CFI = 0.910, IFI = 0.911, TLI = 0.883) ( ).
 In summary, the proposed conceptual framework was deemed adequate for the total variance in emotions (18%) and approach behavior (23.8%), which were within the acceptable levels for studies in social sciences, as per . Furthermore, the hypothesized relations between study variables were assessed. As laid out in , perceived crowdedness was not a signiﬁcant predictor of female guests’ emotions (β = 0.001, p > .05). However, dining atmosphere showed a signiﬁcant and positive inﬂuence on female guests’ emotions (β = 0.219, p < .01). Similarly, interaction with other guests demonstrated a signiﬁcant and positive inﬂuence on female guests’ emotions (β = 0.274, p < .01). Consequently, was not supported, however , were supported. was also supported as female guests’ emotions illustrated a signiﬁcant and positive inﬂuence on participants’ approach behavior (β = 0.488, p < .01).

4.3.

## Test of moderating effect
To evaluate the hypothesized moderating eﬀect of the perceived health risk, a test for metric invariance was examined. Using a cluster analysis based on perceived health risk from COVID19, a total of 283 respondents were grouped into a high perceived health risk group and 119 respondents into a low perceived health risk group. Furthermore, a baseline model comprised of these groups was produced. Results demonstrated that the conceptual model had an acceptable level of the goodness-of-ﬁt statistics (χ2 = 398.599, df = 200, χ2/df = 1.993, p < .000, RMSEA = 0.050, CFI = 0.903, IFI = 0.906, TLI = 0.868). A juxtaposition was performed between produced baseline model and a sequence of nested models where a specific relationship is limited to be parallel over high and low groups of perceived health risk. Subsequently, a chi-square test was used for this comparison.
 and
 summarize the baseline model assessment and the results of the chi-square test. Results revealed that the moderating role of perceived health risk was not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent between the two groups as indicated on the path from perceived crowdedness to emotions (Δχ2 [1] = 0.961 p > .05). This result shows that was not supported. Conversely, the result of the structural invariance assessment demonstrated that the connection between dining atmosphere and emotions signiﬁcantly diﬀered between high (β = 0.241) and low (β = 0.193) groups although chi-square difference across groups did not differ significantly (Δχ2 [1] =0.006, p > .05). Accordingly, perceived health risk significantly moderates the relationship between both constructs and, thus, was supported. Similarly, the link from interaction with other guests to emotions was also signiﬁcantly diﬀerent between the two factors (High = β = 0.224, Low = β = 0.354) groups (Δχ2 [1] = 0.287 p > .05). Thus, was supported.
 

5.

## Discussion
The cruise ship dining experiencescape model developed on S–O–R paradigm and on expanded nomological network of experienscape managed to make an important contribution to the understanding of female cruise travelers’ emotional responses and approach/avoidance behavior during the COVID-19 pandemic. As seen in the recomposed cruise ship dining experiencescape model under the influence of the moderating effect of perceived health risk from COVID-19, leads towards positive emotional responses and approach behavior.
In the stimuli domain dining atmosphere and interaction with other guests showed positive effect on the guests’ emotional responses. This is due to the human brain that rewards social behavior with positive neurochemical feedback loops. As social interaction has been essential to the continuity of our progenitors for least 800,000 years, it might be that the human brain is hardwired to become addicted to social interactions ( ). Women socialize more than men ( ), and despite the fact that 60% of U.S. women are worried that they might contract COVID-19 ( ), prohibiting cruises and closing the dining rooms on cruise ships as a mean of fighting COVID-19 appears ineffective. These findings are supported by recent studies that showed that 45% of women prefer socializing outside their workplace including restaurants ( ) while 41% of women feel less connected during the COVID-19 pandemic ( ).
In this study, perceived crowdedness as stimulus did not have a positive effect on the guests’ emotional responses. This is understandable as from March 1 to July 10, 2020, human density and spatial crowdedness on cruise ships led to 99 COVID-19 outbreaks on 123 different cruise ships ( ). Hence, despite the fact that cruise line companies have declared that they will operate at reduced capacities, this did not resonate enough with female cruise travelers in a way to change their perception of crowdedness in cruise ship dining rooms. This is most likely due to the influence of mass media that labeled cruise ships as crowded “petri dishes” during the COVID-19 cruise tourism crisis ( ).
Examination of the structural invariance assessment revealed that the interconnections between dining atmosphere and emotions, and between interaction with other guests and emotions were signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by perceived health risk from COVID-19. The robustness of the interrelations was greater in the high perceived health risk group than in the low perceived health risk group. Moreover, these results suggest that under the indistinguishable extent of dining atmosphere and interaction with other guests, female cruise travelers with high perceived health risk from COVID-19 experience intensified emotions compared to those with low perceived health risk from COVID-19. Because of likely increased confidence of female cruise travelers based on their advanced knowledge about the COVID-19 pandemic and cruise ship enhanced public health safety protocols, capitalizing on the postulate of female cruise travelers’ perceived health risk from COVID-19 as the moderator might be of paramount importance for deciphering female cruise travelers’ emotional responses and their approach behavior. It appears that advanced public health safety protocols (e.g. medical screening prior to boarding, improved air ventilation and enhanced cleaning and sanitation frequencies) are increasing the consumers’ confidence and are appealing to female cruise travelers. The findings suggest that despite the emotional intensity of the COVID-19 pandemic, female cruise travelers are adapting to the “new normal”. These results are supported by a recent study by who found that during the COVID-19 pandemic 21% of U.S. residents said they or someone in their household had dined at a indoor/outdoor restaurant in the past 24 h, while 39% of U.S. residents said they would likely eat in a restaurant with 75% capacity. Similarly, shows that 38% of U.S. residents would dine in an inside sit-down restaurant, 50% would dine in an outdoor seating area of a restaurant, while among consumers who have eaten at restaurants throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, 41% will continue to do so, even with new CDC’s learnings.
Humans recall with their feelings, where authentic memories as human responses are not in details of the memory, but in the strength of experienced emotions. Emotional responses within the domain of the organism in the proposed framework showed that female cruise travelers hold predominantly robust, positive emotions such as pleasure and arousal towards the cruise ship dining experiencescape. This can be ascribed to the likelihood that in the cruise ship dining rooms, positive emotions are effortlessly stimulated because the cruise ship dining experiencescape is particularly guided by hedonic principle. Consequently, findings of this study also suggest that positive emotions from the cruise ship dining experiencescape are remembered by preference over negative emotions.
Lastly, this study showed that approach behavior within the approach or avoidance response domain is influenced by the emotional responses. More precisely, it appears that female cruise travelers are exhibiting certain psychological traits which allow them to recognize the context of perceived health risk from COVID-19, build up self-confidence and experience positive emotions from the cruise ship dining experiencescape. Consequently, due to the impact of positive emotions elicited from dining atmosphere and interaction with other guests, female cruise travelers choose approach response as their future behavior.
5.1.

## Theoretical implications
The novelty of the present study is that it is the first study to assess the cruise ship dining experiencescape among female cruise travelers during the COVID-19 pandemic. This study revealed a state-of-the-art social phenomenon within the domain of cruise tourism and hospitality with regard to the cruise ship dining experiencescape. Our research employed S–O–R paradigm, and expanded nomological network of experienscape were used to illustrate a process in which female cruise travelers can feel positive emotions in cruise ship dining rooms during the COVID-19 pandemic. By combining these approaches, we have provided a model that can explain the cruise ship dining experiencescape in time of the COVID-19 pandemic.
This study extends the cruise tourism and hospitality literature, demonstrating that while dining atmosphere and interaction with other guests positively inﬂuence guests’ emotional response, the inﬂuence of perceived crowdedness during the COVID-19 pandemic does not have a positive influence on the emotional response. These ﬁndings differ from those in the expanded nomological network of experienscape conceptualized by . However, the moderating role of perceived health risks from COVID-19 has a signiﬁcant positive inﬂuence on the relationship between the cruise ship dining atmosphere and guests’ emotional responses; and between the interaction with other guests and guests’ emotional responses. These ﬁndings confirmed the expanded nomological network of experienscape conceptualized by where personal and situational moderators have an influence on the relationship between stimuli (dining atmosphere and interaction with other guests) and organism (guests’ emotional response). Furthermore, in this study it was confirmed that guests’ emotional response (organism) has a positive impact on approach behavior (response). Consequently, results of this study confirmed S–O–R paradigm and expanded nomological network of experienscape in the particular conditions of cruise ship dining rooms during the COVID-19 pandemic.
This study opens new avenues for future research on the cruise ship dining experiencescape. argue that the cruise industry is doomed without an eﬃcient COVID-19 vaccine, and considering that Dr. Anthony Fauci recently stated that wide vaccination in U.S. will not be available before late 2021 ( ), cruise line companies are experiencing an existential threat ( ). This forecast reinforces the need to further investigate the role of the cruise ship dining experiencescape in what calls “social recession” era with its strong implications on physical distancing.
Lastly, in this research, a theoretically important improvement was made to the existing socio-psychology model (Mehrabian and Russell’s S–O–R (1974). Specifically, this research effectively broadened and deepened the S–O–R paradigm by taking into account such crucial conceptualization of expanded nomological network of experienscape and such crucial concepts of perceived crowdedness, dining atmospherics, interaction with others, and perceived health risk from COVID-19. The approach of the present study offers theoretically valuable insights into research on cruise travelers’ approach decision-making processes and behaviors. Given the ongoing crisis of COVID-19 and its influence worldwide, cruise tourism is facing a stronger crisis than ever. Involving COVID-19 health risk influence, this research offers a valuable guiding framework that helps cruise academics and operators to maximize travelers’ positive experiences and behaviors for cruise tourism.

5.2.

## Practical implications
Cruise line companies are facing uncharted territory as a strict CDC Conditional Sailing Order has entered in force on November 1, 2020 ( ). While there is a glimpse of hope for the cruise industry, there is the real concern about how cruise line companies will face the CDC’s strict requirements, and how they might place their businesses at legal risk should they fail to deliver the CDC’s strict public health safety protocols.
Once cruise line companies can clearly demonstrate that cruise ships can provide an environment safe from COVID-19, it is suggested that cruise line companies engage in boosting consumers’ confidence in a cruise ship dining experiencescape with specifically tailored digital-video marketing content that would target populations’ personality traits. These marketing efforts would target populations of interest, mostly on social media networks, and affect their perceived health risk from COVID-19 and so decisively affect their decision-making processes.
Furthermore, cruise line companies should intensify their crisis communication strategies aimed at strengthening the positive impact of dining atmosphere and social interactions on female cruise travelers’ positive emotional response. However, it is equally important to mitigate fear and worries of perceived crowdedness in dining rooms by lowering the occupancy on cruise ships and creating open seating dinner arrangements (prolonged dinner service) supported by various technological improvements that would provide real time monitoring of the human density in dining rooms. These practices would reinforce female cruise travelers’ positive emotions by building on the feelings of closeness and affection between female cruise travelers and cruise line companies. Moreover, such emotional attachment would also create the meaningful relationships that could positively contribute to the wellbeing of female cruise travelers affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and associated lockdowns and curfews. Cruise line companies should also consider implementing a “health passport” system that would require from crew and passengers a proof of COVID-19 vaccination prior to boarding on cruise ship as such measure would mitigate fear and worries related to perceived crowdedness.
Lastly, cruise line companies must maintain open and transparent communication with policy makers, while policy makers must ensure that COVID-19 public health safety protocols are within even playing field and that COVID-19 public health measures are practically achievable. As such, cruise line companies would require a dedicated on board COVID-19 prevention and response task force. Such task force should be composed of various managers and crew members who have in-depth training and awareness related to the prevention of and response to a potential COVID-19 outbreak on board. This COVID-19 prevention and response task force would be obliged to meticulously and transparently address all potential COVID-19 concerns, as such practices would communicate cruise line companies’ commitment to provide a COVID-19 safe environment for female cruise travelers.

5.3.

## Limitations and future research
This pioneering study has certain limitations that provide opportunities for future research. The first is that because of its focus, the study is based on particular constructs and theory related to the expanded nomological network of experienscape conceptualized by . Further studies could include other constructs and concepts compatible with this network. The second limitation is the use of an online self-administered survey, which means that caution should be applied in generalizing the findings due to self-response bias. However, to lessen this challenge, the survey in this study was composed and validated following the suggestion of in such manner that independent and dependent variables did not replicate the structure of the hypotheses. The third limitation is that participants are from societies with the western cultural perspective. Consequently, the results could differ with participants from societies with other cultural perspectives, for example the rapidly growing Chinese cruise market. The fourth limitation is the phase of cruise experience which was between reinterpretation and evaluation and pre-cruise decision and planning phase. The study was conducted by asking female cruise travelers to recall their previous cruise ship dining experience. Consequently, the responses might be impacted by the preferences and recency effect as the participants were recalling the most recent cruise ship dining experience. Given the recent CDC Conditional Sailing Order for a phased-in approach and return to service for the cruise industry in the United States ( ), future studies should employ an in situ approach to avoid potential shortcomings of this study. Lastly, despite its significant moderating influence on the paths from dining atmospherics and interaction with other guests to emotions, perceived health risk was not a significant moderator in the perceived crowdedness and emotions linkage. An additional effort should be made to identify any crucial concept that deepens this relationship in the future research.

6.

## Conclusions
Dining is one of the key aspects of travelers’ overall cruise experience. Passengers fulfill their cruise travel needs and wants when dining in a pleasant environment. This research is an original and empirical endeavor to utilize perceived crowdedness, atmospherics, and interaction with others as main constituents of stimulus process and explore the possible influence of the variables on emotions and approach behaviors in the cruise dining context. The female travelers are irrefutably key spenders in the cruise sector ( ). Centering on their responses and behaviors, this research demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed theoretical framework of cruise ship dining experiencescape. The theoretical framework of the present research successfully embraced S–O–R paradigm and conceptualization of expanded nomological network of experienscape. The developed model of cruise ship dining experiencescape was further intensified by integrating perceived health risk and its influence. The convoluted mechanism among dining atmospherics, interaction with other guests, emotions, and perceived health risk unearthed in this study is of utmost importance in theory and practice. In addition, the entire processes incorporated in the hypothesized conceptual framework are evocative for better comprehension of female cruise passengers’ approach behaviors in the COVID-19 era.
The COVID-19 pandemic created volatility in all spheres of contemporary society, leaving the cruise industry without certainty and with only few opportunities. Accordingly, the value and originality of this study lies in the effort to develop a cruise ship dining experienscape framework that can be used not only during COVID-19 pandemic and in the recovery phase of the cruise tourism crisis, but also in the “new normal” of cruise tourism. However, these findings should be taken with caution as there might be differences between the responses from participants who were not infected COVID-19, who did not lose loved ones or their job due to COVID-19; and those who were infected with the virus, had severe symptoms or who lost a loved one or a job due to COVID-19.

## Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Elizabeth Turner (Auckland University of Technology) for the meticulous proofing of this paper.

Appendix A.

## Constructs and measurement items

 

## References