pmcAnn Tour ResAnn Tour Res3815pheelsevier101765681Annals of Tourism Research0160-73831873-7722pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleElsevier - PMC COVID-19 CollectionPMC9902294PMC9902294.1990229499022943677802710.1016/j.annals.2023.103538S0160-7383(23)00011-71035381ArticleAgritourism resilience during the COVID-19 crisis
BruneSara KnollenbergWhitneyViláOliviaDepartment of Parks, Recreation and Tourism Management, North Carolina State University, 2820 Faucette Drive, Campus box 8001, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695, USA⁎Corresponding author at: 2820 Faucette Drive, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695, USA.320237220239942835310353810353826720229120232412023070220230702202305062023© 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.2023Elsevier LtdSince January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.Resilience is critical to the sustainability of the tourism industry, which was made particularly evident during the COVID-19 crisis. COVID-19 impacted all sectors of the tourism industry revealing previously unknown strengths and weaknesses. Through a longitudinal qualitative approach, we identified the evolving challenges and coping strategies of agritourism operations under the COVID-19 crisis in North Carolina, USA. The results indicate that agritourism operations not only withstood the health crisis but also advanced the management of their operation and customer satisfaction through diversification and reorganization strategies. We use chaos theory to show how agritourism operations took advantage of the context of uncertainty to employ practices that ultimately showcased their resilience.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Keywords
Adaptive capacityChaos theoryEdge-of-chaosCoping strategiesHealth crisisLongitudinal approachpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesAssociate Editor: Pietro Beritelli

## Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic and accompanying crisis, represented unprecedented challenges for the tourism industry brought on by widespread travel restrictions and the loss of 1 billion international arrivals ( ). Local-level policies imposed to limit the spread of COVID-19 challenged traditional operation models in all sectors of the tourism industry. This disruption unveiled the need for more research focused on the tourism industry's resilience to external threats and shocks, such as pandemics ( ). The COVID-19 crisis also exposed the vulnerability of rural populations suffering from the negative impacts on employment, mental health, and life satisfaction ( ). Assessing tourism that predominantly takes place in rural areas (e.g., agritourism), is crucial to further understand the role of tourism in rural populations' ability to respond to crises.
Agritourism refers to visiting a working farm for education or recreation ( ). Typically, agritourism operations emerge from family farms seeking to diversify their income and better manage external threats, such as volatile agricultural markets or climate change ( ; ). Agritourism operations generate income by offering recreational services (e.g., corn mazes), educational services (e.g., school field trips), and selling agricultural products at their on-farm markets ( ). Between 2002 and 2017, farm revenue from agritourism operations has more than tripled in the US ( ). In North Carolina (North Carolina; USA), where the agriculture sector accounts for 16 % of the economy ( ), agritourism is a thriving industry characterized by diversity of offerings including on-farm stores, farm tours, school fieldtrips, and hands-on agricultural activities being fall the high season (S. ). Thus, understanding agritourism operations' performance during the COVID-19 crisis is important as they contribute to rural communities' economies through sales taxes and as a source of employment ( ).
The COVID-19 pandemic in North Carolina resulted in policies and restrictions that heavily impacted the agritourism industry. The NC's Executive Stay-at-Home Order No. 121 (in effect March 30 – April 30, 2020) and subsequent social distancing measures prevented agritourism operators from receiving visitors and hosting school field trips. Yet, once the social distancing measures relaxed, agritourism was perceived as a comparatively safe recreational activity during the COVID-19 pandemic because most agritourism activities take place outdoors ( ) and operate on a small scale which led to a high demand for recreation at farms ( ). Agritourism operators had to re-envision hosting visitors while following state and local safety guidelines, which opened a unique opportunity to advance the knowledge on agritourism resilience amid a health crisis.
Previous to the COVID-19 crisis, studies largely focused on the contribution of agritourism to community resilience, farming systems' resilience, and climate change adaptation ( ; ; ). Hence, there was limited knowledge on agritourism resilience other than their contribution to farm resilience through income diversification. The COVID-19 crisis instigated a research interest in agritourism resilience specifically with early studies describing how operations leveraged their diversified economic activities and bolstered digital products through virtual tourism and social media ( ; ). tested the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on profitability and found a positive impact due to innovation, with little discussion of specific innovations. Similarly, found that agritourism farms rapidly adapted their commercial channels and followed the measures imposed by the crisis. Yet, it is unknown whether the strategies adopted contribute to long-term adaptability and resilience or if operations will return to business-as-usual.
As early evidence of agritourism resilience relied on cross-sectional methods that overlook how operators' strategies might have changed over time, a longitudinal study can provide depth and insight into agritourism operations' evolving strategies that drive their resilience ( ). Also, the agritourism operations are diverse across regions depending on cultural and the agro-environmental conditions of a region ( ), which calls for more research to fully understand agritourism operations' response to a health crisis. We employed a longitudinal qualitative research approach by interviewing seven farms at three points in time to uncover the main challenges and coping strategies of agritourism operations in North Carolina during the COVID-19 crisis. This study also contributes to the limited research conducted in rural areas about the effects of the COVID-19 crisis ( ) and the impact on the livelihoods of rural communities.

## Literature review

## Tourism resilience and crisis management
A crisis is a disruptive event affecting an organization or system that requires urgent decision-making and actions that may bring about a restructuring of the affected system ( ). Events such as the 2003 Severe Autoimmune Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), economic recessions, and terrorist attacks have impacts on travel and tourism destination areas spanning well beyond the crisis event ( ; ). For example, the negative perceptions about the ease of travel to the United States and its hospitality to foreign visitors' lasted years after the 9/11 terrorist attacks ( ). Therefore, resilience, i.e., the ability of systems to cope with and recover from disruptions and maintain their basic functions, has emerged as an important area of research within tourism ( ; ).
Tourism resilience has received considerable attention because it may influence the ability of communities and destinations to bounce back by sustaining employment sources and through sales taxes ( ). Resilient tourism businesses ‘survive, adapt, and grow in the face of turbulent change’ ( p. 16). Accordingly, although studies often focused on the ability to absorb shock and maintain basic functions (L. ), tourism businesses' resilience is often viewed as flexibility, adaptability, and innovation to face adversity ( ). Resilient businesses can both recover from perturbations and adapt to a new context, which may lead to dramatic changes in the overall business operation ( ). Existing literature emphasizes two strategies of tourism business resilience, reorganization and diversification. Although agritourism operations bolster farm resilience, there is a limited understanding of their adaptation strategies to health-related threats.

## Reorganization and diversification as resilience strategies
Reorganization refers to a period after an event or crisis where a system's resources are utilized differently to generate more suitable structures or conditions to adapt to a new context ( ). Broad categories of reorganization include repurposing buildings, labor or social networks ( ). illustrates how a European seaside resort destination went through a period of growth during the 19th century through reorganization, leading to stable growth through the 20th century. Evolving trends and tastes in leisure led to a period of decline, forcing the destination to ‘reinvent itself’ through transforming into different forms of tourism or other types of service and manufacture (p. 4). But there is still a limited understanding of this post-shock realignment of a system and reorganization phase ( ). This realignment may be challenging for agritourism operations with deeply rooted traditions that may lend reorganization practices unattractive ( ). Thus, more research is necessary to assess agritourism operations' ability to reorganize in response to a crisis.
Diversification entails an optimal use of generalized resources through their multi-purpose use (e.g., space or personnel). Thus, diversification may help prevent an over-dependence on a single market segment by offering product or market assortment ( ). By seeking a variety of audiences, tourism offerings, or products, diversification can help manage risk and uncertainty. Additionally, it relates to diversifying into sectors other than tourism at the business, destination, or country level ( ). At the destination level, diversification of tourism activities enhances the capacity of the population to grow and sustain healthy communities ( ; ). Tourism diversification is an important, yet understudied component of tourism resilience and sustainability ( ). Studying agritourism, as a prime example of diversification within the tourism industry, can offer useful insight into the contribution of diversification to resilience. Farmers pioneered agritourism activities because of the need for farm diversification, particularly for family farms ( ). With volatile agricultural markets and increasing agricultural industrialization, farm diversification through agritourism is regarded as an economic alternative for rural areas and the agricultural sector ( ). At the same time, agritourism operators may further diversify within the operation from merely offering attractions such as U-Pick to for example offering lodging (e.g., farm stays), or school fieldtrips ( ). Nonetheless, the role of diversification in bolstering agritourism resilience in the face of a health-related crisis deserves closer examination.

## Resilience strategies in the context of chaos theory
These reorganization and diversification strategies may help explain why some businesses thrive despite severe crises ( ; ). The phenomena of businesses thriving during a crisis have also been analyzed using chaos theory, which emerged from observing complex, non-linear, non-deterministic, and dynamic systems ( ). Chaos theory posits that chaotic systems may experience a seemingly small change to the initial state that changes the long-term behavior of a system which is known as the ‘butterfly effect’ ( ). The ‘butterfly effect’ is at the core of chaos theory to draw attention to the disequilibrium that systems may face (e.g., turbulence, change) which may lead to uncertain and unpredictable outcomes ( ).
Chaos theory draws attention to states or conditions that may determine systems' or businesses' strategies in the face of a crisis including ‘edge-of-chaos’, ‘lock-in effect’, and reorganization ( ). ‘Edge-of-chaos’ refers to a state where systems reach a critical point of tenuous equilibrium and are ready for a change ( ). illustrate ‘edge-of-chaos’ using the Australian Gold Coast as an example, where World War II generated an ‘edge-of-chaos’ state that triggered entrepreneurial keenness and readiness for change in the tourism industry. This ‘edge-of-chaos’ led to bifurcation in two touristic destinations where one destination thrived through diversifying attractions and touristic activities while the other decayed. Consequently, an ‘edge-of-chaos’ state can lead to a destination's collapse or a destination's reorganization into a new structure that is both more dynamic and adaptable ( ).
A system is considered to be locked-in when is in a state of embeddedness in a modus operandi as part of a routine that has been practiced for years without being challenged ( , p. 112). An example of the ‘lock-in effect’ in tourism constitutes the sustained agglomeration of tourist lodging and attractions around a location that used to be advantageous, but that has become less relevant over time ( ). When a disturbance challenges a modus operandi, reorganization may enhance the systems' ability to deal with external or internal hurdles through resource optimization ( ). As agritourism is embedded in farming traditions, it can also be subject to a ‘lock-in effect’ that may lead to less resilient operations ( ). ‘Lock-in effects’ can also hamper innovation which is considered a source of growth in times of crisis and turmoil ( ; ). Thus, seeking opportunities to innovate and alter the status quo for new standards to emerge can be central to the resilience of the agritourism industry.
While researchers are increasingly interested in using chaos theory, not enough studies in tourism have applied its principles to tourism resilience ( ). In the context of agritourism, chaos theory may contribute to understanding how operators deal with uncertainty where phenomena like the ‘butterfly effect’ and ‘edge of chaos’ may shake the status quo ( , p. 115). In this study, we incorporate two strategies emphasized in the resilience literature (i.e., diversification and reorganization) and chaos theory to identify the different states that agritourism operators experience and how they adapt to the evolving challenges in North Carolina in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic.

## Methods
To capture the response of agritourism operations to the COVID-19 crisis over time ( ), we opted for a longitudinal qualitative approach, which entailed interviewing agritourism operators three times during 2020. Agritourism operations can have transitory decision-making and mindsets ( ) typical of perishable data. Given the time and resources constraints we sacrificed ensuring a representative sample to accelerate data collection and capture ephemeral situations by using a convenience sample ( ). The sample comprised farms that were participating on an ongoing research project where the selection criteria was (1) operations with an on-farm store, that (2) offered a combination of educational activities such as farm tours and (3) had at least one type of hands-on agricultural activity (e.g., U-Pick) located across the three regions of North Carolina. Our prolonged engagement with these farmers through the separate project made this study possible and established a level of comfort and candidness between the research team and the farmers. The lead author of this article has conducted research on family farms' livelihoods for over ten years providing her with a robust understanding of their situation and ability to connect with farmers. Yet, it is acknowledged that this deep engagement with family farms might result in a bias toward highlighting their ingenuity and merit. Therefore, data and findings were reviewed by other members of the research team who had limited to no contact with the participants. We invited the ten farmers by email to participate and informed them about the research objectives and procedures. Seven farmers agreed to participate and provided informed consent through a Qualtrics form as well as a preferred phone number and time to participate in the interviews.
We created a semi-structured interview questionnaire to prompt respondents about the challenges they faced during COVID-19 and the strategies they employed to overcome those challenges. (e.g., what are the main challenges your operation is currently facing?). We scheduled phone interviews with participants at three points in time in 2020. Time 1 took place at the end of the spring agritourism season (May – June); Time 2 was after the summer agritourism season (August – September); Time 3 took place after the fall agritourism season (November). The interviews lasted between 30 min and 1 h each. This longitudinal approach allowed us to explore the evolution and change of resilience practices during the COVID-19 crisis in 2020. We offered participants a $25 incentive for each interview.
The participating agritourism operations offer a range of U-Pick crops such as strawberries, blueberries, pumpkins, apples, and sunflowers, are located in peri-urban areas across the three North Carolina regions, and range in size from 43 to 1700 acres. The operations are family operated and open their doors to the public between three and ten months a year, but most of the farms are open for about four months of the year, more specifically during the fall season. Two of the farms had animal production as their main agricultural activity while the rest relied on crop production. This research is exploratory, aiming to produce a detailed account of resilience strategies used by agritourism operations. Accordingly, we did not intend to sample a representative of the varied agritourism operations in North Carolina ( ) to provide generalizable findings.
We achieved data saturation—where no other themes regarding the research questions emerged—with the seven participating agritourism operations ( ). Following guide for trustworthiness in thematic analysis, we applied the credibility principle by developing prolonged engagement with study participants through their engagement in prior research projects and longitudinal interviews. Additionally, we addressed the credibility and dependability of our findings by engaging two researchers in data analysis for researcher triangulation. To facilitate data transferability, we provide detailed descriptions of the agritourism operations recruited for this study in the selection criteria above ( ). To achieve confirmability, we documented the data collection process and analysis through an audit trail ( ).
To analyze the data, we transcribed interviews verbatim for data analysis using a transcription service. To protect the respondents' identity, we removed identifiable information from interview transcriptions before data analysis. We used Nvivo Qualitative Data Analysis Software to manually conduct thematic analysis for each round of interviews. We started with data familiarization that included prolonged engagement with the data and organizing data in terms of challenges and coping strategies used by agritourism operators in each stage of data collection. We generated initial codes and conducted peer debriefing of these codes (e.g., online sales, marketing). Upon identifying the full range of codes regarding the coping strategies, we conducted axial coding to associate them with broader aspects of resilience and chaos theory (e.g., diversification, reorganization). Two researchers participated in the analysis of the data, and we conducted a peer debrief to discuss connections between open and axial coding. After discussing the evolution of the main challenges and coping strategies for each stage, we derived conclusions related to the aim of the study.

## Results
 presents the agritourism operators provider's profile. The challenges and coping strategies of agritourism operators in North Carolina evolved through the three stages of data collection according to the seasons and the changing context (spring, summer, and fall). Each of the following sections reveals the evolving challenges that threatened agritourism operators' resilience during the height of the COVID-19 pandemic. This is followed by evidence of how adopting diversification and reorganization strategies played a crucial role in agritourism operations' resilience in addressing these challenges ( 
). 

## Spring season of 2020

## Challenges
During the spring season, early challenges included the shutdown of all the agritourism activities. The NC's Executive Stay-at-Home Order No. 121 implemented for a month in March of 2020 posed severe challenges for the farms that were set to receive spontaneous visitors during weekends and school field trips during weekdays over the spring. These operations faced a substantial revenue loss as Farmer 5 described:The portion that we have that produces the majority of our income is our agritourism activities. All our activities for the spring were totally canceled along with the field trips… There we lost three-quarters of our income from those cancellations. We are, because of COVID, trying to figure out how to proceed with those activities.

Farmers feared a devasting fall season if they were prevented from hosting school field trips as Farmer 5 said: ‘[School field trips are] probably 30 to 40 % of our business out there in the fall… and I don't anticipate us having any of those this year. That's going to hurt quite a bit.’ Farmer 1 wished authorities gave operations the freedom to implement safety guidelines on their farm without having to close their doors to the public as they were invested in keeping the public safe:We know our space better than anybody. If you think about it in a logical, intelligent way, why would any business that is involved in bringing people to the venue, subjugate themselves to a backlash due to a spread of COVID based off of something that they did not do to protect the public? It does not make sense. We are invested in safe venues because everybody has their phones now and can very quickly ruin my business.

## Coping strategies
Diversification was a primary coping strategy for these challenges. Agritourism operators relied on the diversified nature of their operation to continue to generate income. Although the stay-at-home order initially prohibited farms to host visitors, they continued their agricultural production and on-farm markets were allowed to operate as essential businesses, expanding access to food in many rural communities and a source of income for farmers ( , Quote 1). The initial shutdown also prompted farmers to diversify by offering virtual experiences. For example, one operation offered Zoom calls with farm animals such as llamas and alpacas that allowed them to reach the international market ( , Quote 2). Agritourism operators were also exploring the possibility of offering virtual school field trips in case remote schooling was still the norm for the fall of 2020 ( , Quote 3).
When the stay-at-home order ended in April of 2020, local authorities imposed mandates limiting the number of visitors to allow social distancing. Farmers again turned to diversification as a coping strategy by expanding their offerings to receive visitors on the farms while maintaining social distancing. For example, Farmer 6 described: ‘Since then, in June, we have had drive-in movies on Saturday evenings. That's when we would sell tickets and we did generate some income from the drive-in movies.’ Farmer 2 created a farm tour that families could engage in by driving around the farm: ‘We created a drive-through experience on the farm that met all the guidelines that were in place.’ In short, farmers highlighted the role of their diversified business practices to cope with the crisis. Farmer 6 thought the main lesson they had learned so far was: ‘Diversification. More diversification, reaction time.’ Farmer 5 reiterated: ‘The key right now is being diversified and trying to be prepared as you can for whatever may lie ahead.’
Agritourism operators also employed reorganization strategies to enable social distancing requirements. For example, Farmer 4 opened the on-farm market by implementing a drive-through market: ‘The customers would come up. They would remain in their vehicle. We would have a pricing board and a listing of everything we had to offer. We would go to each car and take their orders’. One operator required customers to buy tickets online ahead of time to guarantee they would not disregard the recommended maximum number of visitors ( , Quote 4). All operators employed different strategies to either offer virtual experiences or reorganize their operations to ensure minimum numbers of visitors and facilitate social distancing.

## Summer season of 2020

## Challenges
When asked about the main challenges during the second interview (approximately three months later), farmers consistently referred to the overall context of uncertainty in which they operated as Farmer 7 stated: ‘Probably the uncertainty of going forward, that would say that's the main [challenge]. We've pretty much adapted to where things are right now. It's the uncertainty going forward.’ Thus, at this point farmers identified as being at a point of tenuous equilibrium. This uncertainty was related to having to wait for authorities to outline what was allowed during each season. Local and state guidelines conflicted among adjacent jurisdictions adding to the overall uncertainty farmers faced:This is a really hard thing to navigate because the information is all over the place. It's not even consistent information. 10 min away in Tennessee, people are not wearing masks. The Charlotte Motor Speedway said no to a race. It's being held half an hour from here at Bristol Motor Speedway. They've got 20,000 people coming.
(Farmer 7)

Study participants stated that they were exhausted from constantly having to adapt to the COVID-19 changing context: ‘The biggest challenge is having to pivot your business based on where we are. That's a constant thing this year, is having to reinvent yourself constantly’ (Farmer 2). Thus, for the summer season, operators agreed that although they had been constantly adapting to the changing context, the uncertainty about the future represented the biggest challenge.

## Coping strategies
As measures to prevent the spread of COVID-19 relaxed the farmers that usually host visitors during the summer relied on reorganization as a strategy to be able to host visitors safely and restrict the number of visitors ( , Quote 5). Farmer 1 communicated that by hosting visitors during the summer they recovered some of the revenue losses they endured during the spring: ‘We didn't make that much money up, on the blueberry U-Pick, but maybe half of [the losses].’ Farmer 2 also reported increasing sales during the summer: ‘In general, our produce sales were up a good bit. Our market sales are up… It's almost doubled.’ Some virtual offerings that the farmers had pioneered in during the shutdown lost relevance, such as the Zoom calls ( , Quote 6). Yet, virtual school field trips continued to gain relevance. As in-person schooling was not foreseen for the upcoming fall season and more entities became interested in partnering with farms to offer virtual agritourism experiences to expand the remote learning opportunities for children ( , Quote 7).
Regarding reorganization strategies, online ticketing was still not the norm for the operators included in this study as some were still waiting on authorities' guidelines to set up the online ticketing system ( , Quote 8). Farmers had to wait for official guidelines on the number of visitors they would be able to receive before marketing the fall season: ‘As far as the upcoming agritourism season, we are not doing any advertising, or making any announcements about the upcoming fall season, until after the governor's executive order is announced in September’ (Farmer 4). Farmers were also preparing to ensure enough handwashing facilities and signage: ‘Yes, more hand washing stations, signage, better signage in and around the farm market.’ (Farmer 1). Thus, the summer season was largely characterized by uncertainty and stress for farmers who were still trying to plan for the fall season which is a substantial source of income for agritourism operators in North Carolina.

## Fall season of 2020

## Challenges
When asked about challenges they had faced in the fall season, farmers stated that late guidelines by authorities delayed opening their operations to the public:…We had scheduled to open on September 19th for the fall season. We did not receive any direction from the governor's office until September 14th, which was on a Monday, and we were scheduled to open on Saturday. We delayed opening by one week and opened for the season on September 26th, because we had to create a COVID plan, make sure we had all of our employee training done, and to cover ourselves in case our farms were listed as a hotspot for the COVID virus, which it was not, thankfully.
(Farmer 4)

Once farmers obtained official guidelines to plan accordingly, Farmer 3 communicated that the challenges evolved into safely hosting a large number of visitors as they had record visitation numbers: ‘We had to park cars, more than we've ever had to do before. Sales were way up. Transactions were up…The more people you have, challenges increase, of course. …We continually had to monitor that crowd, that line.’ The operators that participated in this study reported that the record visitation numbers allowed them to recover some of the losses they had during the spring and school field trips cancellations during the fall season as Farm 1 explained: ‘…a great year from a retail standpoint all around. Ice cream numbers were up; pumpkin sales were up; gifts were up, and the farm held its own with guests and families coming.’ Consequently, the reorganization practices to enable social distancing ended up being crucial for crowd management ( , Quote 9).

## Coping strategies
Some diversification strategies that farmers used during the initial shutdown such as Zoom calls with llamas lost relevance once farmers were able to host visitors. Yet, Farmer 7 continued offering Zoom calls with farm animals because it does not require a lot of effort and the public still took interest in them ( , Quote 10). The farmers that offered virtual school field trips during the fall season detected unintended benefits such as not being restrained to a geographical region or season, and time savings for schools because of not having to travel which freed time for the tour ( , Quote 11). Yet, farmers that heavily rely on school field trips reported that the economic losses persisted because they did not host as many school field trips throughout 2020: ‘We did a few field trips, not nearly what we would have done in previous years. It was probably a 95 % loss for us as far as educational field trips.’ (Farmer 4). Thus, virtual school field trips did not represent a substitute for in-person field trips income-wise.
The reorganization practice that most operators adopted for crowd management during the fall was online ticketing which produced numerous unintended benefits. Requiring visitors to buy their tickets ahead of time allow farmers to manage crowds by preventing all visitors from arriving at the farm at once, with the bonus benefit of receiving their income in advance: ‘The tickets were sold in three hours increment. Certain number of tickets for time plot and they were sold two or three weeks in advance… That is a good move for farms because they know their income ahead of time’ (Farmer 4). Thus, farmers could obtain working capital (i.e., money to meet current obligations) before opening their doors to the public. First, online ticketing gave farmers the advantage of knowing ahead of time how busy they were going to be any given day. As Farmer 7 describes, before the online ticketing systems, farmers could not tell if it was going to be a busy day:We had all these wonky ways of figuring [the number of visitors] out… It was a beautiful day I would drive into town on Friday night to do something and I would say, “Guys, there's a bunch of cars in town, we're going to be busy tomorrow”… We used to say somebody should figure out a way to tally the number of hotel reservations, so we all had a scale of how busy it was so we could plan, but now we just pre-book. [laughs]
(Farmer 7)

Farmer 2 emphasized that requiring online ticketing ahead of time did not upset customers given that they considered it was their responsibility to check beforehand as Farmer 2 explained: “If they're coming out here for 10 years and they didn't check anything, they were like, ‘I should have looked because I do know that we're in a pandemic.’” Moreover, Farmer 7 regarded the COVID-19 crisis as an opportunity to implement online ticketing mandatory for all visitors:We had offered [online ticketing] in December, so we just went to reservation-only when we reopened. It was helpful because we could just say, ‘OK, because of COVID, from now on, you have to book in advance.’ We didn't have to be the bad guy. [laughs] It gave us an opportunity to do that when we wouldn't have done it otherwise. We had talked about doing it for the summer and were like, ‘I don't know. How do you think our customers would feel?’ Then when this happened, we were like, ‘OK’.

Spreading visitors throughout the day through scheduled ticketing allowed operators to improve the agritourism experience, lessening long lines and waiting times as Farmer 2 indicated: ‘Customer satisfaction is up because of dispersing the number of people here at a time.’ Farmer 1 reinforced this point adding that knowing visitation numbers ahead of time improved staff management: ‘…being able to have more of an orderly arrival of the consumer. It helps with staffing, and planning, and a whole lot of other things.’ Farmer 4 further expanded on enhanced staff and supply management while reducing waste because of online ticketing:[Online ticketing] is convenient, it's just better because we know how much staff to have in place, we know how much food we need to purchase to keep the concession stand stocked, it's just better planning… we had less food wasted because usually in the last hour that we're open we discard the food significantly.

Online ticketing also facilitated the check-in of visitors as Farmer 2 explained: ‘The good thing about [online ticketing] is that we had our first step [done]’. Thus, online ticketing was also considered advantageous as it saved time the day of the tour as Farmer 7 described: ‘Check-in for people was a lot easier.’ Online ticketing not only saved time, but by eliminating the necessity of channeling visitors through the entrance Farmer 1 freed physical space in the farm that would have otherwise been devoted to ticket sales, and allowed them to ask visitors to drive up to the main attraction, without having to use a wagon ride from the parking lot to the main attraction:In the years passed, people would park up front where the farm market is and load the hayride wagon to the [main attraction]. This year they drove to the [main attraction]. That's when everything was ticketed right there. Then the hayride became another attraction that could be properly socially distanced.
(Farmer 1)

Online ticketing also improved communication with the customers as it enables capturing visitors' email addresses: ‘Before, you just showed up, and you didn't have to sign up for our email list’ (Farmer 7). The ability to communicate with customers ahead of time improved satisfaction of the agritourism experience because operators could manage external factors such as the weather. As most agritourism experiences take place outdoors, when the weather was not suitable for certain agritourism activities, operators could offer visitors the opportunity to reschedule their tour: ‘For instance, we had a couple of days that it rained, and we were able to communicate with people that this is what we're doing today because of the rain’ (Farmer 2). Having visitors' email addresses also allows operators to communicate with customers ahead of time and manage expectations: ‘We realized that there was a real need and desire for [online ticketing]. We can communicate with our customers before they come to the farm. They know more about who we are and who we're not and what to expect.’ (Farmer 7).
The online ticketing system may also improve satisfaction in the long run by enabling a two-way communication with visitors easing the ability of visitors to provide a review. This feedback may help improve their practices, but it was also used by operators to encourage their staff:One thing that we have noticed, which I believe is a result of pre-ticketing, is we're getting more reviews …through Google …Not only do we get reviews for the business, but I was talking about the young man that came to work for us. We get a really good review about a certain tour guide. Then we screenshot it and send it to them and say, “Great job.”… It's just like a click-a-button kind of thing. It's super easy. It becomes super easy. That's part of where we're getting more reviews.
(Farmer 7)

In short, agritourism operators regarded the crisis as an opportunity to try new things ( , Quote 12) and overcome ‘lock-in effects’ that prevented them from switching to online ticketing earlier:Some of these changes are things [laughs] that we would never have done, mainly because it's not the way we've done it in the past. What would people say? It probably helped us to think outside the box too, and to realize that we can make some changes without our customers throwing up their hands and saying, ‘I'm not going back there.
(Farmer 3)

Farmer 4 also reflected on the ‘lock-in effect’ and wondered why they did not do some of those changes beforehand: “All of our ticketing was transitioned to online …to track attendance numbers and be in compliance with… what the governor's order stated. We made a lot of changes, and we look back at those changes now and think, ‘Why didn't we do this years ago?’”. When asked whether they will maintain online ticketing the following year, even if COVID-19 was not a threat anymore Farmer 4 said: ‘Absolutely, we would never go back to what we were doing before.’ Farmer 2 concluded that this might be the new standard with agritourism operations: ‘I've heard that from other farms that I'm in associations with, that they experienced the same thing and that they would never go back to doing it the way they did it before.’

## Discussion
The agritourism operations that participated in this study demonstrated remarkable resilience to the sustained challenges brought on by the COVID-19 crisis during 2020, in line with evidence from past studies ( ; ). These challenges included revenue loss because of the stay-at-home order, uncertainty about the future, as well as mixed information about state and local guidelines. Agritourism operations displayed their resilience in two dominant strategies: 1) diversifying the sources of income within and across sectors and 2) reorganizing their operations in innovative ways. Agritourism operations are inherently diversified and this dual role (i.e., agricultural producers and recreational services providers) contributed to their resilience, particularly when the initial shutdown prevented them from hosting visitors.
By leveraging their role in communities as food outlets when they could not host visitors and pioneering agritourism initiatives such as Zoom calls with farm animals, virtual school field trips, and drive-through agritourism experiences, some agritourism farms remained operational during COVID-19's social distancing measure. This study builds on past research pointing out how agritourism provides family farms resilience through offering income diversification ( ; ). These innovations not only expanded access to safe recreational experiences, but also allowed agritourism operations to sustain income and employment sources, continue their educational mission, reach international markets, and connect with customers beyond the confines of their geographical region. Thus, these results further inform the potential of the agritourism industry to contribute to the resilience of rural communities to events such as the COVID-19 crisis.
As the COVID-19 crisis challenged their modus operandi, their reorganization strategies included switching to an online ticketing system with the primary intention of abiding by the maximum number of visitors allowed at one time by authorities following the transition toward digitalization observed across the tourism industry ( ). This reorganization enhanced their operations' ability to deal with the uncertainty and optimized resources ( ). Operators identified myriad unexpected perks resulting from online ticketing systems such as advanced income, improved management of staff, supplies, and waste, releasing time and space at the farm the day of the visit, enhanced communication with customers and vice versa, and facilitating farm management and diversification of their operation. Online ticketing also improved agritourism experiences and visitor satisfaction by reducing waiting times and long lines. Given the considerable advantages of online ticketing, operators consider it a business practice that may become a standard for the agritourism industry in North Carolina. The diversification and reorganization strategies agritourism operations adopted during COVID-19 strengthened their ability to face the changing context and are now operating more effectively.

## Agritourism operations' resilience and chaos theory
 summarizes the stages that farmers experienced through 2020. Farmers largely used diversification strategies (e.g., offering virtual experiences) at the beginning of the pandemic and relied on reorganization strategies (e.g., online ticketing) once they were able to host visitors. This study illustrates how the COVID-19 crisis exerted a ‘butterfly effect’ that modernized the agritourism industry in North Carolina. Agritourism operators identified opportunities to reorganize and ultimately expanded their income stream while offsetting some of the losses they experienced during the spring. Some farmers were on the ‘edge-of-chaos’ regarding switching to mandatory online ticketing ahead of the visit. Updating the ticketing systems was difficult to implement because of ‘lock-in effects’ as operators feared customers' adverse reactions to online ticketing. In-person ticketing had remained unchallenged with the relative stability agritourism operators had experienced before the COVID-19 crisis which did not encourage innovation. The COVID-19 crisis provided a push to implement online ticketing systems and improve the management of their operation. 
Previous cross-sectional studies identified strategies agritourism operations employed to cope with the COVID-19 crisis without discussing whether these strategies contributed to long-term resilience for agritourism operations ( ; ). The longitudinal approach enabled drawing a distinction between reactive strategies that lost relevance with the easing of restrictions (e.g., Zoom with llamas) and an enduring strategy that contributes to long-term resilience (i.e., online ticketing). Hence, this study reveals the usefulness of incorporating temporality as a conceptual driver to understand how agritourism operations build resilience over time. As NC's agritourism industry shares attributes with other States such as offering typical attractions (e.g., U-Pick), these findings may be transferable to other contexts in the USA. Although we only focused on resilience, we provide insight into how incorporating temporality in the analysis can contribute to related bodies of literature such as tourism crisis and disaster management ( ).
This study makes a theoretical contribution by using a longitudinal approach and chaos theory to understand agritourism resilience—to the best of our knowledge—for the first time. Chaos theory provides a suitable lens to advance resilience knowledge during the COVID-19 crisis because it provides language to conceptualize ongoing change. ‘Lock-in effects’ were particularly useful to understand why operators did not adopt certain practices in the past, and how a ‘butterfly effect’ helped overcome ‘lock-in effects’ and trigger innovation. This provides a more comprehensive depiction of agritourism resilience allowing for the appreciation of the complexity involved in the strategies they adopt. Thus, our study exemplifies how chaos theory enables a conceptual and chronological understanding of the components of change in a social system, which can be used more broadly in tourism crisis management studies ( ). Furthermore, chaos theory helps to theoretically connect strategies across time to understand the whole rather than reporting on isolated strategies for a more dynamic understanding of resilience ( ).

## Conclusion
We investigated agritourism resilience to the COVID-19 crisis in North Carolina. With this study, we answer the call for more research using chaos theory and longitudinal studies to explore the complex nature of tourism crises ( ). We found the principles of chaos theory useful to understand agritourism resilience, especially regarding the evolution of coping strategies into permanent practices. The agritourism operators' challenges and strategies illustrate aspects of the chaos phenomena where the context triggers different strategies from operators until a new equilibrium is reached. The uncertainty of the COVID-19 crisis triggered varied responses among agritourism operators ranging from diversification, reorganization, and innovation leading to a new state of equilibrium for the agritourism industry.
Operators sought opportunities in the middle of chaos establishing new standards in the agritourism industry with unexpected benefits for operators and visitors. Thus, resilient operations not only maintained their basic functions but embraced change and sought new areas of improvement. Our study supports previous findings indicating that resilient businesses recognize opportunities in times of chaos and embrace radical change ( ; ). Yet, our sample does not allow for generalization to the entire agritourism industry in North Carolina. For instance, our sampling approach did not allow us to capture the challenges and strategies of the farms that did not open to the public during 2020 or whose business did not necessarily thrive. Hence, future research with a larger and more diverse sample is necessary to further advance agritourism resilience knowledge to capture the experiences of operations that suffered significant losses or closure and represent a wider variety of agritourism operations (e.g., farms that host large events such as weddings, or wineries), even if saturation is sacrificed ( ). Nonetheless, the convenience sample contributed to the main strength in our research as the pre-established rapport and trust with study participants gained through work on a previous project facilitated the longitudinal approach.
Our findings support the importance of diversification and adaptation of commercial channels during the pandemic ( ; ), but also indicate a differentiated reorganization practice (i.e., online ticketing), and its contribution to long-term adaptability. Implementing online ticketing is a promising approach for agritourism operations that can be ventured in other contexts, nonetheless, is limited by the requirement of widespread access to internet for both operators and visitors. Our study also underscores the importance of continuing to adopt longitudinal approaches that facilitate capturing change through time for a deeper understanding of evolving phenomena. While this study is limited to the first year of the pandemic, we believe embracing a longitudinal approach beyond a single year could yield further insights regarding additional changes farms face as the pandemic evolved, the longevity of certain changes, and an understanding of under what contexts farms begin to stabilize their practices.
These findings have practical implications for the tourism industry. Practitioners and policymakers can help tourism businesses become more resilient in three ways. First, by helping tourism businesses diversify offerings across sectors and modalities such as virtual and in-person experiences. Second, by helping tourism businesses become more flexible and with the ability to reorganize. An important aspect of this flexibility is aiding tourism businesses overcome ‘lock-in effects’ helping them seek opportunities to try new practices and services in times of crisis as the public may be receptive. For instance, destination managers can facilitate the adoption of online ticketing by providing capacity building on online platforms to operators and marketing the advantages of online reservations to visitors. Lastly, practitioners and policymakers can help tourism businesses adopt practices that would help them deal with uncertainty. For example, when it comes to tourism activities that highly depend on unpredictable weather, obtaining the contact information of visitors to contact them ahead of time when weather conditions will not be favorable can help operators manage customers' expectations and offer alternatives when the weather threatens costumer satisfaction.
This study captures rich and meaningful accounts from agritourism operators amid a global pandemic, the impact of the crisis on their operations, and their coping strategies. In doing so, we expand the understanding of tourism businesses' resilience scholarship during a health crisis. While the resilience of agritourism operations relies upon their inherent attributes (i.e., relying on both agricultural and tourism activities), this structure reveals a model that other tourism businesses could employ to advance their resilience. The unprecedented challenges associated with the COVID-19 crisis opened opportunities for agritourism operations to emerge with improved practices that further strengthen the industry. Finally, as agritourism operations contributed to the overall resilience of their communities by sustaining food outlets, employment sources, and offering spaces for safe outdoor recreation, we also add to the knowledge about the multiple benefits agritourism offers to society.

## Declaration of competing interest
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

 Sara Brune is a Postdoctoral Scholar at North Carolina State University. Her research interests include how tourism experiences instigate desirable behaviors and inclusive sustainable development.
Whitney Knollenberg is an Associate Professor at North Carolina State University. Her research focuses on tourism leadership and its influence on policy, planning, and partnerships.
Olivia Vilá is a 2022 NOAA Sea Grant John A. Knauss Marine Policy Fellow. Her work focuses on social dimensions of sudden- and slow-onset hazards.
Appendix A

## Supplementary data
The following is the supplementary data related to this article.

## Video 1
This study adopts a longitudinal qualitative approach to examine agritourism resilience during the COVID-19 crisis.
Video 1

## Data availability
The data that has been used is confidential.

## Acknowledgments
We are especially grateful to the farms that participated in this study. We also thank Dr. Danielle Lawson (Pennsylvania State University) for her contribution to funding acquisition and two anonymous reviewers for their insight and helpful comments.

## Funding
This study was supported by a Quick Response grant from the 10.13039/100008618Natural Hazards Center, University of Colorado, Boulder. The Quick Response program is based on work supported by the 10.13039/100000001National Science Foundation (Award #1635593). Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of NSF or the Natural Hazards Center.

Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annals.2023.103538.