pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC9980824PMC9980824.1998082499808243686271710.1371/journal.pone.0282267PONE-D-22-275761Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesClinical MedicineClinical ImmunologyAutoimmune DiseasesCrohn's DiseaseBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyClinical ImmunologyAutoimmune DiseasesCrohn's DiseaseMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyClinical ImmunologyAutoimmune DiseasesCrohn's DiseaseMedicine and Health SciencesGastroenterology and HepatologyInflammatory Bowel DiseaseCrohn's DiseasePhysical SciencesChemistryChemical CompoundsOrganic CompoundsSteroidsPhysical SciencesChemistryOrganic ChemistryOrganic CompoundsSteroidsMedicine and Health SciencesHealth CareHealth Information TechnologyElectronic Medical RecordsComputer and Information SciencesInformation TechnologyHealth Information TechnologyElectronic Medical RecordsResearch and Analysis MethodsDatabase and Informatics MethodsComputer and Information SciencesData ManagementData VisualizationInfographicsChartsMedicine and Health SciencesHematologyHematocritBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyBody FluidsBloodBlood CountsHematocritMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyBody FluidsBloodBlood CountsHematocritBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyBody FluidsBloodBlood CountsHematocritMedicine and Health SciencesEpidemiologyDisease InformaticsMedicine and Health SciencesGastroenterology and HepatologyDiarrheaMedicine and Health SciencesClinical MedicineSigns and SymptomsDiarrheaCreation of an ustekinumab external control arm for Crohn’s disease using electronic health records data: A pilot study
Creation of an external control arm for Crohn’s disease using electronic health records datahttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-1789-3004RudrapatnaVivek A.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSoftwareSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing ChengYao-WenData curationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3352-9934FeuilleColinData curationWriting – review & editing MoseniaArmanData curationWriting – review & editing ShihJonathanData curation ShiYongmeiData curationFormal analysisMethodologySoftwareWriting – original draft RobersonOliviaProject administration RubinBenjaminProject administration ButteAtul J.Funding acquisitionWriting – review & editing MahadevanUmaSupervisionWriting – review & editing SkomrockNicholasSupervisionWriting – review & editing EronduNgoziSupervisionWriting – review & editing ChehoudChristelSupervisionWriting – review & editing RahimSaquibSupervisionWriting – review & editing ApfelDavidSupervisionWriting – review & editing CurranMarkSupervision KhanNajat S.Funding acquisition O’BrienChristopherSupervisionWriting – review & editing TerryNatalieSupervisionWriting – review & editing MartiniBenjamin D.Funding acquisitionSupervisionWriting – review & editing 1
Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States of America2
Bakar Computational Health Sciences Institute, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States of America3
School of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States of America4
Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States of America5
Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States of America6
Janssen Research and Development, Spring House, PA, United States of AmericaRamagopalanSreeram V.Editor , ], particularly in oncology and rare diseases where prospective trials are not always feasible [ ]. A notable example of this occurred in 2019, when the FDA expanded the approved indications of a breast cancer drug, palbociclib, to also include men. This label expansion was approved on the basis of research that used electronic health records as well as medical claims databases [ ].
Generally, ECAs have been performed in contexts where treatments and outcomes are relatively well-defined, and thus align well with prospective studies. However, the feasibility and robustness of ECAs for common, chronic, and complex diseases such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) remain unknown. There is an unmet need to better understand ECAs and evaluate their viability as a complement to prospective studies. Our own prior work has used electronic health records (EHR) data to estimate the effectiveness of tofacitinib for treating IBD [ ]. While this study suggested that EHR data may be useful for this purpose, it was conducted on a cohort whose baseline characteristics substantially differed from the cohorts under study in the pre-approval trials of this drug.
The primary objective of this pilot study was to develop a method for creating an ECA for Crohn’s disease. The target of our retrospective emulation was the ustekinumab comparator arm of TRIDENT, a recently completed phase 2b interventional trial of a new treatment for Crohn’s disease [ ]. Secondary objectives included 1) evaluating EHR-based algorithms as an alternative to manual ascertainment of some disease variables, 2) assessing the robustness of imputation methods for handling missing data, and 3) quantifying outcomes following treatment with ustekinumab.

## Materials and methods

## Ethics
Approved by the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) Institutional Review Board (#20–31760). This board waived the requirement for informed consent, given the retrospective nature of this study.

## Eligibility
This study was designed to retrospectively emulate a prospective cohort from TRIDENT, a recently completed phase 2b randomized controlled trial of a new potential treatment for Crohn’s disease. The design of this trial included an active comparator arm consisting of patients randomized to receive ustekinumab, an FDA-approved treatment for this disease. We began by identifying eleven major eligibility criteria from the TRIDENT protocol, and adapting them to be retrospectively applied to UCSF patients who received ustekinumab as a part of the standard of care. These criteria select for adults with a Crohn’s Disease Activity Index (CDAI) between 220 and 450 and who were stably exposed to other treatments for Crohn’s disease. The CDAI is a composite score that ranges from 0 to over 600, and includes physical exam findings, laboratory measurements, and symptoms (i.e. patient reported outcomes). See S2 in for more details.

## Inclusion criteria
Age ≥ 18
A diagnosis of Crohn’s disease as determined by the treating clinician
Receipt of ustekinumab at the FDA-approved route and dose
A baseline Crohn’s Disease Activity Index (CDAI) within the range of 220 to 450 inclusive

## Exclusion criteria
Receipt of IV steroids within the 3 weeks prior to starting ustekinumab
A change to the dose of an oral corticosteroid (e.g. prednisone, budesonide) within the 3 weeks prior to starting ustekinumab
A change in the dose of methotrexate, 6-mercaptopurine, or azathioprine within the 12 weeks prior to starting ustekinumab
A change in the dose of antibiotics as used to treat Crohn’s disease within the 3 weeks prior to starting ustekinumab
A change in the dose of 5-ASA compounds within the 3 weeks prior to starting ustekinumab
The occurrence of bowel surgery (segmental colectomy, ileocecectomy) within the 6 months prior to starting ustekinumab
A history of major bowel surgery (resection of >50% of the colon, multiple small bowel surgeries) at any point in time prior to starting ustekinumab
These correspond to the major criteria from TRIDENT, except for the exclusion of patients with recent exposure to tumor necrosis factor inhibitors (8 weeks) and integrin inhibitors (16 weeks). We did this for two reasons: 1) real-world patients who fail to benefit from one biologic are typically switched to another with minimal delay to avoid the risk of a flare, and 2) patients who sustained long biologic washout periods without being hospitalized or meeting other exclusionary criteria tend to have a lower disease severity and thus tended to be excluded due to a low baseline CDAI. This deviation from the emulation plan was not anticipated or planned a priori, but rather was made ex post after we recognized that the application of these criteria would have removed nearly all the otherwise eligible real-world patients from this cohort study.

## Cohort identification
We performed cohort identification in six sequential phases ( ).
 

## Phase 1
We used a database of structured EHR data at UCSF (2012–2020) to screen patient records meeting the following two criteria:1) at least one Crohn’s disease diagnosis code (ICD-9-CM 555*; ICD-10-CM K50*) and 2) at least one medication order for ustekinumab. We have previously used this database to conduct studies of real-world treatment outcomes in IBD [ ].

## Phase 2
We equally divided the identified records among four trained chart abstractors to perform additional screening manually. The target of this first pass screening were 1) confirmation of Crohn’s disease as documented by the treating clinician, 2) treatment with ustekinumab at the FDA-approved dose and route, and 3) all inclusion and exclusion criteria as listed above except that pertaining to the CDAI. Abstractors followed a detailed protocol to abstract these elements from the EHR (see S3 in ), and evaluated all sections including labs performed outside UCSF and scanned documents from referring physicians. All chart abstraction was done under the supervision of the principal investigator, a gastroenterologist. Edge cases were adjudicated during weekly meetings.

## Phase 3
At the end of phase 2 we had identified patients meeting all study criteria except for the one pertaining to the baseline CDAI. From this cohort, we abstracted the baseline patient-reported outcome elements of the CDAI (abdominal pain, diarrhea, wellbeing; PRO3) using a time window of up to 16 weeks prior to the date of the first dose of ustekinumab. We analyzed the data to empirically define the baseline period. This corresponded to the narrowest window of time prior to week 0 that was not associated with a substantial increase in missing data.

## Phase 4
We abstracted the non-PRO3 elements of the CDAI (e.g. hematocrit, extraintestinal manifestations) using two methods: manual abstraction, and heuristics utilizing structured EHR data like lab values and diagnosis codes (see S3 in ). One of the four chart abstractors completed this on roughly one quarter of the still eligible cohort. We abstracted all non-PRO3 CDAI elements were abstracted at baseline (week -12 to 0) and directly compared the results with the structured data approach.
We performed manual abstraction on a subset of these variables at post-baseline time periods to assess the accuracy of structured data methodology across time. These included the use of antidiarrheals or opiates (binary), the use of steroids (binary), and hematocrit (numeric). Post-baseline time periods corresponded to the times of the primary and secondary endpoints of TRIDENT.

## Phase 5
We used the structured data-based method to ascertain all non-PRO3 elements at the baseline period among the 183 patients who met all other criteria (S1 in ). Given missing CDAI elements at baseline, we needed to use imputation to determine which individuals met the baseline CDAI requirement and thus could be confirmed as members of the cohort. We used two random forest-based imputation routines (MissForest, MissRanger) to assess the sensitivity of cohort membership to the choice of method. Each of these methods utilizes all the other available data train random forest models to impute missing elements, and repeats this process in an iterative fashion with different targets of prediction until the model achieves convergence on all elements [ ]. We considered this use of imputation reasonable for two reasons: 1) the included variables corresponded to elements that are directly related to Crohn’s disease activity (e.g. CDAI elements, current and prior treatment history, biomarkers), and 2) the dataset contained many of these variables (72 in total), significantly reducing the likelihood of residual bias (see ).

## Phase 6
We used MissForest to finalize cohort membership using the same method for calculating the CDAI as was used in TRIDENT ( ).

## Number of subjects
The sample size calculation in the TRIDENT protocol specified 50 subjects per arm. This study identified and analyzed 56 patients.

## Endpoints
Endpoints included the mean reduction in CDAI at week 12 (TRIDENT primary endpoint) and week 24. Of note, subjects in TRIDENT who entered the study on glucocorticoids were required to remain on them during the induction period. Because real-world clinical practice involves tapering these medications earlier, we included steroid use and steroid-free clinical remission (CDAI ≤ 150) at weeks 12 and 24 as additional endpoints.
We used time windows to approximate the true weeks 12 (weeks 10–14) and 24 (weeks 20–28) relative to the date of ustekinumab initiation. We fixed these windows a priori based on prior work [ ].
We performed manual review to abstract PRO3 elements corresponding to these time windows, and used informatics-based methods to abstract the non-PRO3 elements. We reapplied the MissForest algorithm to impute any missing values post-baseline. We analyzed these data to estimate treatment outcomes according to the above endpoints.

## Safety
The assessment of drug safety was not an objective of this pilot study. We did not identify an incidental findings of possible adverse drug events.

## Statistics
This was a descriptive study. Although our original intention was to compare the results of this ECA to that of the target cohort within the TRIDENT trial using statistical hypothesis testing, we did not perform this for a few reasons: 1) we were unable to accurately emulate several major study criteria, specifically pertaining to biologic washouts and stable uses of medications like corticosteroids, and 2) the outcomes of the target cohort from TRIDENT had not been published as of the time that this work was completed. We reported binary outcomes numerically and as a proportion. We reported numeric outcomes by the mean and standard deviation. We performed statistical computing in R.

## Results

## Cohort identification
The cohort selection process is outlined in and described according to the phase of the study.

## Phases 1 and 2
At the time of our EHR database query (April 2020), we identified 736 patients as having an ustekinumab medication order and a Crohn’s disease diagnosis code. We manually screened these records to confirm patient eligibility based on the inclusion and exclusionary criteria adapted from TRIDENT (Methods). We found that 526 patients were excluded based on at least one criterion, for example patients who has recently initiated steroids to treat active disease while awaiting their first dose of ustekinumab.

## Phase 3
We manually abstracted PRO3 elements at timepoints ranging from -16 to 0 weeks relative to starting ustekinumab. We analyzed data availability using different possible time windows at baseline, and identified 12 weeks as the smallest window that did not result in significant missing data at baseline ( ). Data was commonly missing at time points close to the date of ustekinumab induction, reflecting gaps of time between clinic visits where treatments were decided upon and the date that patients actually received intravenous ustekinumab. When clinic visits occurred, we found that all PRO3 elements tended to be documented together. The PROs were more commonly available than lab-based elements such as c-reactive protein (CRP).
 

## Phase 4
We abstracted the non-PRO3 elements on a sample of the still eligible cohort (N = 183) using a combination of manual and informatics-based approaches. We found the accuracy of informatic approaches to abstracting the CDAI to be high compared to a gold-standard of manual review ( ). The degree of agreement, measured by Pearson’s r2, ranged from 0.91 to 0.96 across timepoints (Tables – ). This high correlation appeared to be driven by the fact that for most patients, the major contributor to the total CDAI came from PRO3 elements rather than the other elements ascertained by informatics-based methods.
 

## Phase 5
30% of the cohort was missing at least one PRO3 element at baseline ( ). To handle this missing data and determine cohort membership, we compared two methods (MissRanger, MissForest) for performing single imputation. These random forest-based methods differ in their modes of optimization as well as their final models, which are fit according to a stochastic process. The two models gave very similar results relevant to the selection of the baseline cohort and their outcomes ( ).
 

## Phase 6
We selected MissForest as the method for imputing the baseline data and thereby finalize the cohort of 56 patients meeting all study criteria ( ). We abstracted post-baseline PRO3 elements in these patients, and used the previously described informatics algorithm to abstract all other post-baseline variables. To handle post-baseline missing data ( ), we reapplied the MissForest algorithm to complete the dataset across timepoints, enabling us to assess the outcomes of this cohort.
 

## Endpoints
Ustekinumab was associated with a 95 point mean reduction in the CDAI by week 12, and a 133 point reduction by week 24 (N = 56; , ). The proportions of patients in steroid-free clinical remission were 23% and 34% at Weeks 12 and 24 respectively. 38% of the cohort was using steroids at the baseline timepoint. Out of the cohort of 56, 7 (13%) and 9 (16%) remained on steroids at weeks 12 and 24 respectively ( ).
 

## Discussion
We used a combination of manual review, informatics, and imputation to pilot a method for creating external control arms in Crohn’s disease. We applied this method to identify a real-world cohort resembling the ustekinumab arm in TRIDENT, a recently completed phase 2b trial. We found that algorithms utilizing structured EHR data were accurate at ascertaining the CDAI (both components and in aggregate) and may be a favorable alternative to manual review for non-PRO3 components. We found a substantial amount of missing data in the context of retrospective use for this study design. However, our results suggested that different imputation models may be equivalent in their impacts on cohort definition and outcome measurement. Lastly, this observational cohort appeared to demonstrate a plausible improvement in disease activity by several measures, consistent with the well-established efficacy of ustekinumab [ ]. Our results suggest that roughly a third of the ustekinumab-treated cohort of TRIDENT will be in steroid-free remission at week 24. The actual outcome of that cohort is pending the publication of the TRIDENT study.
Interest in external control arm studies has continued to grow in recent years. This has directly followed from several trends: 1) the increasing availability of large clinical datasets such as from medical claims and EHRs, 2) advances in methods for organizing and extracting information from these data, 3) the large and rising costs of randomized trials [ ], and 4) increasingly favorable attitudes by regulators towards their use [ ].
If done well, these studies have the potential to transform the way we generate clinical evidence. They can inform the safety and efficacy of existing therapies, as well as new ones by indirect comparison. They may also help answer questions about comparative effectiveness, cost-benefits, and precision medicine, particularly in cohorts who might not have been studied in registrational trials.
Despite this potential, our study underscores important differences between this variety of retrospective research and their prospective counterparts. It is more difficult to create a high-quality external control arm for protocols that 1) specify exact study visit timing, 2) prioritize specific outcome measurements that are not commonly obtained in ordinary practice, and 3) constrain what treatments a patient may or may not receive (deviating from clinical care).
The principal limitation of our methodology was missing data. This problem can be understood as the natural consequence of retrospective deviation from prospective study design in three ways.

## Study timing
The timing of real-world clinic visits follows clinical necessity as well as the individual preferences of providers and patients. It is not uncommon for patients to have one clinic visit that determines the need to start a new therapy, and another to evaluate treatment response. Delays between the decision to start treatment and the receipt of treatment in the real-world essentially guarantees missing data at the study visit equivalent of week 0. These delays are particularly magnified in IBD as treated in the US, where sick patients commonly need expensive biologics that require payor authorization and scheduling infusions.
This situation is similar at the time of follow-up. The precise timing of a follow-up visit can differ based on several factors, including provider availability, patient preferences, and even what drug a patient receives (which in turn informs the most reasonable time to expect a response).
Our study attempted to overcome these differences. We noted the high presence of missing clinic visits at week 0, and therefore used an empirical calibration approach to identify the time window for estimating a patient’s actual CDAI at the time of ustekinumab induction. We use predefined windows of ± 2 and 4 weeks for the outcome assessment for similar reasons, to avoid the retrospective miscalibration of clinic visit timings with that of TRIDENT. Future studies are needed to explore the use of other patient-interactive technologies, such as timed patient surveys embedded into EHR systems, to better address this limitation.

## Outcome measures
We found that the informal capture of clinical data can deviate substantially from that of common clinical trial instruments. The CDAI requires a significant amount of data collection across a wide variety of domains–PROs, vitals, laboratories, and extraintestinal diagnoses. It also requires week-long symptom diaries. Unsurprisingly, the CDAI has had poor uptake in actual clinical practice. This was a large driver of missing data in this study.
Our findings suggest substantial potential for simplifying these indices, or more generally, approaches to better align them to the realities of real-world practice. A large part of the reason why our algorithms were as accurate as they were for ascertaining the CDAI was because of class imbalance. That is, most patients did not have any EHR-based evidence for extraintestinal manifestations, and thus their CDAIs were strongly driven by the PROs (all of which were abstracted manually). A further simplification of the PROs from multi-level ordinal variables to even a binary variable might make for a good tradeoff between precision and suitability for routine clinical capture. Future work is needed to develop ‘real-world ready’ instruments that maintain responsiveness and validity.

## Constrained treatments
The final point, getting at the heart of the difference between clinical care and controlled studies, resulted in a different kind of missing data problem: one of diminished sample size rather than missing values. Although we began this study with 736 potential candidates, we excluded 75% of this population after sequentially applying the major eligibility criteria used to screen subjects in TRIDENT. This study was not designed to measure what proportion of candidates were excluded by different criteria. We applied a ‘greedy’ selection approach (eliminating candidates at the earliest evidence of disqualification) to avoid the labor of abstracting 7,360 data points (10 non-CDAI eligibility criteria).
However, our impression was that many patients were disqualified due to changes in therapy during the washout period prior to the date of ustekinumab induction. This of course is quite natural: patients with active Crohn’s disease who are under clinical care are highly likely to undergo changes in treatment, whether rapid transitions from prior treatment to new ones, or the addition of adjunctive/bridging agents like steroids. This was our reason for removing the biologic washout requirement as an eligibility criterion in this study.
This misalignment between experiments designed to measure treatment effects and clinical practice designed to treat patients results in a significant loss in study efficiency. One solution might involve using larger clinical datasets, to find many more of those rare symptomatic patients who ordinarily would have been treated but by chance were not. However, this approach may increase the risks of unmeasured confounding and residual bias. A potentially better solution would be that of an EHR-enabled registry. The use of phenotyping algorithms to screen patients prior to manual review might be a more cost-effective way to efficiently recruit patients, guarantee the timing and capture of relevant data, and involve more under-represented patients in studies that culminate in practice-changing evidence.
Strengths of this study include the use of predefined chart review protocol, validation of algorithms against that of manual review, sensitivity analyses to explore the effects of various design decisions on outcomes, the release of our raw data and code, and the identification of treatment effects that are broadly consistent the literature. Weaknesses as described above pertain primarily to missing data and the resulting inability to make stronger inferences about treatment effectiveness. We additionally note that this was a single-center study: the generalizability of this methodology to other centers with potentially different patient populations and data quality remain to be seen in future work.
In conclusion, we have piloted an approach for performing an external control arm study in Crohn’s disease. Future studies are needed to improve the alignment between prospective study design and real-world clinical care in complex diseases such as Crohn’s disease.

## Supporting information
S1 Checklist(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 File

## Document containing 1) Definitions of informatically-ascertained CDAI elements, 2) Calculation of the CDAI, 3) Abstraction definitions.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Data

## Zipped files containing data and analytical code.
(ZIP)
Click here for additional data file.

The authors thank Jennifer Creasman, UCSF Academic Research Services, and Clinical Data Research Consultation services for clinical informatics support.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0282267.r001Decision Letter 0
RamagopalanSreeram V.Academic Editor© 2023 Sreeram V. Ramagopalan2023Sreeram V. Ramagopalanhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
25 Nov 2022

PONE-D-22-27576Creation of an ustekinumab external control arm for Crohn’s disease using electronic health records data: a pilot studyPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Rudrapatna,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process. Please submit your revised manuscript by Jan 09 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Sreeram V. Ramagopalan
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. Please provide additional details regarding participant consent. In the ethics statement in the Methods and online submission information, please ensure that you have specified (1) whether consent was informed and (2) what type you obtained (for instance, written or verbal, and if verbal, how it was documented and witnessed). If your study included minors, state whether you obtained consent from parents or guardians. If the need for consent was waived by the ethics committee, please include this information.
If you are reporting a retrospective study of medical records or archived samples, please ensure that you have discussed whether all data were fully anonymized before you accessed them and/or whether the IRB or ethics committee waived the requirement for informed consent. If patients provided informed written consent to have data from their medical records used in research, please include this information.
3. We note that the grant information you provided in the ‘Funding Information’ and ‘Financial Disclosure’ sections do not match. 
When you resubmit, please ensure that you provide the correct grant numbers for the awards you received for your study in the ‘Funding Information’ section.
4. Thank you for stating the following financial disclosure: 
"VR received funding from Janssen Research and Development LLC (www.janssen.com).
VR received funding from the UCSF Division of Gastroenterology (gastroenterology.ucsf.edu).
VR and AJB received funding from UCSF Bakar Computational Health Sciences Institute (bakarinstitute.ucsf.edu)
The contents of this manuscript are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official views of the NIH. None of the study sponsors had any influence over the data interpretation or conclusions from this study."
Please state what role the funders took in the study.  If the funders had no role, please state: ""The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript."" If this statement is not correct you must amend it as needed. 
Please include this amended Role of Funder statement in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
5. Thank you for stating the following in the Competing Interests section: 
"NS, NE, CC, SR, DA, MC, NSK, CO, NT, and BDM are employees of Janssen Pharmaceuticals, a for-profit entity that owns all rights to the drug ustekinumab. UM is a consultant for Janssen Pharmaceuticals. AJB is a co-founder and consultant to Personalis and NuMedii; consultant to Mango Tree Corporation, and in the recent past, Samsung, 10x Genomics, Helix, Pathway Genomics, and Verinata (Illumina); has served on paid advisory panels or boards for Geisinger Health, Regenstrief Institute, Gerson Lehman Group, AlphaSights, Covance, Novartis, Genentech, and Merck, and Roche; is a shareholder in Personalis and NuMedii; is a minor shareholder in Apple, Meta (Facebook), Alphabet (Google), Microsoft, Amazon, Snap, 10x Genomics, Illumina, Regeneron, Sanofi, Pfizer, Royalty Pharma, Moderna, Sutro, Doximity, BioNtech, Invitae, Pacific Biosciences, Editas Medicine, Nuna Health, Assay Depot, and Vet24seven, and several other non-health related companies and mutual funds; and has received honoraria and travel reimbursement for invited talks from Johnson and Johnson, Roche, Genentech, Pfizer, Merck, Lilly, Takeda, Varian, Mars, Siemens, Optum, Abbott, Celgene, AstraZeneca, AbbVie, Westat, and many academic institutions, medical or disease specific foundations and associations, and health systems.  Atul Butte receives royalty payments through Stanford University, for several patents and other disclosures licensed to NuMedii and Personalis.  Atul Butte’s research has been funded by NIH, Peraton (as the prime on an NIH contract), Genentech, Johnson and Johnson, FDA, Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, Leon Lowenstein Foundation, Intervalien Foundation, Priscilla Chan and Mark Zuckerberg, the Barbara and Gerson Bakar Foundation, and in the recent past, the March of Dimes, Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation, California Governor’s Office of Planning and Research, California Institute for Regenerative Medicine, L’Oreal, and Progenity. The authors have declared that no competing interests exist."
  
We note that one or more of the authors are employed by a commercial company: Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Personalis and NuMedii, etc.
(1) Please provide an amended Funding Statement declaring this commercial affiliation, as well as a statement regarding the Role of Funders in your study. If the funding organization did not play a role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript and only provided financial support in the form of authors' salaries and/or research materials, please review your statements relating to the author contributions, and ensure you have specifically and accurately indicated the role(s) that these authors had in your study. You can update author roles in the Author Contributions section of the online submission form.
Please also include the following statement within your amended Funding Statement. 
“The funder provided support in the form of salaries for authors [insert relevant initials], but did not have any additional role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. The specific roles of these authors are articulated in the ‘author contributions’ section.”
If your commercial affiliation did play a role in your study, please state and explain this role within your updated Funding Statement. 
(2) Please also provide an updated Competing Interests Statement declaring this commercial affiliation along with any other relevant declarations relating to employment, consultancy, patents, products in development, or marketed products, etc.  
Within your Competing Interests Statement, please confirm that this commercial affiliation does not alter your adherence to all PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials by including the following statement: ""This does not alter our adherence to  PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.” (as detailed online in our guide for authors http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/competing-interests) . 
If this adherence statement is not accurate and  there are restrictions on sharing of data and/or materials, please state these. Please note that we cannot proceed with consideration of your article until this information has been declared.
Please include both an updated Funding Statement and Competing Interests Statement in your cover letter. We will change the online submission form on your behalf.
6. Please amend the manuscript submission data (via Edit Submission) to include authors: Colin Feuille MD, Yongmei Shi PhD
7. Please amend either the abstract on the online submission form (via Edit Submission) or the abstract in the manuscript so that they are identical.
8. Please upload a copy of Figure 8 to which you refer in your text on page 26. If the figure is no longer to be included as part of the submission please remove all reference to it within the text.
9. We note you have included a table to which you do not refer in the text of your manuscript. Please ensure that you refer to Table 8 in your text; if accepted, production will need this reference to link the reader to the Table.
10. Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information. 
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: I Don't Know
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: The authors made an effort to emulate the control arm of a clinical trial in Crohn's disease. I have two major concerns with this manuscript.
First, the concept behind is either contentious or not clear. Starting with the growing accepted concept that external control arms are needed in many situations like for example rare disease and many oncology settings, the paper's motivation appears to be that this concept should be extended to more common diseases because of the cost and complexity of running trials. I think this is very contentious. Randomization still has a value and should be pursued as much as possible. It does not seem justified that external control arms where clinical trials are feasible are justified. But the authors also appear to deviate from this concept in some other parts of the paper, as the concept of running this feasibility exercise is more loosely justified in terms of replacing "prospective" studies, and in some other places their rationale is about "complementing" other types of research. There should be clarity on the place where the authors see this. If the main justification is about replacing a phase III RCT for this kind of approach, I do not think it is a good scientific approach. If the idea is about post laungh evidence generation, or about adding to the totality of the evidence regarding new comparators, I think it will be more justitiable.
Analytically. the authors made a good effort but it falls short on many elements.
First, they did not fully replicate the arm in question, two exclusion criteria were left out. I do not know how the control arms can be emulated. It is not clear if this was an a priori or ex-post decision. Did they try first with all the criteria and numbers were too low or was this an a priori plan? And if it is an a priory plan, how can it emulate the control arm of the trial if these criteria were left out. If the interest was about emulating the control arm, we do not know if a full emulation is possible. Second, to show empirically that the emulation was close, they should present results comparing versus the trial. Actually they should have matched patients using trial data. But all these comparisons or analytical approaches are not in scope and are important. Finally, this is a single center attempt, we do not know if this approach would work for other centers. How dependent on the data quality of the center was this approach? How would it vary if attempting to do a multi-center emulation.
In conclusion, my advice is to deeply clarify the conceptual intent about the role of this exercise and provide more analyses that use the trial baseline information. In addition, generalizability should be explored. The paper, as is, minimally needs to clarify its conceptual intent and recognize analytical limitations. And in that case, it may be a better fit for a medical informatics journal.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0282267.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
28 Dec 2022

December 15, 2022
To the editor and reviewer:
Thank you for your review of our manuscript. We have a number of revisions in response to your feedback. Details and response to your comments are below in green font and preceeded by double asterisks.
ACADEMIC EDITOR COMMENTS:
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

**Thank you, this has now been done.
2. Please provide additional details regarding participant consent. In the ethics statement in the Methods and online submission information, please ensure that you have specified (1) whether consent was informed and (2) what type you obtained (for instance, written or verbal, and if verbal, how it was documented and witnessed). If your study included minors, state whether you obtained consent from parents or guardians. If the need for consent was waived by the ethics committee, please include this information.
If you are reporting a retrospective study of medical records or archived samples, please ensure that you have discussed whether all data were fully anonymized before you accessed them and/or whether the IRB or ethics committee waived the requirement for informed consent. If patients provided informed written consent to have data from their medical records used in research, please include this information.
**Thank you, now added.
3. We note that the grant information you provided in the ‘Funding Information’ and ‘Financial Disclosure’ sections do not match. 
When you resubmit, please ensure that you provide the correct grant numbers for the awards you received for your study in the ‘Funding Information’ section.
**Now done
4. Thank you for stating the following financial disclosure: 
"VR received funding from Janssen Research and Development LLC (www.janssen.com).
VR received funding from the UCSF Division of Gastroenterology (gastroenterology.ucsf.edu).
VR and AJB received funding from UCSF Bakar Computational Health Sciences Institute (bakarinstitute.ucsf.edu)
The contents of this manuscript are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official views of the NIH. None of the study sponsors had any influence over the data interpretation or conclusions from this study."
Please state what role the funders took in the study. If the funders had no role, please state: ""The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript."" If this statement is not correct you must amend it as needed. 
Please include this amended Role of Funder statement in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
**Now included in the revised cover letter
5. Thank you for stating the following in the Competing Interests section: 
"NS, NE, CC, SR, DA, MC, NSK, CO, NT, and BDM are employees of Janssen Pharmaceuticals, a for-profit entity that owns all rights to the drug ustekinumab. UM is a consultant for Janssen Pharmaceuticals. AJB is a co-founder and consultant to Personalis and NuMedii; consultant to Mango Tree Corporation, and in the recent past, Samsung, 10x Genomics, Helix, Pathway Genomics, and Verinata (Illumina); has served on paid advisory panels or boards for Geisinger Health, Regenstrief Institute, Gerson Lehman Group, AlphaSights, Covance, Novartis, Genentech, and Merck, and Roche; is a shareholder in Personalis and NuMedii; is a minor shareholder in Apple, Meta (Facebook), Alphabet (Google), Microsoft, Amazon, Snap, 10x Genomics, Illumina, Regeneron, Sanofi, Pfizer, Royalty Pharma, Moderna, Sutro, Doximity, BioNtech, Invitae, Pacific Biosciences, Editas Medicine, Nuna Health, Assay Depot, and Vet24seven, and several other non-health related companies and mutual funds; and has received honoraria and travel reimbursement for invited talks from Johnson and Johnson, Roche, Genentech, Pfizer, Merck, Lilly, Takeda, Varian, Mars, Siemens, Optum, Abbott, Celgene, AstraZeneca, AbbVie, Westat, and many academic institutions, medical or disease specific foundations and associations, and health systems. Atul Butte receives royalty payments through Stanford University, for several patents and other disclosures licensed to NuMedii and Personalis. Atul Butte’s research has been funded by NIH, Peraton (as the prime on an NIH contract), Genentech, Johnson and Johnson, FDA, Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, Leon Lowenstein Foundation, Intervalien Foundation, Priscilla Chan and Mark Zuckerberg, the Barbara and Gerson Bakar Foundation, and in the recent past, the March of Dimes, Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation, California Governor’s Office of Planning and Research, California Institute for Regenerative Medicine, L’Oreal, and Progenity. The authors have declared that no competing interests exist."
We note that one or more of the authors are employed by a commercial company: Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Personalis and NuMedii, etc.
(1) Please provide an amended Funding Statement declaring this commercial affiliation, as well as a statement regarding the Role of Funders in your study. If the funding organization did not play a role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript and only provided financial support in the form of authors' salaries and/or research materials, please review your statements relating to the author contributions, and ensure you have specifically and accurately indicated the role(s) that these authors had in your study. You can update author roles in the Author Contributions section of the online submission form.
Please also include the following statement within your amended Funding Statement. 
“The funder provided support in the form of salaries for authors [insert relevant initials], but did not have any additional role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. The specific roles of these authors are articulated in the ‘author contributions’ section.”
If your commercial affiliation did play a role in your study, please state and explain this role within your updated Funding Statement. 
**I have added this text to the section “Funding Statement”.
(2) Please also provide an updated Competing Interests Statement declaring this commercial affiliation along with any other relevant declarations relating to employment, consultancy, patents, products in development, or marketed products, etc. 
Within your Competing Interests Statement, please confirm that this commercial affiliation does not alter your adherence to all PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials by including the following statement: ""This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.” (as detailed online in our guide for authors http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/competing-interests) . 
If this adherence statement is not accurate and there are restrictions on sharing of data and/or materials, please state these. Please note that we cannot proceed with consideration of your article until this information has been declared.
Please include both an updated Funding Statement and Competing Interests Statement in your cover letter. We will change the online submission form on your behalf.
**Now revised and additionally included in the cover letter.
6. Please amend the manuscript submission data (via Edit Submission) to include authors: Colin Feuille MD, Yongmei Shi PhD
**Now done.
7. Please amend either the abstract on the online submission form (via Edit Submission) or the abstract in the manuscript so that they are identical.
**Now done.
8. Please upload a copy of Figure 8 to which you refer in your text on page 26. If the figure is no longer to be included as part of the submission please remove all reference to it within the text.
**Sorry – this was an error, meant to say Figure 4. Now corrected.
9. We note you have included a table to which you do not refer in the text of your manuscript. Please ensure that you refer to Table 8 in your text; if accepted, production will need this reference to link the reader to the Table.
**Sorry – this was an error, meant to say Table 8. Now corrected.
10. Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information. 
**Done
REVIEWER’S COMMENTS
Reviewer #1: The authors made an effort to emulate the control arm of a clinical trial in Crohn's disease. I have two major concerns with this manuscript.
First, the concept behind is either contentious or not clear. Starting with the growing accepted concept that external control arms are needed in many situations like for example rare disease and many oncology settings, the paper's motivation appears to be that this concept should be extended to more common diseases because of the cost and complexity of running trials. I think this is very contentious. Randomization still has a value and should be pursued as much as possible. It does not seem justified that external control arms where clinical trials are feasible are justified. But the authors also appear to deviate from this concept in some other parts of the paper, as the concept of running this feasibility exercise is more loosely justified in terms of replacing "prospective" studies, and in some other places their rationale is about "complementing" other types of research. There should be clarity on the place where the authors see this. If the main justification is about replacing a phase III RCT for this kind of approach, I do not think it is a good scientific approach. If the idea is about post laungh evidence generation, or about adding to the totality of the evidence regarding new comparators, I think it will be more justitiable.
**Thank you for your feedback. We did not intend to imply that ECAs should replace phase 3 RCTs anytime in the near future, particularly for diseases like Crohn’s disease where these high-quality studies continue to be relatively feasible and where current retrospective emulation methods (as we show here) are clearly very limited. Although we can see how the last version of our manuscript could give this impression.
**That said, we do think that this field needs to continue to develop methods for using EHR data in clinical research and to benchmark retrospective studies against prospective ones. Even though our pilot study suffered from many limitations, we think that many readers can learn from our experience, anticipate and avoid certain missteps, improve the quality of retrospective evidence, and address the occasional evidence gaps that lie between controlled environments and routine clinical care. 
**We have modified the language throughout to reflect this, including the abstract (lines 24-27), introduction (revised paragraph 1), methods (line 89, 216-220), and the discussion.
Analytically. the authors made a good effort but it falls short on many elements.
First, they did not fully replicate the arm in question, two exclusion criteria were left out. I do not know how the control arms can be emulated. It is not clear if this was an a priori or ex-post decision. Did they try first with all the criteria and numbers were too low or was this an a priori plan? And if it is an a priory plan, how can it emulate the control arm of the trial if these criteria were left out. If the interest was about emulating the control arm, we do not know if a full emulation is possible. Second, to show empirically that the emulation was close, they should present results comparing versus the trial. Actually they should have matched patients using trial data. But all these comparisons or analytical approaches are not in scope and are important. Finally, this is a single center attempt, we do not know if this approach would work for other centers. How dependent on the data quality of the center was this approach? How would it vary if attempting to do a multi-center emulation.
**Thank you for your feedback. We have made revisions to more clearly acknowledge these limitations:
-Lines 125-128 now make clear that the decisions to leave the two exclusion criteria out were made ex post, and what the reasons were. 
-Lines 216-220 reinforce the above and indicate the reasons for not statistically comparing the outcomes of our cohort that of TRIDENT.
-Lines 435-437 emphasize the limitations of this single-center effort and the possibility that our method may not generalize to other centers.
In conclusion, my advice is to deeply clarify the conceptual intent about the role of this exercise and provide more analyses that use the trial baseline information. In addition, generalizability should be explored. The paper, as is, minimally needs to clarify its conceptual intent and recognize analytical limitations. And in that case, it may be a better fit for a medical informatics journal.
**As above, we do agree with you. We have made several revisions of the text and hope that it addresses the important points you raised above. Although we considered a medical informatics journal as a potential venue, we think that PLOS ONE has a wider readership and would allow us to communicate these findings with more members of our target audience.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0282267.r003Decision Letter 1
RamagopalanSreeram V.Academic Editor© 2023 Sreeram V. Ramagopalan2023Sreeram V. Ramagopalanhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
13 Feb 2023

Creation of an ustekinumab external control arm for Crohn’s disease using electronic health records data: a pilot study
PONE-D-22-27576R1
Dear Dr. Rudrapatna,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Sreeram V. Ramagopalan
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: The authors addressed the comments transparently and the points in question are communicated clearly to the readers. The manuscript is in my opinion suitable for publication.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: Gerardo Machnicki
**********
10.1371/journal.pone.0282267.r004Acceptance letter
RamagopalanSreeram V.Academic Editor© 2023 Sreeram V. Ramagopalan2023Sreeram V. Ramagopalanhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
20 Feb 2023

PONE-D-22-27576R1 
Creation of an ustekinumab external control arm for Crohn’s disease using electronic health records data: a pilot study 
Dear Dr. Rudrapatna:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Sreeram V. Ramagopalan 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE