---
id: DOC-CHECKPOINT06-REGISTRY-V2-FINDINGS
title: Bounded family context repair
kind: memo
status: live
date: "2026-10-02"
audience: [maintainers, external reviewers]
scope: Synthetic contracts for a separate v2 implementation; no clinical validation.
---

The separate companion_v2.py repairs three lexical/context mechanisms: ordinary who pronouns no longer imply WHO criteria; explicit full RECIST names and iwCLL are recognized; versions may follow parentheses and a fixed criteria phrase. WHO requires its uppercase acronym or full organization name plus an adjoining criteria phrase. Lowercase organization acronyms and broader paraphrases can still abstain. Historical assessment wording causes conservative abstention. Conflicting families, versions, negation and modifiers retain conservative handling.

The scope and synthetic tests were frozen before implementation. Six new grouped synthetic tests and fourteen pre-existing v1 synthetic tests passed against v2. They exercise pronouns including uppercase prose, actual WHO criteria, paired families, negation, historical assessment, full names, iwCLL, bounded version syntax, conflicting versions, source offsets and input immutability. The initial command failed because python resolved to a Microsoft Store alias. The existing bundled Python then ran all 20 tests successfully. No failed synthetic assertion or repair iteration occurred.

Accepted v1 is unchanged. The earlier independent result remains 2/9 joint agreement; no frozen trial corpus was executed by this worker. Any coordinator replay of those cases is seen-case regression only. This is a limited grammar, not clinical criteria implementation, and no extraction accuracy or generalization claim follows from these synthetic tests.

Class-title and aggregate-description roles remain outside the category-title mapper. The earlier category-role coverage gap is not repaired. Literal input rows, denominators, measurement payloads and copied outcome context retain the v1 preservation path. New tests verify exact equality, and pre-existing tests retain confirmation-state and numeric-cell safeguards.

Run synthetic checks with `python -Xutf8 -B -m unittest -v test_companion_v2 test_v1_contract_on_v2` from this directory. The public functions remain `classify_context(outcome)` and `accompany(unit, source_row, outcome, coordinates)`; the coordinator can import companion_v2 for its cloud wrapper. The inherited standalone CLI still expects the original accepted575 ZIP, manifest and reviewed27 files; it is not a CLI for the nine-case source slice.

Next: integrate these exact hashes and perform one cloud seen-case regression. A future generalization test requires a separately frozen source slice and blind oracle.

