pmcPLoS PathogPLoS Pathog349plospathplosPLOS Pathogens1553-73661553-7374PLOSPMC10727446PMC10727446.110727446107274463805577510.1371/journal.ppat.1011822PPATHOGENS-D-22-020531Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesMolecular BiologyMolecular Biology TechniquesCloningResearch and Analysis MethodsMolecular Biology TechniquesCloningBiology and Life SciencesBioengineeringGenome EngineeringSynthetic Genome EditingCrisprEngineering and TechnologyBioengineeringGenome EngineeringSynthetic Genome EditingCrisprBiology and Life SciencesSynthetic BiologySynthetic GenomicsSynthetic Genome EditingCrisprEngineering and TechnologySynthetic BiologySynthetic GenomicsSynthetic Genome EditingCrisprBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGene Identification and AnalysisGenetic ScreensBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyVirologyViral ReplicationBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyVirologyViral ReplicationViral PackagingBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyVirologyViral StructureVirionsBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGenomicsMicrobial GenomicsViral GenomicsBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyMicrobial GenomicsViral GenomicsBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyVirologyViral GenomicsBiology and Life SciencesMolecular BiologyMolecular Biology TechniquesArtificial Gene Amplification and ExtensionPolymerase Chain ReactionResearch and Analysis MethodsMolecular Biology TechniquesArtificial Gene Amplification and ExtensionPolymerase Chain ReactionGARP and EARP are required for efficient BoHV-1 replication as identified by a genome wide CRISPR knockout screen
GARP and EARP required for efficient BoHV-1 replication as identified by a CRISPR knockout screenhttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-0272-0282TanWenfang S.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSoftwareSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing RongEnguangInvestigationMethodologyResourcesValidation DryIngaResourcesWriting – review & editing LillicoSimon G.ConceptualizationFunding acquisitionWriting – review & editing LawAndyFunding acquisitionResources DigardPaulFormal analysisFunding acquisitionMethodologyResourcesWriting – review & editing WhitelawBruceConceptualizationFunding acquisition DalzielRobert G.ConceptualizationFunding acquisitionProject administrationSupervisionWriting – review & editing 1
Division of Infection and Immunity, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom2
Division of Functional Genetics and Development, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom3
Centre for Tropical Livestock Genetics and Health, the Roslin Institute, Easter Bush Campus, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom4
Division of Genetics and Genomics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland, United KingdomGewurzBenjamin E.Editor ]. The virus is endemic in the UK, with 80% of herds seropositive for infections [ – ]. Following clearance of acute infection, BoHV-1 establishes lifelong latency in sensory neurons. However, stressful life events can trigger reactivation and clinical diseases. Vaccination can be used to control the disease but strains isolated from respiratory cases and aborted fetuses sometimes correspond to vaccine strains [ ]. Improved knowledge of BoHV-1 virology is therefore needed to advance disease control and resistance strategies.
Like other alpha-herpesviruses, BoHV-1 replicates its dsDNA genome in the host cell nucleus but matures into infectious particles in the cytoplasm. To initiate infection, the viral envelope glycoproteins (glycoprotein B and C) interact with cell surface proteoglycans [ , ] and bring the virus closer to the cellular membrane. This interaction facilitates binding of other viral glycoproteins to host cell receptors [ – ] which subsequently enables cell entry [ ]. Once inside the cell, the capsid ventures along microtubules to dock at the nuclear pore, while the tegument proteins execute intricate programs of manipulating host factors in the cytoplasm. After docking, the capsid injects the viral genome into the nucleus to initiate DNA replication and the three stages of viral transcription: immediate early (IE), early (E) and Late (L) [ ]. The newly synthesized viral transcripts are shuttled into the cytoplasm for the translation of viral proteins, with capsid subunits transported back into the nucleus for capsid assembly and genome packaging.
According to the envelopment➔de-envelopment➔re-envelopment model of alpha-herpesvirus replication [ – ], during nuclear egress the capsid assumes a primary envelope at the inner nuclear membrane and is de-enveloped at the outer nuclear membrane. It then buds into a secondary envelope in the cytoplasm via endosomal recycling, gaining the glycoprotein decorated membrane and the tegument protein layer wrapped in between [ ]. The events of cytoplasmic packaging and secondary envelopment are complex processes and remain heavily contended topics. Previous studies in human Herpes Simplex Virus Type 1(HSV-1), an alpha-herpesvirus similar to BoHV-1, found that the capsid regains membrane from a cytoplasmic source decorated with viral glycoproteins, which are first secreted to the plasma membrane [ , ] and retrieved to the cytoplasm via Rab5 GTPase dependent endocytosis [ , ]. They also suggested that membrane tubules of both early endosome [ ] and trans-Golgi Network (TGN) [ , , ] origin can be used to wrap newly synthesized capsids of HSV-1 into infectious virions, although some more recent studies have cast doubt on the TGN being a major source for re-envelopment [ , ]. Comparative ultra-structural studies between HSV-1 and BoHV-1 demonstrated that BoHV-1 assembly utilizes recently endocytosed material for envelopment in a manner analogous to that of HSV-1, while side-by-side analysis further confirmed similar proteome compositions of the BoHV-1 virion to HSV-1 [ ]. Although it is known that the post TGN re-envelopment of HSV-1 capsids is Rab5 and Rab11 dependent [ ] [ ], the detailed mechanisms linking the glycoprotein containing vesicles, such as early endosomes, to the TGN and/or recycling endosomes during secondary envelopment of herpesviruses are poorly understood.
Recent developments in genome editing technologies offer unprecedented opportunities to study host-pathogen interactions. CRISPR/Cas9 in particular has been well purposed for high throughput genetic screens, exemplified by various genome wide CRISPR screens that identified many novel human genes involved in viral infections [ – ], and more recently in pigs [ , ]. Here we present the process of generating a genome wide CRISPR knockout library for cattle, named btCRISPRko.v1, and detail our experience and discovery of almost 300 host factors putatively involved in BoHV-1 infection. We then focused our efforts on validating and investigating some of the top and novel hits. Our results suggest crucial roles for two cellular membrane tethering complexes in tegument protein packaging and secondary envelopment of alpha- and gamma- herpesviruses. The knockout library btCRISPRko.v1 is readily available to study other pathogens in cattle and we think it is a useful resource for the wider cattle research community.

## Results

## A highly transducible MDBK cell line with stable expression of Cas9
To facilitate the screen, we first generated single cell clones with uniform Cas9 expression, using Madin-Darby bovine kidney (MDBK) cells that are highly susceptible to BoHV-1 infection. To achieve this, we designed and produced TAL effector nuclease pair TAL1.6 that specifically target the 1st intron of the bovine rosa26 locus(Table B in
 ), which is a safe harbour for consistent transgene expression [ ]. By co-transfecting MDBKs with the TALENs and a plasmid homology directed repair (HDR) template (Fig A in
 ), we derived clones that harbour a EF1α promoter driven Cas9 expression cassette in both alleles of the rosa26 following dilutional cloning and PCR genotyping (Fig A in
 ). Unfortunately, lentiviral transduction efficiency of these MDBK cells was too low to deliver a genome wide CRISPR library cost-effectively with satisfactory coverage (Fig B in
 ).
An Interferon stimulated gene called TRIM5α has been shown to inhibit RNA viruses including HIV-1 based lentivirus [ – ]. In cows, the TRIM5α locus has undergone multiple rounds of duplication, but within this cluster TRIM5-3 or LOC505265 has been shown to be responsible for the HIV-1 restriction [ ]. Thus, we set out to derive bi-allelic knockout clones lacking the B30.2/PRY-SPRY anti-viral domain of TRIM5-3 on top of the Cas9 expression, hoping to increase transduction efficiency in MDBKs ( ). Due to high sequence similarity between TRIM5-3 and other genes within the TRIM5 cluster [ ], we were only able to design three CRISPRs specific to TRIM5-3. We then transfected them into the Cas9+ MDBKs and estimated their editing efficiency by T7 endonuclease I digestion (T7E1). With this assay PCR products amplified from edited cells are digested into two smaller products, in this case presented as two overlapping bands on the agarose gel. Compared to a single larger product amplified from unedited cells, the intensity of digested PCR products correlates to the percentage of edited cells. Unfortunately, based on our T7E1 results, none of these CRISPRs demonstrated good cutting efficiency at this locus ( ). We then designed and synthesized two pair of TALENs, and after transfection one pair (1L+1R, Table B in
 ) lead to efficient and specific targeting of TRIM5-3, also assayed by T7E1 ( ). We were then able to isolate Cas9+/+;TRIM5α -/- single cell clones with homozygous Cas9 expression and TRIM5-3 deletion (Table E in
 ). As a result, the transduction efficiency in these clones increased eight-fold ( ) while its BoHV-1 infectibility was fully maintained compared to WT cells (Figs C-E in
 ), indicating that Cas9 over-expression and TRIM5α knockout do not interfere with BoHV-1 replication. We thus conducted our BoHV-1 screens in these Cas9+/+;TRIM5α -/- MDBK cells and validated the candidates in WT cells or a Cas9+/+ only clone (Clone P in lane 3, Fig A in
 ).
 

## CRISPR library designed with optimal on-target efficiency and limited off-targeting in silico
To make a genome wide knockout library broadly applicable to high throughput functional genomics research in cattle, we complemented the UMD3.1.1 genome assembly with the Y chromosome from the btau5.0.1 genome assembly. For each coding gene, sequences shared among all RefSeq transcript isoforms were scanned for 20bp sequences followed by NGG, the Cas9 protospacer adjacent motif (PAM) ( ). We then filtered all CRISPRs using our initial design criteria and only kept those that: a. had a 20–80% GC content; b. did not harbour BbsI binding sites “GAAGAC” and “GTCTTC”, and c. did not contain any of the following sequences “N”, “AAAA”, “TTTT”, “GGGG”, and “CCCC” ( ). Each remaining CRISPR was then estimated for the on-target efficiency using Azimuth 2.0 [ ] and aligned back to the genome to identify all potential off-targets using BWA [ ]. For each gene, 4–5 top candidate guides ranked by on-target efficiency, cut position and off-target specificity ( ) were picked into a final library totalling 94,000 guides targeting 21,165 genes, along with 2000 non-targeting controls ( 
and Table A in
 ). Taken together these guides have a median cutting efficiency of 0.67 based on calculations by Azimuth 2.0 ( ) and 93.3% of all targeting guides cut in the first half (0–50% cut position) of common coding sequences ( ). Also 73% of all guides have zero predicted off-targets residing in coding regions with a CFD score > 0.2 ( ) [ ] and less than three such off-targets in non-coding regions ( ).
 

## Library production and performance assurance in MDBK cells
Prior to library synthesis, we validated the design by testing guides against seven host genes [ – ] and all guides induced indels at the intended sites, with cutting efficiency up to 79% (Fig F in
 ). We then synthesized the library as one ssODN pool and cloned it into two almost identical lentivirus plasmids [ , ] containing either the original sgRNA scaffold from the Broad Institute (Fig G and Table B in
 ) [ ] (referred as the K2g2 library) or an optimized version from Chen et. al [ ] (referred as K2g5). After packaging and transducing the two libraries into Cas9+/+;TRIM5α -/- MDBKs with Puromycin selection, we PCR amplified the CRISPR regions using genomic DNA from the cells as templates and sequenced the amplicons by NGS ( 
and Figs H and I in
 ). After data analysis using purposely built CRISPR screen analysis package MAGeCK [ ], we saw a higher depletion rate of guides targeting core essential genes (CEG2.0) [ ] in K2g5 transduced cells than those by K2g2 (Fig J in
 
and
 ), pointing to superior performance of K2g5. Re-sequencing of the K2g5 cells with higher sequencing depth confirmed the shift ( 
and
 ) and the relative unaltered representation of non-cutting controls, suggesting good off-targeting control during the library design. We also detected 99.9% of all guides in the plasmid library with a GiniIndex of 0.1258 [ ], and 96.01% of all sequencing reads mapped to the library without any mismatch ( ). These data reflect good coverage and distribution, and accuracy of the K2g5 library. Thus, we chose the K2g5 library for our BoHV-1 screens. To expand the usefulness of the library, we also cloned these guides into a piggyBac vector to enable delivery of the library into hard to transduce cells (Fig K in
 ).

## Overview of the genome wide CRISPR knockout screens
We first obtained a GFP tagged BoHV-1 virus strain [ ] and developed a reliable FACS assay capable of isolating cells with differential levels of BoHV-1 replication based on GFP ( 
and Fig L in
 ). This strain was derived from BoHV-1.1(strain Jura), the most prevalent respiratory form around the world [ ], with the GFP fused to the C terminus of VP26 [ ]. A full cycle of BoHV-1 infection takes 8–15 hours to complete; VP26 is a minor capsid protein synthesized during the L stage of transcription. After infecting library transduced cells with this virus, we FACS collected four fractions of live cells with Negative (Neg), Low, Medium, and High levels of GFP intensity ( ). We then PCR amplified and sequenced the CRISPR regions as before and obtained the copy number of all CRISPRs by counting matching reads. Using MAGeCK [ ], we pair-wise compared CRISPR copy numbers between fractions, and identified genes with significantly enriched or depleted guides, to which anti- or pro-viral roles were assigned. We then conducted a focused CRISPR knockout screen of the top candidates for quick validation, followed by pathway analyses and literature search to uncover the most interesting candidates for further investigation.
 

## CRISPR KO screen identifies pro- and anti-viral candidates involved in many aspects of virus biology
In total we conducted two rounds of genome wide screens. Initially we infected cells with an MOI = 2 and sorted them at 10 hours post infection (10 h.p.i) (Fig M and Table C in
 ). The experiment was repeated three times and after sequencing and data analyses, we identified genes with well-established roles in BoHV-1 replication as well as many undocumented candidates ( and Data files). Encouraged by the results, we performed a 2nd screen by FACS sorting cells harvested at 8 h.p.i. The earlier time point allowed a more stringent gating strategy (Fig M in
 ), capturing more extreme phenotypes but also higher numbers of cells returned by the FACS sort as the infection was less advanced and cells were healthier (Table D in
 ). Reassuringly, this screen recapitulated many candidates highlighted in the 1st screen, along with new candidates ( and and Data files). There was a good regression trend between the l2fc of common pro-viral candidates from the two screens ( and , and Data files), indicating screen reproducibility.
 For both screens, comparisons of either GFP Neg or Low cells with the High cells lead to the most candidates. With strict cut-offs (adjusted p-value < = 0.005, FDR< = 0.1 and log2 Fold Changes(l2fc) > = 0.95), a total of 154 pro-viral and 138 anti-viral candidate genes emerged ( , and Data files, highlighted in blue in ). Guides targeting pro-viral genes were enriched up to 25-fold in the GFP Neg and Low cells, (l2fc = 4.66), and those targeting anti-viral candidates were enriched up to 13-fold in GFP High cells (l2fc = 3.65). The 2nd screen re-identified 46 out of the 67 pro-viral candidates from the 1st screen, together with 87 new candidates ( and ). In total, the list combines 50 pro-viral and 45 antiviral candidates identified from the 1st screen ( and Data files), as well as 116 pro-viral and 53 anti-viral genes from the 2nd screen ( , highlighted in red and and Data files).

## Validation of candidates by a focused CRISPR KO screen and by CRISPRi
We then conducted a focused screen for quick validation and re-ranking of the top candidates. Candidate genes selected with p-value < 0.05 and l2fc > = 0.75 (pro-viral) or l2fc < = -0.75 (anti-viral) from the GFP Neg/Low v.s. High groups (based on the 2nd screen results) were further divided into two tiers, with tier 1 genes satisfying more stringent statistics (p-value< 0.005 and l2fc > = 0.95 or l2fc< = -0.95, ). We then produced a mini-KO library containing 6,071 guides targeting 679 candidate genes and 83 neutral genes that ranked between 10,000th and 13,000th places by MAGeCK with l2fc falling in the range of (-0.06,0.06), with eight guides per gene, as well as 326 non-targeting controls ( ). After library packaging, transduction and Puro selection, cells containing the focused library were infected and sorted using the same BoHV-1 challenge and FACS gating strategy as the 2nd genome-wide screen. Upon comparative analyses of the read counts of guides in GFP Neg and High cells, we observed expected CRISPR distribution patterns for most candidates with positive l2fc values for pro-viral candidates and negative l2fc for anti-viral genes in GFP Neg cells ( ). Also, CRISPRs targeting tier 1 candidates had a more extreme distribution of l2fc of CRISPR copy numbers than those targeting tier 2 candidates, e.g., 64.6% of guides targeting tier 1 pro-viral candidates (T1_pro) and 25.2% for tier 2 pro-viral candidates (T2_pro) fell outside the range of neutral genes ( 
and
 ). These data validate the candidacy for many genes tested, with the top ten validated pro- and anti-viral genes listed in , providing further evidence that they play a role in BoHV-1 replication.
We also sought to test some of the candidates using an orthogonal method called CRISPR interference (CRISPRi). CRISPRi uses a catalytically deactivated Cas9(dCas9) fused to transcriptional interfering domains, such as the KRAB and the TRD domain of MeCP2 [ ]. When the dCas9 is coupled with sgRNAs that bind immediately downstream of transcription start sites (TSSs), the dCas9/sgRNA complex can block procession of the gene transcription machinery, achieving gene knockdown [ ]. To validate genes using CRISPRi, we first random selected seven candidate genes, RNGTT, SLC30A1, TMEME41B, TP53, TTC4, USO1 and ZBTB1. For each gene, we designed three CRISPR sgRNAs that target the TSS of its principal transcript (Table C in
 ). We then expressed these three sgRNAs simultaneously in MDBK cells with Doxycycline inducible dCas9-KRAB-MeCP2 expression as previously described [ ] and performed plaque assays on them directly. We found that multiplexed CRISPRi knockdown of all genes targeted, except for USO1, significantly reduced efficiency of virus plaque formation compared to control cells transfected with three non-targeting guides ( ).

## Gene ontology analyses for enriched pro-viral cell components and biological processes
To prioritize further validation efforts, we conducted gene ontology (GO) analysis on the pro-viral candidates. With Fold Enrichment >10 and -log2(P-value) >10 as cut-offs, 13 cellular components ( ) and 30 biological processes (Fig N in
 ) stood out ( and Data files). Both lists reflect diverse biological functions occurring at different locations in the host cell. Some of these candidates are obvious and already highlighted by literature [ , ], such as processes at different steps of Heparan Sulfate (HS) synthesis (e.g., GO:0006065, GO:0015014, and GO:0030210) and general transcription factors indispensable for viral transcription (e.g. GO:0005673, GO:0000438, GO:0051123, GO:0006368), while others require substantial work to pinpoint their possible function in BoHV-1 biology. Two components captured our attention further, the endosome-associated recycling protein (EARP) and the Golgi-associated retrograde protein (GARP) complexes (GO:1990745 and GO:0000938), being the 4th and 5th most enriched cellular components according to GO ( ). Both of them have been shown to be important for endocytic recycling [ ] but no roles in alpha-herpesvirus replication have been described.

## Anti-viral candidates identified by CRISPR KO screen
Initial analysis identified 56 anti-viral candidate genes from the screens and literature search highlighted several candidates of interest. For example, FBXW11 and TFDP1 that regulate cell cycle progression, and CDC45, MCM2 and UBE2M for NEDD8-conjugating enzyme UBC12 ( ). Re-analysis of the primary screens by slightly relaxing the statistics (p< = 0.05, FDR< = 0.2 and l2fc < = -0.9) expanded the families of genes that regulate cell cycle and DNA replication and highlighted other sets of genes with good anti-viral potential (86 more candidates with an average l2fc = -1.28, ). In particular, a group of genes associated with the HOPS/CORVETT complexes that coordinate late endosome and lysosome fusion, i.e. VIPAS39, VPS16, VPS18, and VPS41, all became significant ( ). In addition, the screen pinpointed other E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes or ubiquitin related or like proteins, including UBA52, UBL5, UBE2D3, with the latter shown to be essential for RIG-I and MAVS aggregation in antiviral innate immunity [ ]. Two negative regulators of mTORC1 signalling, TSC1 and TSC2 that are phosphorylated by Us3 during HSV-1 infection resulting in mTORC1 activation [ ], [ ], were also identified.
 

## Genes with potential roles in BoHV-1 cytoplasmic and nuclear entry
We recovered PVR (LOC526865 or nectin-1) and PVRL2 (nectin-2, , blue labels, ), two membrane proteins previously implicated as receptors for BoHV-1 [ , , ]. The screens also captured at least 20 genes involved in crucial steps of Heparan Sulfation [ ] ( , black labels, Figs O and P in
 ). Another group of candidates, COG1, COG2, COG4, COG5, COG6 and COG7, codes for six of the eight subunits of the Conserved Oligomeric Golgi Complex (COG), an evolutionarily conserved peripheral membrane protein complex residing within the Golgi apparatus. It is thought to act as a retrograde vesicle tethering factor in intra-Golgi trafficking [ ] and be crucial for glycoprotein modification and HS secretion to the cell surface [ ]. The identification of many such proteins known to be important to BoHV-1 and multiple subunits from the same complexes and pathways demonstrate robustness of the screens.
The BoHV-1 capsid docks at the nuclear pore complex (NPC) for genome delivery after cell entry. As the gateway for bi-directional and selective transport of nucleic acids and peptides, the NPC consists of 34 distinct nucleoporins embedded in the nuclear membrane, of which NUP35, NUP50 and SEHL1 were identified by the screen ( 
and
 ). Another hit, KPNA2 encoding importin α1, has been shown to mediate import of several HSV-1 proteins into the nucleus and modulate assembly and egress of its capsids [ ]. XPO6, a gene encoding Exportin-6 that acquires cargo in the nucleus and shuttles it to the cytoplasm via the NPC, was also discovered. How these proteins participate in the bi-directional transport of BoHV-1 transcripts and proteins between the cytoplasm and the nucleus remains unknown.

## Genes related to genome replication, gene transcription, RNA processing and translation also identified
Alpha-herpesviruses have evolved to usurp host transcription machinery to express viral genes and manipulate host transcription. At least eight factors within the RNA polymerase II transcription pre-initiation complex (PIC) were significantly depleted in the GFP Neg and Low cells ( and ). In addition, genes encoding subunits of the Mediator complex proven to interact with ICP4 of HSV-1 [ ], namely MED16, MED23, MED24 and MED25, were among some of the most depleted (Figs and and ). Genes known to regulate RNA elongation and processing post transcription initiation, e.g. DDX3X [ ], DRAP1, ERCC3, GPN2, INTS7, SUPT4H1, SUPT5H, SUPT6H [ ], TCEA1 and TCEB2, were also significantly deleted. Furthermore, multiple genes involved in chromatin restructuring, namely BRD7 [ ], CSNK2A1, CSNK2B, ENY2, PBRM1 [ ], ZBTB1, and ZEB1, were also identified. Many of these gene products have been found to influence HSV-1 replication and transcription [ ]; these results indicate BoHV-1 may co-opt these proteins in a similar fashion to HSV-1.
During and post transcription, precursor mRNA (pre-mRNA) transcripts are capped, poly-Adenylated, and spliced prior to nuclear export. Many animal viruses appropriate host factors to achieve efficient viral translation or divert host RNA for degradation via virion host shutoff (vhs) [ ]. Indeed, several genes including FAM103A1 and RNGTT important for mRNA capping [ ], HNRPA2B1 [ ] and PRRC2A [ ] for m6A-dependent nuclear RNA processing, and RBBP6 for pre-mRNA processing were all preferentially deleted in GFP Neg and Low cells ( and ). TUT1, a gene encoding a protein that directly adds 3’ polyA tails to mRNA and polyU tails to miRNAs and snRNAs, the latter being important for pre-mRNA splicing [ ], was also depleted.
Once transcribed and modified, most viral transcripts are translated into peptides that are folded prior to viral packaging and egress. Protein translation is a multi-step process consisting of initiation, chain elongation and termination. Our screen identified multiple factors involved in these processes, namely EEF2, EIF1AX, EIF5, EIF5A. Interestingly, genes encoding two proteins catalysing the conversion of lysine to the unique amino acid hypusine in EIF5A [ ], DOHH and DHPS ( and ), were significantly depleted in GFP Neg and Low cells from both screens. These findings potentially highlight the prime importance of EIF5A in modulating BoHV-1 protein translation. In addition to translation initiation and control, genes important for proper folding of newly synthesized peptides, e.g. TTC4, HSP90B1, PFDN2, were also preferentially deleted in GFP Neg and Low cells.

## Single gene VPS51, VPS52, and VPS53 knockout severely impairs production of infectious particles
Three sets of candidates highlighted by STRING protein analysis promote intracellular protein and membrane trafficking [ ]. One cluster consists of VPS51, VPS52, and VPS53 ( , red nodes) that form part of GARP, a retromer complex that tethers retrograde endosomal carriers to the TGN [ ]. Genes known to regulate this retrograde trafficking process, namely SYS1, ARFRP1, and RGP1, were also enriched. The fourth subunit of GARP, VPS54 primarily locates the complex to the TGN and to recycling endosomes (REs) to a much lesser extent [ ]. Replacing VPS54 with VPS50 forms another complex, EARP that mainly resides on REs [ ]. The other cluster code for tethering or regulatory factors essential for intra-Golgi transport or membrane trafficking between the Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) and the Golgi Apparatus ( , green nodes). These include members of tethering SNAP Receptors or t-SNAREs (GOSR1 and STX5), regulator of SNARE assembly required for ER-to-Golgi transport (USO1 and ARF4) and subunits of the transport protein particle tethering complex or the TRAPP complex (TRAPPC1 and TRAPPC3). There are also nodes disconnected from the network with suspected roles in intra-cellular trafficking, namely GPR89A, RABGGTB, SGMS1, UNC50, and VPS13D ( , blue nodes, ).
 To probe the importance of the GARP/EARP in BoHV-1 replication, we made a series of KO cells missing one of the subunits VPS51, VPS52 or VPS53. By plaquing BoHV-1 directly on these KO clones (Table E in
 ), the apparent virus titre dropped by almost 3-log compared to non-KO control (Clone P) cells ( ). The plaques also became smaller, with up to 59% reduction in size compared to those grown in the control cells (Clone P, ). Overexpressing cDNA encoding the missing subunits in the KO cells (VPS51R, VPS52R, VPS53R) greatly rescued the impairment in both viral titre and plaque size ( 
and Fig Q in
 ). We also tracked the rate of VP26-GFP synthesis in these KO cells by measuring GFP fluorescent intensity from 0 h.p.i. to 72 h.p.i, following infection with the GFP tagged BoHV-1 at MOI = 0.1 (top panel, ) or MOI = 3 (bottom panel, ). While the growth rates in GFP intensity in the rescue cells (VPS52R) were almost identical to that in the control cells (Clone P), there was a profound reduction for the KO cells in the MOI = 0.1 group, as its GFP signal barely increased throughout the infection ( ), indicating impaired multi-cycle infection dynamics. A decrease in GFP was also observed in the KO cells within the MOI = 3 group but it was not as dramatic; a 50.1% reduction on average was observed for all KO cells by 48hpi ( ).

## VPS50,54 double KO but not single KO recapitulates the effects of VPS51, VPS52 and VPS53 KO
Because GARP and EARP share subunits VPS51, VPS52 and VPS53, our data so far indicate that at least one of the complexes is required for efficient BoHV-1 replication. To determine which, we created EARP or GARP specific KO cell lines by deleting just VPS50 (VPS50KO) or VPS54 (VPS54KO) (Table E in
 ). Interestingly, there was only a small reduction (1.4-fold in VPS50KO, p<0.0001; and 1.6-fold in VPS54KO, p<0.0001) in virus titre compared to the control (Clone P, ) when we performed plaque assays on them; and no change in plaque sizes was observed for both series of KOs (Figs Q and R in
 ). Although still significant, the decrease of virus titre in VPS50KO or VPS54KO cells was modest compared to that observed in VPS51KO, VPS52KO and VPS53KO. These results suggest that GARP and EARP serve alternative roles for BoHV-1 and can be recruited by the virus via the same pathway or independent routes. To test this, we produced double knockout cells lacking both VPS50 and VPS54, i.e. VPS50;54dKO clones (Table E in
 ) and conducted plaque assays as before. The dKO cell clones recapitulated the results obtained from VPS51KO, VPS52KO and VPS53KO clones with close to 3-log reduction in virus titer ( ). These experiments suggest that the roles GARP and EARP play are interchangeable for BoHV-1 but that at least one of them is required for efficient BoHV-1 replication.

## GARP and EARP knockout also affects other herpesviruses including HSV-1 and AIHV-1
We then set out to determine whether GARP and EARP deficiency affects other viruses beyond BoHV-1. We first tested this on another alpha-herpesvirus HSV-1, in the human lung carcinoma epithelial cell line A549 cells. Although we were unable to generate bi-allelic 51KO and 52KO A549 cells, haplo-deficiency in mono-allelic KO cells, huVPS51+/- and huVPS52+/-, was sufficient to lead to a significant albeit modest 2-fold reduction in HSV-1 titer ( ). Similarly, HSV-1 titer dropped in VPS50KO and VPS54+/- A549 cells ( ). Future work is needed to confirm the negative impact on HSV-1 replication by generating bi-allelic GARP/EARP knockout human cell lines. We then tested a herpesvirus from a different sub-family other than alpha-herpesviruses. Alcelaphine herpesvirus-1 (AlHV-1) is a gamma-herpesvirus that infects wildebeests and domestic cattle [ ]. When we titrated this virus (Strain C500) on the GARP and EARP KO MDBK cells (VPS51KO, VPS52KO, VPS53KO), there was a ~3-log reduction in virus titer ( ), whereas the reduction in GARP only (VPS54KO) or EARP only (VPS50KO) KO cells was very moderate ( ). These results were comparable to what was observed for BoHV-1, indicating that AIHV-1 might employ the GARP/EARP complexes in a similar fashion to BoHV-1.

## Initial virus entry and viral gene transcription efficiency are unaltered in VPS52KO cells
To understand the mechanism behind reduced infectibility, we investigated whether the loss of GARP and EARP affected the virus during its earlier stages of infection. Using DNA samples collected from pellets of VPS52KO cells and unedited cells (Clone P) infected with BoHV-1 (MOI = 0.3) as templates, we first quantified the viral genome within these cells post infection across six time points from 0hpi to 24hpi by qPCR. Little difference in viral genomic DNA (vDNA) copy number was observed between the KO and control cells (Clone P) up to 12hpi, indicating that the loss of VPS52 did not impact on viral entry from the cell surface to the nucleus ( ). Using RT and qPCR, we then measured mRNA transcription efficiency of the ICP0 (IE), Circ (IE), UL23 (E), and Glycoprotein B (L) genes in these cells. For all four genes examined, there was minimal difference in mRNA/ vDNA ratios between the VPS52KO cells and control cells throughout the course of infection ( ). This suggests that the loss of the tethering complexes did not affect viral gene transcription efficiency in the VPS52KO cells and therefore may not be the explanation for the observed reduction in viral titer.
 

## Most viruses produced by VPS52KO cells are not infectious
Given that it was unlikely the VPS52KO affected the virus at the entry and gene transcription stages during the initial infection, we then sought to understand the impairment by examining the viruses themselves produced by the VPS52KO cells. We first titrated the total, cell-free and cell-associated viruses collected from the VPS52KO and control cells on WT MDBKs. Throughout a 36-hour infection with BoHV-1 at MOI = 0.1, the production of infectious total, cell-free (supernatant), and cell associated viruses (pellet) were all greatly impaired in VPS52KO cells ( ). There was a rate of reduction at ~1-log per cycle compared to non-KO cells (Clone P), and a ~3-log cumulative reduction by 36hpi after about three cycles of replication. Significant differences in virus titers were also observed between the control cells and 52KO cells when they were challenged by the virus at MOI = 3( ).
However, when we quantified the virus particles produced by these cells using qPCR, the viral genome copy numbers followed a similar upward trend for both VPS52KO and the unedited cells (Clone P). This is true for most timepoints examined during the 36-hour infection for both MOI = 0.1 ( ) and MOI = 3 infections ( ). No substantial difference in genome copies was observed for total, cell-free or cell-associated genomes produced between VPS52KO and Clone P cells ( ), with a maximum of ~1-log decrease for virions secreted to the supernatant by VPS52KO at 36 h.p.i. When we calculated the genome to pfu ratios, they followed a steady downward trend for viruses produced by unedited cells (Clone P), indicating increasingly efficient production of infectious virus particles once the infection was established ( ). Interestingly, we observed drastically different trends for virions produced by VPS52KO cells. The genome to pfu ratios remained high for total, cell-free and cell-associated viruses produced throughout the time course of infection, for cells infected at MOI = 0.1 ( ) and at MOI = 3 ( ). Taken together, these data further imply that the loss of GARP/EARP function affected the virus at a later stage of its life cycle, likely during cytoplasmic packaging as suggested by the high genome/pfu ratios of released viruses, leading to the production of poorly infectious viruses.

## Viruses released by VPS52 KO cells severely lacks viral tegument protein VP8
Since GARP and EARP are involved in the trafficking of proteins between membrane vesicles [ ], we conjectured that they are employed in the sourcing and trafficking of membrane associated viral proteins that are crucial components of infectious virions. According to this theory, trafficking routes of these viral proteins are cut off in cells missing both complexes during cytoplasmic packaging, resulting in virions deficient in such proteins that are unable to establish new infection. Thus to further understand the invovlement of GARP/GARP, we assayed the protein contents of virions released by these KO cells, with a focus on membrane associated viral proteins in the first instance.
To achieve this, we obtained a monoclonal antibody generated by the Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut (FLI) that targets a viral protein of BoHV1 strain "Schönböken” (https://www.european-virus-archive.com/antibody-or-hybridoma/murine-mab-anti-envelope-protein-bovine-herpesvirus-1-bohv-1) [ ], which is closely related to strain “Jura” used to generate the GFP tagged BoHV-1 for our screens. Although the antibody target was classified as an envelope protein back in 2005 when it was first produced (personal communication with Dr. Sven Reiche of FLI), our Mass Spectrometry and western blot data demonstrate that it specifically binds to VP8 of BoHV-1 strain “Jura” (Fig S in
 ). As the most abundant tegument protein of BoHV-1 [ ], VP8 is a major component of the outer tegument layer of BoHV-1. During the late stage of infection, it is translocated from the nucleus to the Golgi and cytoplasm where it is packaged into maturing viruses prior to cellular egress [ ].
Using this antibody, we first determined whether the expression level and overall distribution of VP8 was affected in the VPS52KO cells. By immunofluorescent staining and confocal microscopy, we detected ample VP8 proteins in the VPS52KO cells at 10 h.p.i. with BoHV-1 at MOI = 1. This is comparable to that in the control cells (wt and Clone P, ), indicating that the loss of GARP and EARP did not affect VP8 expression. We also did not observe any substantial difference in VP8 protein distribution relative to a cis Golgi marker GM-130 ( ). However, due to the lack of antibodies against other organelles, such as the Endoplasmic reticulum and endosomes that work properly in the MDBK cells, any more specific changes in the VP8 localization within the VPS52KO cells remain to be further explored. By confocal microscopy we also failed to detect any apparent alterations in VP26-GFP protein expression in the KO cells ( ).
 Given that the GARP/EARP KO unlikely altered viral protein expression, we proceeded with experiments to determined if it affected viral protein inclusion into virions instead. To assay this we probed VP8 composition of the cell free viruses released by the KO cells, with the level of VP26-GFP as a proxy for the quantity of virus particles. By infecting the KO cells with the BoHV-1 GFP virus at MOI = 3, we harvested released viruses via ultracentrifugation of the tissue culture supernatants at 48h.p.i. ( ). Upon lysing the virus pellets under reducing conditions, we conducted western blot analyses by hybridizing the samples with the anti-VP8 antibody ( ) and an anti-GFP antibody. Compared to viruses released by the WT and Cas9+ MDBK (Clone P) cells, we observed drastic decreases of VP8 content in viruses produced by the VPS52KO cells. The ratio of VP8 to GFP was reduced by >90% compared to that of the control cells ( ). This is in sharp contrast to the 2-log increases in genome to pfu ratios of the viruses produced by the same cells ( ).
Although by confocal microscopy we didn’t observe any obvious impairment to the VP8 protein expression in the infected VPS52KO cells ( ), to further rule out the possibility that it is majorly responsible for the decrease of VP8 on released viruses, we quantified the VP8 and VP26-GFP proteins in the cells by western blot. We found that the VP8 protein levels stayed the same between the KO and non-KO cells ( ) while the VP26-GFP decreased by 3-fold ( ). Interestingly and contrary to the reduced VP8 level on released viruses ( ), the VP8 to GFP ratio in the VPS52KO cells doubled compared to the control cells ( ), suggesting retention of VP8 in the KO cells as less of it was included into viruses that were subsequently released into the extracellular space.

## Discussion
By constructing and using a bovine genome wide CRISPR knockout library, we were able to conduct genome wide screens during BoHV-1 infection. As a result, we produced a list of pro-viral and anti-viral host factors that could impact various aspects of BoHV-1 biology such as entry, viral genome replication, viral gene transcription, and intracellular trafficking of viral components. Some of the most intriguing examples include the EARP and GARP complexes, known for promoting endosome recycling [ ]. Our follow up experiments suggest that for alpha- and gamma-herpesviruses these complexes serve as crucial links for the trafficking of viral proteins to the sites of cytoplasmic envelopment. The discovery of multiple other candidate genes involved in retrograde trafficking from EE to the TGN in addition to subunits of GARP and EARP ( ), strengthens this proposition. Prior to our screen, GARP has been shown to be important for the envelopment of poxviruses, including the vaccinia virus and Monkeypox virus [ , ]. To our knowledge, this report is the first documentation on their requirement for herpesviruses and provides evidence that both the TGN and REs can be the membrane source for envelopement.
Initially these complexes were identified by the screens designed to enrich for cells with reduced or enhanced VP26-GFP protein expression. Indeed, in GARP and EARP deficient cells we observed up to ~3 fold decrease in VP26-GFP protein levels in our VP26-GFP tracking expriments (bottom panel, ), and subsequently by Western Blotting ( ). However, seeing that this 3-fold decrease in VP26-GFP was inadequate to explain the 3-log reductions in virus titers (Figs , ), we conducted additional experiments to understand if the loss of GARP and EARP resulted in other impairments. We found that these deficient cells can release new viruses almost as efficiently as WT cells ( ). However, most of the virus particles from the KO cells were not able to establish new infection, demonstrated by their high genome to pfu ratios (Figs and ), indicating that they contain defects that render them non-infectious.
To identify such defects, we examined the protein content of these viruses and discovered that compared to viruses produced by WT cells, viruses released by the GARP and EARP KO cells severely lack VP8 ( ). Encoded by the UL47 gene of BoHV-1, the multi-functional tegument protein VP8 is crucial for BoHV-1 virulence. Analogous to VP13/14 from HSV-1, VP8 is a powerful interferon antagonist [ – ] and has also been shown to regulate host cell apoptosis [ ]. Viruses harvested from a ΔUL47 mutant lacking VP8 displayed severe growth defects in tissue culture conditions [ ]; both intracellular and extracellular mutant viruses exhibited more than 100-fold decrease in titer, comparable to our viruses obtained from the KO cells (Figs , ). These findings strongly suggest that the 90% reduction in VP8 tegument protein ( ) was a direct cause for the lost infectivity of viruses produced by these KO cells. This reduction was unlikely due to a major decrease in VP8 protein expression as our experiments failed to detect any such change in the KO cells ( ). All in all, our data provide evidence that the loss of GARP and EARP manifested its negative impact on the virus through disruption to the VP8 packaging in the cytoplasm.
How could these membrane tethering complexes be involved in the packaging of VP8? Previously, Schindler et al [ ] demonstrated that GARP is primarily found on the TGN while EARP mainly resides on REs, potentially mediating fusion of vesicles derived from early endosome (EE) with both the TGN and REs. Vesicles of both TGN [ ] and RE [ ] origin have been strongly indicated as assembly sites for cytoplasmic envelopment of BoHV-1, although this is a heavily debated topic [ , ]. Alpha-herpesviruses including BoHV-1 express multiple membrane bound glycoproteins that are packaged into virions during cytoplasmic envelopment [ ]. Prior to packaging, they are concentrated to the plasma membrane by secretion and recycled back to the cytoplasm via endocytosis, with some of them localized to REs [ , ] or vesicles positive for TGN46, a Trans Golgi Network (TGN) marker, such as gH [ , ] and gM of HSV-1 [ ]. Thus it is likely GARP and EARP KO disrupted the trafficking of viral glycoproteins from the plasma membrane to the REs and TGN. Could this be related to the packaging defect seen with VP8?
Published research suggests so. Recently a glycoprotein M (gM) deletion mutant of BoHV-1 lead to cell-free viruses with significantly reduced VP8 content and more than 2-log loss in virus titer [ ]. The study also demonstrated that for the WT virus, VP8 colocalized itself with gM on the Golgi after nuclear export. For the gM deletion mutant however, the Golgi localization of VP8 was lost, suggesting the importance of gM for the correct localization of VP8, likely due to the observed interaction between the two [ ]. The gM of HSV-1 has been shown to be crucial for the localization of multiple tegument proteins to the assembly sites, including VP13/14 and other envelope proteins, as well as their eventual packaging into virions [ ]. Given that the gM protein is conserved across the Herpesviridae species, this could also be true for gM of BoHV-1. In conclusion, these data suggest that GARP and EARP KO might have affected the packaging of VP8 via their trafficking of gM, its interactive binding partner, to the site of secondary envelopement.
Based on our data the literature presented above [ , , ], we developed a model for this process. Under normal conditions ( ), GARP and EARP serve as key links for vesicles from early endosomes (EE) to be tethered to the TGN and fast REs, allowing membrane fusion to take place and relaying gM and the attached VP8 to these new organelles. Vesicles loaded with gM and VP8 then bud from the TGN and REs, taking gM and VP8 to the destinations where secondary envelopment of the viral capsid takes place. Alternatively, endocytosed gM can be trafficked via slow REs, presumably less efficiently. In cells missing GARP and EARP, gM carrying vesicles are unable to be tethered to the TGN or fast REs, depriving the capsid access to gM-containing vesicles for envelopment as a result. Instead, the capsid resorts to vesicles lacking gM and VP8, producing virions deficient in these proteins that are unfit for infection ( ). EEs carrying gM are more likely to be diverted to late endosomes or initial autophagic vacuoles (AVis) for degradation. Some capsids can still mature into infectious virions by using vesicles from slow REs instead. Based on the ~1-log / replication cycle reduction of infectious viruses produced by VPS52KO cells ( ), we estimate it to be less than 10% as efficient as the GARP/EARP mediated paths. Another possibility is that capsids without a secondary envelope and the glycoproteins are released into the culture media at the end of the infection cycle via host cell apoptosis, but this remains to be examined.
 A good understanding of host pathogen interaction in livestock is crucial for animal health and the control of zoonotic diseases. Like other herpesviruses, BoHV-1 has co-evolved to tightly regulate and usurp the host cell niche. As many of the pro- and anti-viral candidates identified by our CRISPR screen remain to be studied, we hope that further dissection of the roles these genes play in viral propagation may aid development of therapeutics. Among them, candidate genes that are also core essential genes (CEGs) [ ] or fitness genes might not be as straightforward to study using the CRISPR KO approach, as they are essential for the growth of cells in prolonged tissue culture conditions. Due to the lack of a cell- or tissue-based latency reactivation model, we were confined to the study of the active cycle of BoHV-1; it may be beneficial to adapt this screen to gain knowledge regarding the maintenance of BoHV-1 latency when the opportunities arise. Besides BoHV-1, the screening platform we built is readily deployable to the study of other economically important bovine pathogens, such as foot and mouth disease virus, bovine rotavirus, bovine viral diarrhoea virus, bovine respiratory syncytial virus and Schmallenberg virus. One can also use this library to study aspects of biology beyond virology, such as pluripotency maintenance and differentiation of stem cells and repurposing BoHV-1 as a cancer therapy vector [ – ].

## Materials and methods
Briefly, a library of 94,000 CRISPR sequences targeting 21,165 protein coding genes, along with 2,000 non-targeting CRISPRs was synthesized as 80-mer single strand oligos by Twist Biosciences (San Francisco, USA) in the following format: GCAGATGGCTCTTTGTCCTAGACATCGAAGACAACACCG-N20-GTTTTACAGTCTTCTCGTCGC (N20: 96,000 variable 20bp CRISPR sequences). The oligos were then PCR converted to dsDNA and cloned into pKLV2-U6gRNA5(BbsI)-PGKpuro2ABFP-W [ ] by BbsI digestion and T4 ligation to make the K2g5 library. The other three libraries were cloned using the same protocol but with different vector backbones. The library was packaged into lentivirus in HEK293FT cells by Calcium Phosphate transfection and transduced into ~100 million Cas9+/+; TRIM5 -/- cells at a MOI of 0.3–0.5 with three repeats. Transduced cells were selected with 1.8 ug/ml Puromycin for 7–10 days, while maintaining a coverage of 300-500x. For both screens, 70–100 million (passage 4–5) library transduced cells were infected with GFP tagged BoHV-1 virus at a MOI of 2. At 10hpi (1st screen) or 8phi (2nd screen), cells were harvested for FACS sort, to obtain fractions of live cells with varied GFP intensity, i.e. GFP negative, GFP low, GFP medium, and GFP High. The viral infection was repeated three times and genomic DNA was extracted from all fractions and all repeats. The CRISPR containing lentiviral sequences were amplified and barcoded by a 2-step PCR with limited cycles and sequenced on a NextSeq 500 machine using a SR75bp High Output kit. Reads for each sample were then trimmed using cutadapt v1.16 [ ] and counted based on the CRISPR sequences they contain using MAGeCK v0.5.8 [ ]. Pairwise comparisons of CRISPR copy numbers between fractions were also completed by MAGeCK, to identify genes with significantly enriched or depleted guides in different fractions post BoHV-1 infection. For more details such as PCR primers, CRISPR and TALEN sequences, plasmids and reagents used in this study, please refer to the .

## Supporting information
S1 Data

## btCRISPRko_v1_library.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Data

## g2 vs g5.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Data

## 1st_screen_raw_counts_and_MAGeCK_results.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Data

## 2nd_screen_raw_counts_and_MAGeCK_results.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S5 Data

## All_candidates.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S6 Data

## focused_screen_related_info.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S7 Data

## GO_analyis_of_all_candidates.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Text

## Supplementary_materials_and_methods.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Text

## Supplementary data.
Table A. Numbers of genes targeted, and guides included in the btCRISPRko.v1 library. Table B. Libraries produced from this study. Table C. Number of cells recovered from 1st screen. Table D. Number of cells recovered from 2nd screen. Table E. Knockout clone genotypes. Fig A. Knock-in (KI) of Cas9 to rosa26. A. Knock-in and genotyping strategies. A genome editor designed to target first intron of rosa26 generates a double strand break and a plasmid with a EF1a promoter driven Cas9 expression cassette flanked by homology sequences (orange colored) is used to repair the break, incorporating the expression cassette. To identify targeted clones, PCR primer set F+R binding outside the homology arms (horizontal read arrows) is used for genotyping. B. TALEN mRNA pair TAL1.6, chosen out of six editors tested (T7E1 results shown on gel), cuts in intron 1 and was co-transfected with HDR plasmid expressing the Cas9-2a-Blasticidin cassette. Single cell clones were isolated and genotyped. C. Genotyping results. PCR amplicons from the 4kb Wild Type (wt, filled triangles) and 11kb targeted (tg, filled triangle) alleles are indicated. Homozygote clones are labelled as +/+. Fig B. Lentivirus transduction efficiency is low in wt MDBK cells. A. bright field visualization of HEK293FT cells 48 hours after being transfected with the library plasmid pool, pMD.2 and psPAX2 for serum-free lenti-virus packing. B. Same cells under the BFP filter showing strong BFP expression, indicating efficient transfection and packaging. C. CRISPR library transduction in HEK293FT cells. D. CRISPR library transduction in Cas9+/+ cells without TRIM5 KO with four times the virus as that used on HEK293FTs. Fig C. Plaque assays to compare replication of BoHV-1 in wild type MDBK cells and homozygous Cas9 clones. A. Plaque sizes measurements from wt, and three Cas9+/+ clones infected with GFP tagged BoHV-1 virus, repeat n = 3 (n.s.: not significant with p-value>0.05 based on a two-tailed t-test). B. Plaque number counts calculated as pfu/mL from wt, and the Cas9+/+ clones. Fig D. Plaque assays to compare replication of BoHV-1 in wild type MDBK cells and TRIM5-/- clones. A. Plaque sizes measurements from wt, and two TRIM5 KO clones, A44 and B13 infected with GFP tagged BoHV-1 virus, repeat n = 2. B. Plaque number counts calculated as pfu/mL from wt, and the TRIM5 KO clones. C. Sample plaque assay results with the same quantities of virus. Fig E. Plaque assay to compare BoHV-1 replication in Cas9+/+ only cells and Cas9+/+; TRIM5-/- clones. A. Titer of virus grown in Cas9+/+ or Cas9+/+;TRIM5-/- cells; B. Average size of plaques grown. All comparisons conducted by single factor ANOVA results non-significant results. Fig F. Testing CRISPRs designed for the CRISPRko library in MDBK cells. A. Cutting efficiency of guides delivered by lentivirus or PiggyBac targeting CTNNB1, MAPK8 and MAPK9. B. Cutting efficiency of guides in vitro transcribed as sgRNA and delivered by transfection, targeting Oct1, SGK1, SGK2, and SGK3. Fig G. Stepwise CRISPR library cloning, packaging, and transduction. The library was synthesized as a pool of oligos and PCR amplified to convert to dsDNA. The fragments containing CRISPRs were then ligated into either lentivirus (illustrated as example) or piggyBac vectors that contain a hU6 promoter to drive sgRNA expression and a Puro2aBFP marker for Puromycin selection. If using lentiviral delivery, the library was packaged as lentivirus and transduced into Cas9 expressing cells at low MOI to produce library expressing cells with single sgRNA integrations. Fig H. Next generation sequencing of screening samples to identify candidate genes with depleted or enriched guide RNA. To determine copy numbers of guides, PCR using primers PCR1_Fx + PCR1_R (red arrows, Table E in ) are used to amplify the fragments containing CRISPR sequences. PCR products from different samples are then barcoded using a 2nd PCR with a unique combination of indexes and sequenced as a pool. Comparison of guide RNA copy numbers between samples is conducted by MAGeCK to identify enriched or depleted guides and their targeted genes. Fig I. NextSeq of the CRISPR libraries to examine CRISPR copy number distribution. A. Sequencing of the K2g2 and K2g5 plasmid libraries at 40X sequencing depth. B. Sequencing of the K2g5 library and library transduced Cas9+/+; TRIM5-/- cells at 200X sequencing depth. Fig J. Library performance and specificity comparison between the K2g2 and K2g5 libraries. Plots show log2 fold changes in copy numbers of guides targeting essential genes(red), non-essential genes(black), and non-targeting control guides(green) in the two cell populations transduced with the K2g2 or K2g5 library compared to the plasmids. The data was plotted using a python script adapted from Hart et al. 2017 [ ]. Fig K. PiggyBac transposition mediated CRISPR library delivery into Cas9+/+ MDBK cells. Cas9+/+ transfected with either library with (left panels) or without (right panels) transposase hypBase and selected with Puromycin to test library transposability. After Puro selection, cells were stained with Giemsa for colony visualization. Fig L. GFP tagged BoHV-1 virus infecting wt MDBK cells. A. 8 hours post infection of MDBKs by the GFP tagged virus. B. image of the same cells under bright field. Fig M. FACS sort to collect sub-populations of different degrees of BoHV-1 replication. FACS plots with four gatings to collect sub-populations of live cells with GFP Negative, GFP Low, GFP Medium, and GFP High signals from 1st or 2nd round of screen. Fig N. Gene Ontology analysis of pro-viral candidates identified by the screen. GO reveals the top biological processes that can be important for the virus using the Fold Enrichment > = 10, and -log2(p-value)> = 10 statistical cut-offs (To see the full list, please refer to ). Fig O. Candidates identified in the GFP Negative sub-population. Data shown is from 2nd screen, labels only applying to pro-viral candidates with stringent cut-offs: p<0.005, FDR< = 0.1, and log2fc> = 1.5 ( ). Fig P. Candidates identified in the GFP Low sub-population. Data shown is from 2nd screen, labels only applying to pro-viral candidates with stringent cut-offs: p<0.005, FDR< = 0.1, and log2fc> = 1.5 ( ). Fig Q. Sizes of BoHV-1 plaques grown in various clones. ImageJ was using to measure sizes of plaques grown in VPS50KO, VPS51KO, VPS52KO, VPS53KO and VPS54KO (denoted as -/-) cells as well as KO clones with overexpression of corresponding subunit (pVPS50,51,52,53,54). Cas9+/+ clone P was used as control and plaque size for the control was normalized to 1 (n.s.: p>0.05 based on ANOVA followed by t-tests between genotypes). Fig R. Plaque size in VPS50KO and VPS54KO cells. Plaques were grown and measured in Control cells (Clone P), VPS50KO (left panel) clones or VPS54KO clones (right panel). Average plaque size from Clone P control cells were set as 1 (n.s.: p>0.05 based on ANOVA followed by t-tests between genotypes). Fig S. Specificity of an antibody against VP8 of BoHV-1. A. Western blot result using the anti-BoHV-1 antibody (red) and an anti-GFP antibody (yellow) against a concentrated virus sample harvested at 48h.p.i. (MOI = 3) from tissue culture supernatant of WT cells grown in serum free media (SFM, DMEM+1% Pen/Strep). Black arrows point to bands that match the size of VP26-GFP (41kD) and the most prominent band on the membrane, marked with a “?” as the candidate target antigen for the FLI antibody. SFM was used as a negative control. B. Concentrated virus samples resolved on 10% SDS PAGE gels and stained by Coomassie. PAGE gel pieces (marked by the black rectangular boxes) containing bands that match the size of the detected candidate band by western blot in A were cut out and protein contents were examined by Mass Spectrometry. C. Proteins with the most abundant peptides in viruses harvested from the WT cells and the MOCK samples detected by the Mass Spectrometry (n = 2). The Y-axis represents abundance of each protein as total area under curves of all peptides returned for that protein. D. Representative Western blot results on lysates harvested from HEK293FT transfected with plasmids overexpressing glycoproteins or VP8 of BoHV-1. The same samples were hybridized with the primary anti-Flag antibody (rabbit) and the FLI antibody (mouse) together followed by secondary antibodies labelling the anti-Flag (Licor Donkey anti-rabbit 800) or the FLI antibody (Licor Donkey anti-mouse 680). -ve: empty vector, MOCK: lysate from supernatant of MOCK infected cells; BoHV-1: lysate from concentrated supernatant of cells infected with the GFP tagged BoHV-1.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.

We thank Dr. Peter Wild and colleagues at ZTH for sharing the GFP tagged BoHV-1 strain, Prof. Dr. Jens Teifke and Dr. Sven Reiche for sharing the anti BoHV-1 antibody, Dr. Kosuke Yusa from the Wellcome Sanger Institute, Amy Tong from Professor Jason Moffat’s lab at the University of Toronto, and Professor Keisuke Kaji from the SCRM Medicine at the University of Edinburgh for sharing their protocols, and other members of the CRISPR community for wonderful insights and techniques. We are also grateful to the imaging facility staff Dr. Anna Raper, Dr. Bob Fleming and Mr. Graeme Robertson and the CSU unit for support, the virology group for meaningful discussions, Professor Kenneth Baillie, Professor Mike McGrew, Dr. Lel Eory, Dr. Oriol Xandri Canela, Dr. Mazdak Salavati and Dr. Rute Maria Pinto for advice or comments on the manuscript, all based at the Roslin Institute. We would also like to extend our appreciation to the NGS team, Angie Fawkes, Richard Clark and Lee Murphy at the ECRF for sequencing our screen samples.
 10.1371/journal.ppat.1011822.r001Decision Letter 0
HearingPatrickSection EditorGewurzBenjamin EAcademic Editor© 2023 Hearing, Gewurz2023Hearing, Gewurzhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
9 Jan 2023

Dear Dr. Tan,
Thank you very much for submitting your manuscript "GARP and EARP are required for efficient BHV-1 replication as identified by a genome wide CRISPR knockout screen" for consideration at PLOS Pathogens. As with all papers reviewed by the journal, your manuscript was reviewed by members of the editorial board and by several independent reviewers. In light of the reviews (below this email), we would like to invite the resubmission of a significantly-revised version that takes into account the reviewers' comments.
Each of the three reviewers appreciated a number of strengths of the manuscript, including the construction of a useful resource for the field and its application in a CRISPR screen of BHV1 replication. Each of the three reviewers make points that will be important to address in a revision. One of the reviewers inadvertently typed these points in the wrong field, so including them here:
1. Bovine herpesvirus 1 is now abbreviated as BoHV-1, not BHV-1. 2. GARP and EARP were not defined in the abstract. 3. Is it accurate to state that GARP and EARP are redundant functions that BoHV-1 needs for retrograde transport and virion production?
4. One major, but unavoidable, flaw with this approach is cellular genes necessary for cell growth will not be viable and thus cannot be tested. This should be discussed in the manuscript. 5. Figure 6F: the differences were less than one log in virus production. Are the authors sure this difference is biologically relevant?
We cannot make any decision about publication until we have seen the revised manuscript and your response to the reviewers' comments. Your revised manuscript is also likely to be sent to reviewers for further evaluation.
When you are ready to resubmit, please upload the following:
[1] A letter containing a detailed list of your responses to the review comments and a description of the changes you have made in the manuscript. Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.
[2] Two versions of the revised manuscript: one with either highlights or tracked changes denoting where the text has been changed; the other a clean version (uploaded as the manuscript file).
Important additional instructions are given below your reviewer comments.
Please prepare and submit your revised manuscript within 60 days. If you anticipate any delay, please let us know the expected resubmission date by replying to this email. Please note that revised manuscripts received after the 60-day due date may require evaluation and peer review similar to newly submitted manuscripts.
Thank you again for your submission. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive so far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Benjamin E Gewurz, M.D., Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Patrick Hearing
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Kasturi Haldar
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
​orcid.org/0000-0001-5065-158X
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064

***********************
Each of the three reviewers appreciated a number of strengths of the manuscript, including the construction of a useful resource for the field and its application in a CRISPR screen of BHV1 replication. Each of the three reviewers make points that will be important to address in a revision. One of the reviewers inadvertently typed these points in the wrong field, so including them here:
1. Bovine herpesvirus 1 is now abbreviated as BoHV-1, not BHV-1. 2. GARP and EARP were not defined in the abstract. 3. Is it accurate to state that GARP and EARP are redundant functions that BoHV-1 needs for retrograde transport and virion production?
4. One major, but unavoidable, flaw with this approach is cellular genes necessary for cell growth will not be viable and thus cannot be tested. This should be discussed in the manuscript. 5. Figure 6F: the differences were less than one log in virus production. Are the authors sure this difference is biologically relevant?
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Part I - Summary

Please use this section to discuss strengths/weaknesses of study, novelty/significance, general execution and scholarship.
Reviewer #1: For this study, the author utilized a genome wide CRISPR knockout strategy to target all protein coding genes in the bovine genome. As expected, this strategy identified numerous genes that impaired or stimulated viral replication. Interestingly, the Golgi-associated retrograde protein (GARP) complex and endosome associated recycling protein (EARP) complex scored as being very important for virus production. BoHV-1, like most herpesviruses undergoes a complicated strategy to generate infectious viruses that are shed or spread via cell to cell. Hence, it is expected these pathways would be important. With that said, there are several issues that need to be addressed.
Reviewer #2: This manuscript by Tan et al. illustrates the careful construction and impressive documentation of a CRISPR/Cas9 knockout library for high throughput genomics and gene discovery in the cattle genome. The btCRISPR library generated, targeting all protein coding genes in the cattle genome, will be hugely useful in studying cellular processes in bovine cells, as well as processes that intersect with viruses infect bovine cells. At every barrier, the authors went the extra mile to create a high-standard resource. The authors perform extensive gene ontogeny analysis, and illustrate the possible involvement of many pro- and anti-viral host genes involved in the viral replication cycle. They validate one of these sets of genes, comprised of VPS 50-54, which assemble to form the GARP and EARP complexes. They then rigorously knock out the components of these complexes to ascertain their role in the BHV1 life cycle. They arrive at an intriguing model that trafficking of viral glycoproteins to RE and the TGN is cut off by GARP and EARP KOs, and the vesicles that bud off are deficient in viral glycoproteins essential for 2ndary envelopment of capsids. This hypothesis is intriguing and prompts some testable hypotheses.
Reviewer #3: Tan et al., develop tools for and then perform a screen for host cell gene products that affect expression of one of the BHV-1 viral capsid proteins, VP26, during a single cycle of infection (i.e., after a relatively high m.o.i. infection at times prior to completion of a first cycle of infection). They identify many genes with both positive or negative effects on VP26 expression and show nicely that knock-down or CRISPRi inhibition of expression putative proviral host factors affects initiation of plaque formation by BHV-1. This appears to have been a fruitful screen and the cell line and library tools that they have constructed represent a highly useful and significant tool for identifying pro- and anti-viral factors for BHV-1 expression.
The paper then takes a confusing turn as the authors focus on two membrane trafficking-related protein complexes, EARP and GARP and attempt to build a case that these are likely to be important for virus assembly. This is confusing in part because their screen was not structured to find cellular factors that promote events in virus replication past the expression of VP26. Indeed, it is difficult to see how factors that might even be absolutely essential for assembly would have had any effect on the outcome of their screen. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the evidence presented that these factors directly affect assembly is incomplete and not easily interpretable.
The authors show that individual knock-outs of three of three subunits common to the EARP and GARP complexes result in strong inhibition of the ability of BHV to initiate plaque formation and have a small effect on the sizes of the plaques that do form (although this latter measurement is not controlled by rescue of expression). They also attempt to show that these knockouts affect virus production in Figure 6D. The problem here is that the experiments shown in Figure 6D do not measure virus production. Rather, they show kinetics of VP26 expression. The lower graph is particularly telling in that it measures VP26 expression in a single cycle of infection (i.e., the vast majority of cells infected at m.o.i. = 3). This result strongly suggests, despite what is shown in Figure 7, that the primary defect in their VPS51/52/53 knockouts is a strong inhibition of expression of at least some late genes. This is, of course, consistent with the results of the screen in which these candidates were identified. The authors show in Figure 7 that the virions produced in the VPS52 knockout have a lower specific infectivity than those from a wild-type cell clone. This can easily be explained as an indirect effect of inhibition of expression of critical virion components. It should also be noted that the experiments shown in Figure 7 are also not controlled with cells in which the knockout is repaired.
The approaches shown in this manuscript for library generation screening and validation are admirably state-of-the-art. However, to draw the conclusion that the EARP and GARP complexes are directly important in virus assembly, the authors will need to incorporate additional approaches. They must, first, assess the expression of viral proteins (in addition to mRNA) to determine the effects of their knock-outs on expression. They must also perform actual virus production assays (i.e., single- and multi-step growth experiments that measure production of infectious virus rather than marker gene expression). Also, there is no TEM or imaging of any kind to support an effect on virus assembly.
More minor points include:
Figure 1B assay is not explained. This is presumably output from a T7E1 assay, but the basis of the assay as applied in this circumstance is unexplained. Insufficient information is provided to allow critical evaluation of the data. And this is a problem throughout the portion of the paper that describes cell line and library engineering.
Also, no validation of knock-out of TRIM5alpha expression is presented. The authors get the effect they want with some clones, but whether this is related to TRIM5 KO is not clear. In one respect, it does not matter, since they get clones that show elevated transduction efficiency, but the lack of transparency and rigor in characterization of those clones is disturbing.
Given that the screen was based on diminished or enhanced GFP expression in a single cycle of virus replication, how do the authors imagine, they identified genes that are involved in virus assembly and virion specific infectivity?
Table S1 – the meaning of the numbers in the right-hand column is not explained. The table is unintelligible.
Figures S3-S5 do not measure the parameter relevant to their screen. They look, on the one hand, at ability to initiate a plaque and, on the other, at the ability to spread. This is a problem because their screen is based on inhibition or enhancement of late protein expression during a single cycle of infection. The relationship between plaque formation, spread and virus single-cycle replication is complicated (at least in the alphaherpesviruses) and the authors should validate the utility of their cell lines using the same sort of criteria they will use for their library screen.
Figure 2C axes are uninterpretable. Y axis: “Density” of what? What are the units? X axis: is this nucleotides?
**********

Part II – Major Issues: Key Experiments Required for Acceptance

Please use this section to detail the key new experiments or modifications of existing experiments that should be absolutely required to validate study conclusions.
Generally, there should be no more than 3 such required experiments or major modifications for a "Major Revision" recommendation. If more than 3 experiments are necessary to validate the study conclusions, then you are encouraged to recommend "Reject".
Reviewer #1: 1. This manuscript contains 16 supplementary Figures. The authors need to include tables or a couple of figures that summarizes what the top 10 genes or signaling pathways that were identified and include it in the manuscript. Furthermore, these genes need to be named and not just listed as number, and a brief description included.
2. What was the rational for examining Circ RNA expression? It would have been much better to look at ICP0 or ICP4 expression was because it is known these viral genes are crucial viral regulatory genes.
Reviewer #2: The manuscript is so thorough in describing the construction of the library, but the validation experiment and the single experiment to ascertain the roles of GARP/EARP in viral life cycle are a bit lacking. Figure 7 demonstrates that the genomes/pfu ratio is much higher in cells that lack the interchangeable GARP/EARP complex members, suggesting the model proposed in Figure 8: that trafficking of viral glycoproteins to RE and the TGN is cut off by GARP and EARP KOs, and the vesicles that bud off are deficient in viral glycoproteins essential for 2ndary envelopment of capsids. But Figure 7 - is where the investigation of GARP/EARP begins and ends.
1. Given that these VPS proteins are involved membrane trafficking, it is unclear to what extent virions are produced.
For example, do BHV virions lack gB or other glycoproteins?
BHV viral particles should be purifiable. And also should be GFP+.
Particle:pfu ratios using electron microscopy to show that properly or improperly-formed virions are being made.
Better still, if an Ab exists, immunoelectron microscopy could be performed to show that viral glycoproteins are reduced in the viral envelope.
Are there are normal number of virions in GARP/EARP KO cells? Is their morphology affected?
Could the authors examine membrane protein content of virions from cells deficient in EARP/GARP? Or examine expression of gB and localization of gB at various time points during wt infection of control cells vs. EARP/GARP deficient cells.
2. Lines 363- Strange that HSV-1 results in a relatively tiny (but reproducible) reduction in titer – the fold reduction is not mentioned (and should be) but it looks like a 2-4 fold reduction? This is strangely minimal compared to the 3 log reduction in AIHV titres, a gamma herpesvirus. These seem to be hugely different and at a minimum, worthy of some comment in the discussion. The last sentence says “indicating that AIHV and HSV might employ GARP and EARP similarly to BHV”. If GARP/EARP affect BHV and AIHV titres by 3 logs and HSV titres by 3-fold, are they really functioning similarly?
Line 369 – In fig F, for HSV1, VPS54 -/+ results in the largest reduction in titres at ?? 5X, compared with ? 2.5X reduction with VPS50-52. Yet for AIHV and BHV, the VPS54KO does almost nothing to the AIHV titers (fig H), and the VPS 51-52 reduce titers by 3 logs. This seems to argue that HSV is different from AIHV and BHV. Some discussion is warranted, if not further experimentation.
3. GARP and EARP KO affected viral entry and did not affect viral gene transcription, as ascertained through examination of vDNAout and transcription of IE, E, and L genes.
If transcription of gB is unaffected, and if GARP/EARP affect virion integrity by altering trafficking of gB, then perhaps gB is mislocalized within infected cells?
Reviewer #3: They must, first, assess the expression of viral proteins (in addition to mRNA) to determine the effects of their knock-outs on expression. They must also perform actual virus production assays (i.e., single- and multi-step growth experiments that measure production of infectious virus rather than marker gene expression). Also, there is no TEM or imaging of any kind to support an effect on virus assembly.
**********

Part III – Minor Issues: Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications

Please use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: 1. The methods describing the expts in Figure 7 are difficult to find and may not exist. In Figure 7BCD they must have infected either clone P or the 52KO cells with BHV1, then taken the supt, pellet, and total, at different time points, and then titer what is collected at these time points on some other type of cell using the methods described in “Plaque assays”. No mention is made of this expt in the methods or legend.
2. Do not understand “n.s.” in Figure D. Error bars are minute or nonexistent? At the 36 hr timepoint, the KO is at 10^3 and the wt is at 1. How could this be n.s., while the differences in C look negligible, with overlapping error bars, and yet are marked with 1 to 4 ****? Not clear to which data points the asterisks in Fig 7C refer. A particular time point only? Which one? Why only one? Why are there error bars only on some points but not others? What is the number of biological replicates?
3. Figure 6 H – cannot find legend for panel H. Must have been intended to be part of panel G. Text references 6H, though.
4. Figure 7 depicts relative genomes, relative mRNA/vDNA, relative vDNA/pfu – relative to what? cannot find or missed description of relativity in legend or Methods.
5. Line 420 – Combined with existing knowledge … - what knowledge is this? References?
6. Line 415 – we conducted a series of experiments to understand the routes these complexes are recruited by the virus for self-benefit. (?? A hybrid of two sentences ?)
7. Line 433-34 referring to colocalization could use some references.
8. Line 336 – would be clearer if text read “VP26-GFP” synthesis (Fig 6D left panel).
9. Line 336 - Figure 6D does not have a left panel…Also the abscissa is unlabeled in Fig 6D top panel –
10. “We also tracked the rate of VP26 synthesis in these KO cells (Fig. 6D left panel) by measuring
GFP fluorescent intensity from 0 h.p.i. to 72 h.p.i, following infection with GFP tagged BHV-1 (Fig. 6D
right panel)” Line 336 - It seems that the difference between the top and bottom panels are the MOI. Both panels depict the KO cell lines, although only the top has a legend. And both panels look like they are following infection with GFP-BHV? This sentence is confusing, as the distinction between left and right panels does not seem to correspond even to the top and bottom panels in Fig 6D.
11. Line 136 and prior – please define btau5.0.1 and rosa26 and TAL1.6.
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No

Figure Files:

While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org.

Data Requirements:

Please note that, as a condition of publication, PLOS' data policy requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions outlined in your manuscript. Data must be deposited in an appropriate repository, included within the body of the manuscript, or uploaded as supporting information. This includes all numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.. For an example see here on PLOS Biology: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5.

Reproducibility:

To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
10.1371/journal.ppat.1011822.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
18 Jun 2023

AttachmentSubmitted filename: response_to_reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.ppat.1011822.r003Decision Letter 1
HearingPatrickSection EditorGewurzBenjamin EAcademic Editor© 2023 Hearing, Gewurz2023Hearing, Gewurzhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
17 Jul 2023

Dear Dr. Tan,
Thank you very much for submitting your manuscript "GARP and EARP are required for efficient BoHV-1 replication as identified by a genome wide CRISPR knockout screen" for consideration at PLOS Pathogens. As with all papers reviewed by the journal, your manuscript was reviewed by members of the editorial board and by several independent reviewers. The reviewers appreciated the attention to an important topic. Based on the reviews, we are likely to accept this manuscript for publication, providing that you modify the manuscript according to the review recommendations.
Please prepare and submit your revised manuscript within 30 days. If you anticipate any delay, please let us know the expected resubmission date by replying to this email.
When you are ready to resubmit, please upload the following:
[1] A letter containing a detailed list of your responses to all review comments, and a description of the changes you have made in the manuscript.
Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out
[2] Two versions of the revised manuscript: one with either highlights or tracked changes denoting where the text has been changed; the other a clean version (uploaded as the manuscript file).
Important additional instructions are given below your reviewer comments.
Thank you again for your submission to our journal. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive so far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Benjamin E Gewurz, M.D., Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Patrick Hearing
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Kasturi Haldar
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
​orcid.org/0000-0001-5065-158X
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064

***********************
Reviewer Comments (if any, and for reference):
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Part I - Summary

Please use this section to discuss strengths/weaknesses of study, novelty/significance, general execution and scholarship.
Reviewer #2: This manuscript by Tan et al. illustrates the careful construction and impressive documentation of a CRISPR/Cas9 knockout library for high throughput genomics and gene discovery in the cattle genome. The btCRISPR library generated, targeting all protein coding genes in the cattle genome, will be hugely useful in studying cellular processes in bovine cells, as well as processes that intersect with viruses infect bovine cells. At every barrier, the authors went the extra mile to create a high-standard resource. The authors perform extensive gene ontogeny analysis, and illustrate the possible involvement of many pro- and anti-viral host genes involved in the viral replication cycle. They validate one of these sets of genes, comprised of VPS 50-54, which assemble to form the GARP and EARP complexes. They then rigorously knock out the components of these complexes to ascertain their role in the BHV1 life cycle. They arrive at an intriguing model that trafficking of viral glycoproteins to RE and the TGN is cut off by GARP and EARP KOs, and the vesicles that bud off are deficient in viral glycoproteins essential for 2ndary envelopment of capsids, is intriguing and prompts some testable hypotheses. In Figure 8, the authors then test the hypothesis that gB is reduced or absent from released cell-free virions and show that virions generated from VPS52KO possess less gB, supporting the idea that GARP/EARP participate in the normal trafficiking of gB.
Reviewer #3: The revised manuscript of Tan et al., addresses many of the concerns raised in their first submission. The authors have made an effort to address the possibility that there are real effects on virus production due to GARP/EARP subunit knockout (Figure S19) and that that these effects on virus production are due to changes in protein expression rather than effects on assembly (Figures 8 and S20). They are almost there, but there are problems with each of these three critical figures that should be addressed before publication.
Figure S19 is not easily interpretable. The Panel B Y axis is labeled “vDNA copies (relative).” Relative to what? A ratio relative to a cellular housekeeping gene would make sense for total and pellet values, but not for supernatant where the presence of host DNA would indicate cell lysis. The authors should indicate what is actually being measured in this panel. In panel C, the numbers do not make sense. The Y axis is “vDNA/pfu (relative).” If you take any of the time points in panels A and B and calculate the vDNA/pfu ratio, you do not get a value that corresponds to a point in panel C. To give just one example, the clone P 12 h time point for total production, vDNA (relative)/pfu = ~1e2/~1e6 = 1e-4. The value actually plotted in panel C is ~5e0. The trends look about right, but the authors need to explain how the data was actually derived.
The data in Figure S19 is also critical for the conclusions that suthors wish to draw in the paper and should be in the main body of the paper rather than the supplementary data.
Figure S20 does not make sense. First, the western blot in panel A was apparently generated by probing with both anti-gB and anti-GFP simultaneously with no way to distinguish the bands resulting from reactivity with each antibody. For example, there is no way to tell whether the band at about 37k is actually VP26-GFP or a degradation product of the 100k band. Similarly, there is no way to know whether the upper band actually represents reactivity with the putative anti-gB or cross reactivity of the anti-GFP antibody with some other BoHV protein. I cannot understand why the experiment was done in this way. Panels B and C also do not make sense. The box that the authors cut clearly contains the major capsid protein, VP5 (the most abundant protein by copy number in any herpesvirus virion), but they state that gB is the most abundant protein by peptide representation. This is odd to begin with, but their graph appears to show substantially greater abundances for peptides of VP11/12 and 13/14. It is possible that I have mis-read the graph because the authors do not indicate what is on the Y axis (what does “area” mean in this context?). The bottom line is that the figure does not provide evidence that their antibody reacts specifically with gB.
The specificity of this antibody is cast into further doubt by the confocal images shown in Figure 8. They are of too low a resolution to tell for sure (and the lack of a separated red channel does not help), but the putative gB signal appears to be distributed evenly throughout the cytoplasm rather than localized on any membrane structures as would be expected for an envelope glycoprotein.
The bottom line here is that I am unconvinced that this antibody is specifically directed against gB. Demonstration of reactivity in cells that express only gB is necessary to clarify this.
**********

Part II – Major Issues: Key Experiments Required for Acceptance

Please use this section to detail the key new experiments or modifications of existing experiments that should be absolutely required to validate study conclusions.
Generally, there should be no more than 3 such required experiments or major modifications for a "Major Revision" recommendation. If more than 3 experiments are necessary to validate the study conclusions, then you are encouraged to recommend "Reject".
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: Demonstration of their putative anti-gB antibody reactivity in cells that express only gB is necessary to show antibody specificity.
**********

Part III – Minor Issues: Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications

Please use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity.
Reviewer #2: I realize that Figure S20 is the 20th supplementary figure, but I cannot figure it out.
“Western blot using anti BoHV1 Ab and an anti-GFP Ab against concentrated virus samples from TC supt of WT or 51KO cells. Black arrows point to band that matches VP26-GFP.”
This antibody was used to stain lysates of viruses harvested from media “alongside” an anti-GFP antibody.
I don’t understand – is this a GFP blot or a VP26 blot? Or both? If both, I only see one red VP26 band.
Is red anti-GFP or anti-gB? Why would they use both Abs unless you could see them both- w two different colors? Is it supposed to be green as well?
In Fig S20C, there is a color for WT and one for MOCK. But the bars in the graph all look black. I am assuming that the gB, UL47, and gE , which seem to have 2 bars associated with them, the one to the right is gray.
Not clear why MOCK infected cells have viral proteins in them. Is this contamination from neighboring lanes? If so, please explain. Are all those proteins found by MS predicted to be in the 98 kDa range? If not, please discuss. If so, please discuss - just so that the figure is understandable. Confusing. Is the Coomassie stained band at 95 kDa supposed to be gB? Or, was that black box cut out and gB and all the other proteins detected by MS?
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
Figure Files:
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org.
Data Requirements:
Please note that, as a condition of publication, PLOS' data policy requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions outlined in your manuscript. Data must be deposited in an appropriate repository, included within the body of the manuscript, or uploaded as supporting information. This includes all numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.. For an example see here: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5.
Reproducibility:
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
References:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
10.1371/journal.ppat.1011822.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
8 Nov 2023

AttachmentSubmitted filename: response_to_reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.ppat.1011822.r005Decision Letter 2
HearingPatrickSection EditorGewurzBenjamin EAcademic Editor© 2023 Hearing, Gewurz2023Hearing, Gewurzhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
13 Nov 2023

Dear Dr. Tan,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'GARP and EARP are required for efficient BoHV-1 replication as identified by a genome wide CRISPR knockout screen' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us now if you or your institution is planning to press release the article. All press must be co-ordinated with PLOS.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens.
Best regards,
Benjamin E Gewurz, M.D., Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Patrick Hearing
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Kasturi Haldar
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
​orcid.org/0000-0001-5065-158X
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064

***********************************************************
Reviewer Comments (if any, and for reference):
10.1371/journal.ppat.1011822.r006Acceptance letter
HearingPatrickSection EditorGewurzBenjamin EAcademic Editor© 2023 Hearing, Gewurz2023Hearing, Gewurzhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
30 Nov 2023

Dear Dr. Tan,
We are delighted to inform you that your manuscript, "GARP and EARP are required for efficient BoHV-1 replication as identified by a genome wide CRISPR knockout screen," has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
We have now passed your article onto the PLOS Production Department who will complete the rest of the pre-publication process. All authors will receive a confirmation email upon publication.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any scientific or type-setting errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. Note: Proofs for Front Matter articles (Pearls, Reviews, Opinions, etc...) are generated on a different schedule and may not be made available as quickly.
Soon after your final files are uploaded, the early version of your manuscript, if you opted to have an early version of your article, will be published online. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
Thank you again for supporting open-access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens. 
Best regards,
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064