pmciScienceiScience3532isciiScience2589-0042ElsevierPMC12159498PMC12159498.112159498121594984051011710.1016/j.isci.2025.112632S2589-0042(25)00893-41126321ArticleTargeting G9a-m6A translational mechanism of SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis for multifaceted therapeutics of COVID-19 and its sequalae
MuneerAdil XieLing XieXuping ZhangFeng WrobelJohn A. XiongYan YuXufen WangCharles GheorgheCiprian WuPing SongJuan MingGuo-Li JinJian SongHongjun ShiPei-Yong ChenXianxianc@email.unc.edu 1Department of Biochemistry & Biophysics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA2Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA3Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA4Department of Neuroscience and Mahoney Institute for Neurosciences, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA5Mount Sinai Center for Therapeutics Discovery, Departments of Pharmacological Sciences, Oncological Sciences, and Neuroscience, Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA6Center for Genomics, Division of Microbiology & Molecular Genetics, Department of Basic Sciences, Lawrence D Longo MD Center for Perinatal Biology, Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, School of Medicine, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, CA 92350, USA7Department of Neuroscience, Cell Biology, and Anatomy, Center for Addiction Sciences and Therapeutics, Brain Health Institute, Mitchell Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA8Department of Pharmacology, and Neuroscience Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA9Institute for Human Infections and Immunity, Sealy Institute for Vaccine Sciences, Sealy Center for Structural Biology & Molecular Biophysics, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA∗Corresponding author xianc@email.unc.edu10These authors contributed equally
11Lead contact
20620251152025286489934112632186202430122024752025110520251206202513062025© 2025 The Author(s)2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Targeting G9a translational mechanism of SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis for multifaceted therapeutics of COVID-19 and its sequalae

6320242024.03.04.583415bioRxiv10.1101/2024.03.04.583415PMC1094235238496599

## Summary
N6-methyladenosine (m6A) modification pathway is hijacked by several RNA viruses, including SARS-CoV-2, making it an attractive host-directed target for development of broad-spectrum antivirals. Here, we show that histone methyltransferase G9a, through its interaction with METTL3, regulates SARS-CoV-2-mediated rewiring of host m6A methylome to ultimately promote turnover, abundance, secretion and/or phosphorylation of various viral receptors and proteases, transcription factors, cytokines/chemokines, coagulation and angiogenesis associated proteins, and fibrosis markers. More importantly, drugs targeting G9a and its associated protein EZH2 are potent inhibitors of SARS-CoV-2 replication and reverse multi-omic effects of coronavirus infection in human alveolar epithelial cells (A549-hACE2) and COVID-19 patient peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs)—with similar changes seen in multiorgan autopsy samples from COVID-19 patients. Altogether, we extend G9a function(s) beyond transcription to translational regulation during COVID-19 pathogenesis and show that targeting this master regulatory complex represents a new strategy (drug-class) that can be leveraged to combat emerging anti-viral resistance and infections.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•G9a interacts with translation regulators to promote turnover of proviral factors
•G9a-METTL3-m6A axis rewires viral/host m6A methylome following SARS-CoV-2 infection
•G9a regulates poised-mRNA expression in COVID-19 patient PBMCs and autopsy samples
•G9a/Ezh2 inhibition reverses multi-omic landscape of SARS-CoV-2 infection

Natural sciences; Biological sciences; Microbiology; Virology

## Subject areas
Natural sciencesBiological sciencesMicrobiologyVirologypmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesPublished: May 11, 2025

## Introduction
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2), is an unprecedented global public health crisis having already claimed more than 6.8 million lives worldwide. Particularly, high mortality is observed for SARS-CoV-2-infected patients who have pre-existing chronic conditions, such as recovery from sepsis, chronic pulmonary diseases, metabolic diseases (e.g., diabetes), asthma, cardiovascular diseases, thrombosis, chronic liver disease and cirrhosis, and cancer. , Despite initial success of vaccines in reducing COVID-19 infections, hospitalizations, and deaths, neutralizing antibody levels eventually wane with time , and genomic variation owing to low replication fidelity , leads to emergence of SARS-CoV-2 variants having increased transmissibility or virulence. For example, an Omicron subvariant, XBB.1.16, also known as Arcturus, has fueled a surge of COVID-19 cases in 2022. Accordingly, none of the available monoclonal antibodies, with emergency use authorization, neutralize Omicron and its variants effectively. , , Also, development of resistance has been observed for antiviral drugs that target either SARS-CoV-2 polymerase (e.g., Remdesivir, Molnupiravir) or protease (e.g., Paxlovid). , , More importantly, without available clinical drugs, emerging cases of post-acute sequela of COVID-19 (aka “long COVID”) have been reported. For example, COVID-19 causes a plethora of neurological, neuropsychiatric, and psychological impairments, such as ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke, encephalopathy, encephalitis, brain fog, depression, anxiety, and sleep disorders. Yet, SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis and the etiology of long COVID neurological symptoms are poorly understood. To effectively combat both emerging variants of the coronavirus and long-lasting COVID-19 sequelae, key mechanistic questions need to be answered, including (1) how SARS-CoV2 life cycle is regulated in the host, and (2) how SARS-CoV2 hijacks host pathways to promote COVID-19 pathogenesis.
The molecular/cellular hallmarks of COVID-19 pathogenesis include increased proportion of monocyte-derived macrophages, reduction and functional exhaustion of T cells (lymphopenia), and increased levels of serum cytokines (hyperinflammation) , ; together, these circumstances result in sepsis and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), two leading complications associated with severe COVID-19. , In correlation with the crucial function of histone modification and chromatin remodeling during SARS-CoV-2 infection, the histone methyltransferases G9a and G9a-like protein (GLP; hereafter G9a will represent both proteins) showed upregulated expression in COVID-19 patients who had high virus load. In addition, in support of our indication of G9a inhibitor efficacy for multifaceted COVID-19 therapeutics , (US patent application #US18/035,831), Sakai et al. reported recently that treating SARS-CoV-2-infected hamsters with our G9a activity inhibitor UNC0642 not only suppressed SARS-CoV-2 replication but also mitigated infection-induced lung damage. These results from the hamster infection model implicated G9a activity-associated pathways and mechanisms in COVID-19 pathogenesis. However, the well-understood canonical function of G9a in gene-specific transcriptional silencing did not explain how translation of other proteins was upregulated in the immunocompromised states of COVID-19.
Proteomic dissection of endogenous protein-protein interaction complexes (interactomes) has unique strengths for discovery of new functions of bait proteins, which can be extrapolated by identifying interactors that have known functions. , Because the systemic cytokine profiles in severe COVID-19 patients were similar to profiles in macrophage activation syndromes, particularly viral sepsis, we used our chromatin activity-based chemoproteomic (ChaC) technique with a biotinylated G9a inhibitor UNC0965 to dissect G9a-interacting pathways in the peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of COVID-19 patients. Notably, unlike conventional immunoprecipitation (IP)-MS , that characterizes protein complexes based only on epitope abundance, ChaC identified in vivo interactors of constitutively active G9a specifically from the diseased cells in the PBMCs with different cell types. Akin to endotoxin-tolerant (ET) macrophages that have molecular characteristics similar to the immunopathological background of COVID-19 vulnerable groups that have pre-existing chronic inflammatory diseases, , UNC0965 ChaC-MS identified numerous regulators of translation, ribosome biogenesis, and proteostasis that had enhanced interaction with G9a in COVID-19 patient PBMCs. Coincidently, in the lungs of deceased COVID-19 patients, major protein translation pathways were found dysregulated. In addition, in a recent study of virus-host protein interactome, Zhou et al. revealed that, via interactions with host translational regulators, SARS-CoV-2 hijacks the corresponding translational pathways. Thus, our ChaC identification of G9a interaction with multiple regulators of SARS-CoV-2 hijacked translation now extends G9a activity beyond its transcriptional repression function to translational regulation of SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis.
Specifically, in COVID-19 related samples, G9a-interacting translation regulators included the N6-methyladenosine (m6A) RNA methylase METTL3, , the ribosomal (r)RNA methylase fibrillarin (FBL), and another histone methyltransferase Ezh2. METTL3 is implicated in viral m6A RNA modification and SARS-CoV2 dysregulated host immune response, , , , and elevated m6A levels were found associated with severe clinical outcomes and mortality of COVID-19 patients. , , , SARS-CoV-2 can escape the host cell innate immune response by mimicking the host mRNA capping machinery and 2′-O methylation (2′-O-Me), the most prevalent modification in rRNA; FBL is the only known methyltransferase that catalyzes site-specific 2′-O-Me of rRNA. Importantly, Ezh2 and FBL, both of which interact with G9a, were found in a complex that regulates the 2′-O-Me rRNA-mediated protein synthesis. The abovementioned reports in conjunction with our ChaC findings raised a triggering possibility that, via COVID-19-characteristic interactions with METTL3 or Ezh2/FBL, G9a coordinates m6A- or Ezh2-mediated SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis.
Like Bojkova et al. who found that viral replication was prevented by inhibitors of translation pathways reshaped by SARS-CoV-2, we showed that inhibitors of G9a and Ezh2 (G9a interactor) suppressed viral replication in SARS-CoV-2 infected human alveolar epithelial cells that overexpressed human ACE2 (A549-hACE2). Combined, these results implicated the G9a interactome in regulating translation of virus growth in the host. On the basis of the in vivo effect of UNC0642 in reversing COVID-19 pathology, we used G9a and Ezh2 inhibitors as the mechanistic probes to conduct multiomics analyses to investigate inhibitor effects on the SARS-CoV-2 infection-induced, G9a-related transcriptome, m6A RNA epitranscriptome, proteome, phosphoproteome, and secretome of the A549-hACE2 cells or ex vivo culture of COVID-19 patient PBMCs. Correlations of these multiomics data showed that G9a inhibition reversed SARS-CoV-2-induced changes in m6A RNA abundance and/or expression, phosphorylation, or secretion of specific proteins; these proteins whose translation was regulated by G9a (i.e., affected by G9a inhibitor) unite the networks associated with major stages of COVID-19 pathogenesis including host-virus interactions, and dysregulated host immune response. These results indicated that constitutively active G9a is the upstream/master regulator of widespread translational or post-translational (e.g., phosphorylation or secretion) processes associated with COVID-19 pathogenesis. Further, these results elucidated the mechanisms of inhibitor action toward both virus and the dysregulated host response that broadly reversed synthesis and degradation of specific proteins that ultimately define COVID-19 pathology. In correlation with the fact that abnormal m6A modification enhances the replication of a broad range of coronaviruses/variants and their associated pathogenesis, , we found that G9a inhibition reversed the m6A epitranscriptome landscape associated with SARS-CoV2 infection. These results implicated G9a inhibition in broad-spectrum blockade of emerging coronavirus variants or any virus. In addition, we identified multiple G9a-regulated, inhibitor-reversed pathways characteristic of long COVID or COVID neurological symptoms. Importantly, akin to our finding that a brain-penetrant inhibitor of G9a, MS1262, reversed brain neuropathological pathways associated with Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis, we found that MS1262 suppressed SARS-CoV2 replication, suggesting a therapeutic effect of G9a inhibition on long-lasting COVID neurological symptoms.
In sum, our COVID-19 pathology correlated multi-omics studies reveal a novel G9a-translation mechanism of COVID-19 pathogenesis from which we derived/validated biomarkers that can identify patient populations vulnerable to severe symptoms. Accordingly, targeting G9a and its interactor Ezh2 represents both virus- and host-directed therapeutics of severe COVID-19 and long COVID.

## Results

## G9a activity-dependent interactome is implicated in the translational regulation of COVID-19 pathogenesis
To determine at which regulatory layer G9a promotes COVID-19 pathogenesis, we dissected G9a-associated pathways by our label-free quantitation (LFQ) ChaC-MS approach. We used two ChaC probes, i.e., UNC0965 for G9a and UNC2399 for Ezh2 for capturing G9a- and Ezh2-interacting complexes in the PBMCs from COVID-19 patients. For comparison, we included ChaC-MS results for G9a complexes obtained from ET macrophage cells ( A). Three technical replicates were performed for each biological replicate, and principal-component analysis (PCA) showed good separation between G9a, EZH2, and control (UNC0125) pulldowns from patient PBMCs ( C). Based on LFQ ratios that are proportional to the relative binding of individual proteins to G9a or Ezh2 in COVID-19 patient PBMCs, LFQ ChaC-MS identified 1319 protein groups, of which 822 and 410 proteins were identified as G9a and Ezh2 interactors, respectively, in at least one COVID-19 patient, and 368 proteins were shared between the two methyltransferases. ( B and D; A). Unsurprisingly, there was significant overlap between G9a/Ezh2 interactors in COVID-19 patients and ET macrophages. In agreement with the canonical epigenetic (transcriptional) regulatory function of G9a and EZH2, we identified several proteins associated with chromatin remodeling and histone modification, including the SWI/SNF remodeling complex and BRD4, which were identified by siRNA and genome-wide CRISPR screens as essential host factors for SARS and pan-coronavirus infection, respectively , ( B and E). Similarly, in line with reports that core components of the G9a complex including EHMT1 and WIZ interact with SARS-CoV-2 encoded ORF9c, , we found 51 ChaC-identified interactors associated with ORF9c, and turnover of 24 other proteins was upregulated following infection ( B; B), indicating the regulatory function of G9a interactome in COVID-19 immunopathogenesis. 
In addition, ChaC revealed that G9a and Ezh2 interacted with the same translational regulators in ET macrophages and COVID-19 patient PBMCs ( B, 1C, and E). Notably, among the ChaC-identified G9a-interacting translation regulators, the splicing factor SF3B1 and the 40S ribosomal protein Rps14 were identified as patient PBMC- and ET-specific G9a interactors ( B); Bojkova et al. showed that emetine inhibition of Rps14 and pladienolide inhibition of SF3B1 significantly reduced SARS-CoV-2 replication. In correlation with the newly characterized function of EZH2 in translation regulation, numerous members of the EZH2 complex were identified, such as EZH1, EZH2, EED, and SUZ12. Broadly, interactors shared between patient PBMC- or ET-macrophage specific G9a and EZH2 were primarily involved in translation elongation, immunity, angiogenesis and blood coagulation, cytoskeletal rearrangement, and vesicle-mediated transport—all pathways dysregulated by SARS-CoV-2 infection , , , , , , ( C). These UNC0965 ChaC findings were highly correlated with COVID-19 clinicopathology because (1) in nasopharyngeal swabs and/or autopsy samples from severe COVID-19 patients, multiple G9a, EZH2, and METTL3 complex members are observed to be simultaneously dysregulated ( A and S1B), (2) histone mimicry by SARS-CoV-2 encoded ORF8 resulted in simultaneous increases of G9a- and Ezh2-catalyzed methylation at the histone H3 K9 and K27 following SARS-CoV-2 infection, , and (3) EZH2 binds METTL3 and EZH2 regulates IRES-dependent translation. Taken together, these SARS-CoV-2 pathology-correlated findings of ChaC-MS suggested that, via interactions with host translation regulators, such as METTL3 and EZH2, SARS-CoV-2-upregulated G9a noncanonically function in the SARS-CoV-2 hijacked translational regulation of COVID immunopathogenesis.

## G9a-interacting translation pathways promote SARS-CoV-2 infection and replication
In ET macrophages that mimic the immunopathological phenotype of COVID-19, we found that G9a and METTL3 coregulated the m6A-mediated translation of proteins associated with sepsis and ARDS complications of severe COVID-19. , Specifically, our translatome proteomics and m6A RIP-Seq analysis of ET macrophages identified proteins whose translation was G9a-dependent (“G9a-translated” proteins); these proteins included 503 host interactors of SARS-CoV-1/2- and MERS-CoV-encoded proteins, , 11 known COVID-19 markers, , and 66 other coronavirus pathogenesis-related proteins ( D, A, and S2C; also see C). Certain G9a-translated proteins were ChaC-identified G9a interactors and/or non-histone G9a substrates and/or G9a/METTL3-coregulated m6A targets in both patient PBMCs and ET macrophages ( D), which further supported the translational or post-translational function of G9a in COVID-19 pathogenesis. More importantly, genetic perturbation of numerous G9a-translated host interactors of SARS-CoV-1/2- and MERS-CoV-encoded proteins impairs SARS-CoV-2 replication and infection. , These G9a-translated, host-virus interactors were primarily involved in signaling pathways related to gene expression, cell cycle, immunity (e.g., leukocyte activation, neutrophil degranulation), translation (e.g., ribosome/ribonucleoprotein biogenesis), RNA processing (e.g., splicing and transport), and proteostasis (e.g., proteolysis, ubiquitination, autophagy, secretion, exocytosis, protein folding/localization/transport). In fact, all of these pathways are implicated in the SARS-CoV-2 life cycle and COVID-19 pathogenesis , , , , , , ( D). Similarly, several host factors critical for SARS-CoV-2 infection identified in siRNA/CRISPR-based screens are closely related to G9a complex , ( D). These results systematically revealed the associations of G9a interactome and G9a-translated proteins with host-virus interactions and SARS-CoV-2 infection/replication.
To validate the in vivo function of the G9a activity-dependent interactome in SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis, we evaluated multiple G9a- and EZH2-targeting compounds for their antiviral activity against SARS-CoV-2-Nluc in a human alveolar epithelial cell line that overexpresses human ACE2 receptor (A549-hACE2). Briefly, compounds targeting G9a including UNC0642 (EC50 = 0.74 μM; CC50 = 4269 μM; SI > 1000) and MS1262 (EC50 = 2.69 μM; CC50 = 223 μM; SI = 83) showed potent antiviral activity against SARS-CoV-2 with good selectivity indices (SI = CC50/EC50). Similarly, Ezh2 inhibitor UNC1999 (EC50 = 2.241 μM; CC50 = 48.54 μM; SI = 20) hindered SARS-CoV-2 replication in this model system, whereas tazemetostat (EC50 = >10 μM; CC50 = >10 μM; SI = >1), a potent EZH2 inhibitor approved for treatment of epithelioid sarcoma and follicular lymphoma, showed moderate decrease in virus proliferation ( E and F). Thus, drugs that target G9a or its interactor Ezh2 are potent suppressors of SARS-CoV-2 replication at sub/low micromolar concentrations and with good selectivity, making them attractive candidates for COVID-19 therapy.

## SARS-CoV-2 and G9a co-regulate host response pathways primarily at the translational and post-translational levels
To further clarify G9a’s function in the translational regulation of SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis, we investigated G9a inhibitor effects on the SARS-CoV-2 infection-induced transcriptome, m6A RNA epitranscriptome, proteome, phosphoproteome, and secretome. Correspondingly, we conducted COVID-19 pathology-correlated, multiomics analyses of SARS-CoV-2 infected A549-hACE2 cells or ex vivo culture of COVID-19 patient PBMCs with and without UNC0642 (a G9a inhibitor) treatment ( A and A). PCA showed clear separation between mock- and SARS-CoV-2 infected A549-hACE2 cells while, expectedly, UNC0642 treatment led to a distinct omics landscape compared with controls ( B). High reproducibility was observed between biological replicates and across experimental conditions across datasets ( C). In total, high-quality quantification for 49,021 human or viral entities, including 29,756 transcripts, 7,461 protein families, 11,217 phosphoproteins, and 587 secreted proteins, was obtained across datasets. There were 3,211 entries (1,393 RNA-seq, 109 proteome, 1,326 phospho-proteome, and 383 secretome) that showed differential enrichment for indicated comparisons ( D and S3E; ). Effective infection of A549-hACE2 by SARS-CoV-2 was confirmed by a dramatic increase in viral transcripts and encoded proteins ( B). 
After cellular entry mediated by receptors and proteases, SARS-CoV-2 hijacks host translation machinery to induce a hyper-inflammatory response mediated by particular transcriptional factors (TFs). This response leads to a “cytokine-storm” that is implicated in blood hypercoagulability, fibrosis, and micro-thrombosis in severe COVID-19 patients. , Correspondingly, we identified these process-related proteins that showed SARS-CoV-2-induced expression changes, including various viral receptors and proteases, TFs, cytokines (and their receptors), and proteins associated with coagulation, angiogenesis, and fibrosis ( E).
From a systems view, our multiomics-correlated data showed that SARS-CoV-2 infection led to activation of pathways related to (1) viral replication—including coronavirus replication and pathogenesis, phagocytosis, xenobiotic metabolism, and LPS-stimulated MAPK signaling, (2) host innate/adaptive immune response—encompassing the complement cascade, leukocyte extravasation, ILK, IFN, chemokine, NF-kB, CD40, CCR3, and JAK-STAT signaling, (3) coagulation and thrombosis—involving renin-angiotensin, VEGF, endothelin, thrombin, angiopoietin, and erythropoietin signaling, (4) protein translation—including PI3K/AKT, p70S6K/mTOR, EIF2, and ERK/MAPK signaling, (5) cellular homeostasis—involving autophagy, sirtuin signaling, the TCA cycle, and glycolysis, and (6) fibrosis—such as hepatic and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. ( C). In addition, gene ontology enrichment analysis revealed functional terms related to SARS infection, cell cycle, protein phosphorylation, growth factor signaling, and neutrophil/platelet degranulation ( F). In parallel, kinase activity scores estimated from quantitative phospho-proteomic data showed that SARS-CoV-2 infection leads to activation of several kinases including members of the p38/MAPK pathway (MAPK1, MAPK13, ERK, and ERBB3), CK1 (CSNK2A1), AKT/PI3K pathway (RSK and RPS6KA), Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinases (DAPK1 and PRKAA2), PKC family (PRKCE, PRKCA, and PRKCG), DNA damage response (DNA-PK and ATM) and stress response related proteins (SGK1). Kinases predicted to be downregulated included electrolyte homeostasis (WNK1), immune response (CAMK4 and PRKCQ) and cytoskeletal rearrangement (EPHA2 and ROCK) related regulators, among others (row2; G). Similar pathway activation and kinase activity profiles were observed in PBMCs of severe/ICU COVID-19 patients and other in vitro models of SARS-CoV-2 infection. , , , , SARS-CoV-2 infection also resulted in activation of other upstream regulators involved in coagulation/wound healing (EDN1 and FN1) and cytokine production (CSF1, CCL2, IRS2, and NCOA3) and suppression of factors involved in antiviral response (PTPRK and PPP2R1A) ( H). In line with previous reports, , , , , , , network activity analysis also showed that SARS-CoV-2 infection-mediated activation of translation (EIF2/4), hyperinflammation (IL1B, IL-18) and apoptosis/lymphopenia (CASP3/9) related pathways with concomitant suppression of anti-viral/anti-inflammatory response (NF-kB, IFN type-1, and Jak-STAT) in A549-hACE2 cells ( A and 3B). 
We also evaluated the contribution of RNA/protein abundance to changes at either phosphorylation or secretion level. Consistent with reports of increased cytokine secretion , and host phosphorylation landscape rearrangement, for nearly all cases of a significantly changed phosphorylation site and/or secreted protein, we did not observe corresponding significant changes in RNA/protein abundance ( G). These results suggested that, instead of transcriptional regulation, post-translational (i.e., phosphorylation or secretion) regulation is the primary host response to SARS-CoV-2 infection, which would influence protein abundance, at least during the timescale of infection in our study.

## G9a inhibition rescues SARS-CoV-2 hijacked pathways
As evidenced by negative overall correlations (RNA-seq = −0.53; proteome = −0.48; phosphoproteome = −0.47; secretome = −0.42), pharmacologic inhibition of G9a led to reversal of SARS-CoV-2-mediated changes in abundance (RNA-seq, proteome), secretion (secretome), and phosphorylation (phosphoproteome) of various viral/host transcripts and proteins in A549-hACE2 cells ( B). We observed similar reversal in the activity of SARS-CoV-2 dysregulated pathways following G9a inhibition, an effect that was absent in UNC0642-treated mock-infected controls, thereby further associating G9a activity with viral replication and the SARS-CoV-2 dysregulated host response ( C). Specifically, abundance, secretion, and/or phosphorylation patterns of 351 host or viral entities dysregulated following SARS-CoV-2 were reversed upon UNC0642 treatment. Most of these entities showing SARS-CoV-2-induced, UNC0642-reversed patterns in “cluster-1” were related to coronavirus pathogenesis, including viral transcripts and proteins, host receptors for virus entry (notably, ACE2), fibrosis markers, cytokines, and coagulation or angiogenesis-related proteins ( D). Nearly all members of cluster-1 were host interactors of various SARS-CoV-1/2- and MERS-CoV-encoded proteins, further highlighting G9a’s function in promoting expression/phosphorylation of host factors necessary for SARS-CoV-2 infection/replication ( E). Overall, these SARS-CoV-2 promoted, UNC0642-reversed, host-interactors were involved in complexes or pathways related to immune response (e.g., antiviral/stress response, neutrophil degranulation, and cytokine signaling), coagulation or angiogenesis (e.g., platelet aggregation, VEGF signaling), translation (e.g., ribosome biogenesis), energy metabolism (e.g., carbohydrate, carbon, small molecule synthesis), and cell cycle ( F and H).
In parallel, we evaluated the effect of G9a inhibition by UNC0642 on the host response of mock-infected A549-hACE2 cells. Although UNC0642 treatment altered expression, secretion and/or phosphorylation of certain host proteins ( D), overall, there was negligible effect on the global and phosphoproteomic landscape. Thus, G9a had little effect on host phosphorylation-dependent signaling under noninfected circumstances (i.e., row 1 in G). More importantly, in line with global reversal of SARS-CoV-2-mediated changes in abundance and phosphorylation of host and viral proteins, UNC0642 treatment reduced or reversed the kinase activity profile of SARS2 infection (row 3 in G). Coincidently, therapeutic targeting of several G9a-regulated kinases that we identified inhibited SARS-CoV-2 infection and replication in vitro. , , , These kinases are functionally associated with growth factor signaling (e.g., MAPK, PI3K/Akt, and TGF-b), protein translation (e.g., mTOR, p38/MAPK), cell cycle (e.g., CDKs), and cytoskeletal rearrangement (e.g., CSNK2A1/2). Similarly, G9a inhibition did not affect the activities of regulators related to coagulation/wound healing, cytokine production, and antiviral response in mock-infected cells but, in contrast, led to stark reversal in activation of these regulators in SARS-CoV-2-infected A549-hACE cells ( H). Network activity analysis also showed that G9a inhibition reduces activation of pathways related to translation (e.g., EIF2/4), hyperinflammation (e.g., IL1B, IL-18), and apoptosis/lymphopenia (e.g., CASP3/9) in SARS-CoV-2 infected cells while activating pathways related to anti-viral/anti-inflammatory response (e.g., NF-kB, IFN type-1, and Jak-STAT) ( ). On a pathway scale, these data explain G9a’s function in mediating SARS-CoV-2 rewiring of host signaling to promote viral replication and dysregulated immunity. 
Yaron et al. implicated phosphorylation of SARS-CoV-2 proteins in viral replication and pathogenesis. Correspondingly, we identified six phosphorylation sites on SARS-CoV-2 encoded proteins, including Orf9b (Ser50), M (Ser213), and N (Ser78, Ser176, Ser412, and Ser413) ( B; C). These sites are conserved among coronaviruses, indicative of functional constraint. Top kinase families predicted to phosphorylate these sites include casein kinase II (CK2), glycogen synthase kinase (GSK-3), ribosomal s6 kinase (RSK), and protein kinase C (PKC), suggesting that these kinases may contribute to regulation of viral replication. This idea is in line with top upstream kinases predicted by our dataset to be induced by UNC0642 to reverse the phospho-proteomic landscape of SARS2 infection. More importantly, UNC0642 treatment of SARS2-infected cells resulted in marked decrease in phosphorylation at four viral sites, including ones on N (Ser78, Ser176, and Ser412) and Orf9b (Ser50), compared to SARS2 infected cells alone ( B). Mechanistic details and potential functionality of these G9a regulated sites are unknown and warrant further investigation.
In sum, our multiomics correlation analysis revealed that UNC0642 treatment, which had minimal effect in noninfected cells, broadly rescued the widespread SARS-CoV-2-hijacked signaling pathways. Mechanistically, G9a activity regulates the SARS-CoV-2-mediated activities of translation-regulatory kinases such as RSK, supporting the translation-regulatory function of G9a in SARS-CoV-2 replication and the dysregulated host response.

## G9a promotes SARS-CoV-2/m6A-coregulated translation for COVID-19 pathogenesis
METTL3 (m6A writer) stabilizes mRNA transcripts by introducing m6A to promote translation. , In addition, SARS-CoV-2 infection increases expression of m6A regulators, including METTL3, and induces COVID-19 characteristic m6A landscapes in both virus and the host cells or patients, wherein the m6A modification was implicated in viral replication and dysregulation of host immune response. , , , , , , , , , , Similarly, we showed that, in ET macrophages, G9a and METTL3 co-upregulated translation of certain m6A-modified mRNAs associated with sepsis and ARDS. Depletion of G9a or METTL3 restored T cell function and reduced macrophage activation syndrome. Further, in line with reports of increased expression of RBM15 and WTAP in COVID-19 patient PBMCs, we observed increased expression of METTL3 complex components (RBM15, WTAP) and m6A readers (TRA2A) upon SARS-CoV-2 infection, which was suppressed by UNC0642 treatment in SARS-CoV-2 infected cells ( I). In correlation with UNC0642-suppressed SARS-CoV-2 replication ( E and B), our results highlighted a triggering possibility that G9a is the upstream regulator of SARS-CoV-2 hijacked, m6A-mediated translation of proteins associated with COVID-19 pathogenesis. Thus, targeting G9a represents both a virus- and a host-directed mechanism of COVID-19 therapeutic action.
To investigate exactly how active G9a assists SARS-CoV-2 to hijack the host translation pathways, we characterized the function of the ChaC-identified interaction between G9a and METTL3 in SARS-CoV-2 induced pathogenesis. Specifically, we examined whether and how G9a activity would influence the distribution of m6A on cellular transcripts during infection. Accordingly, using MeRIP-Seq, we identified m6A-modified transcripts that had SARS-CoV-2 induced changes and which were reversed by UNC0642 treatment in infected A549-hACE2 cells. Like other omics datasets, we observed a clear principal component separation between mock and infected cells, and UNC0642 treatment resulted in distinct host m6A landscape ( A). Nearly two thousand m6A-modified transcripts were identified with 818 transcripts having differential m6A abundance following infection and/or UNC0642 treatment ( A; A). Coincident with elevated m6A regulator expression in A549-hACE2 cells following SARS-CoV-2 infection ( I), and previous reports for A549-hACE2 cells and COVID-19 patient PBMCs, , , we detected an overall increase in m6A abundance following infection, compared with uninfected controls; this effect was reversed upon UNC0642 treatment as evidenced by the overall negative correlation of −0.48 ( B and 3C). Specifically, SARS-CoV-2 infection led to increased m6A modification in the 5′-UTR and coding sequence (CDS) regions along with a concomitant decrease in m6A abundance around the 3′-UTR of host transcripts. However, UNC0642 treatment reversed these SARS-CoV-2-mediated changes in CDS m6A levels (decrease) and 3′-UTR (increase) regions, and led to decreased m6A in the 5′-UTR regions in general ( C). Most SARS-CoV-2 dysregulated, UNC0642-reversed, m6A-modified transcripts were involved in pathways related to type I/II interferon regulated genes involved in immunity (viral infection, neutrophil degranulation), cell cycle (mitosis, G2/M transition), translation, RNA splicing/processing, cytoskeletal rearrangement, and energy metabolism (carbohydrates, glucose, glycolysis, and steroids) ( B and S4C). Interestingly, most transcripts with differential m6A did not exhibit corresponding changes in mRNA expression ( D); thus, increased m6A following SARS-CoV-2 infection was not due to changes at the transcriptional level but, instead, due to a post-transcriptional host response to virus infection.

## G9a directs translation of viral and host proteins for SARS-CoV-2 replication and dysregulated host response
Following virus entry into host cells, viral mRNAs are “poised” to rapidly undergo translation and produce virus replication proteins and trigger translation of specific mRNAs for the host response. However, little is known about how these poised mRNAs are regulated during SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis. To further elucidate the mechanism of G9a-mediated translation in SARS-CoV-2 replication and associated pathogenesis, we compared transcriptomic (RNA-seq) and LFQ proteomic datasets from the A549-hACE2 cells with versus without SARS-CoV-2 infection or with and without G9a inhibitor treatment. These multi-omics comparisons identified G9a-regulated, poised mRNAs, i.e., genes that showed changes in protein expression without any significant change in corresponding mRNA levels following SARS-CoV-2 infection. As expected, we detected 397 (151 upregulated; 246 downregulated) and 279 (150 upregulated; 129 downregulated) differentially expressed poised mRNAs following SARS-CoV-2 infection with versus without UNC0642 treatment ( D and 3E; B). SARS-CoV-2 infection reshaped host signaling to produce more protein from viral infection, translation/rRNA-biogenesis and cell cycle-related mRNAs, whereas infection reduced translation of host immunity, stress response, and energy metabolism-related genes ( F; columns 1 to 4). More importantly, these SARS-2 mediated changes in expression of host poised mRNAs were largely mitigated (120 total; 48 down/up; 34 up/down) following UNC0642 treatment of infected cells ( F; columns 5–6). Lastly, the majority of SARS-CoV-2 regulated poised mRNAs whose expression was reversed by UNC0642 were also identified as “G9a-translated” proteins that carried G9a/METTL3-coregulated m6A modification in ET macrophages ( F). These results underpinned the crucial activity of G9a in SARS-CoV-2 mediated hijacking of host translational machinery to increase virus production and evade host cell immune responses. Together, we showed that G9a upregulated m6A of select host mRNAs following SARS-CoV-2 infection to promote translation of transcripts functionally related to immune response, rRNA/ribosome, and viral entry/egress.

## SARS-CoV-2-induced, G9a-mediated translation contributes to COVID-19 complications
To ascertain the clinicopathologic relevance of the G9a translational mechanism of COVID-19 pathogenesis, we conducted transcriptomic (RNA-seq), epi-transcriptomic (m6A/RIP-seq), and LFQ proteomic experiments to identify G9a-regulated, poised mRNAs from ex vivo culture of COVID-19 patient derived PBMCs. Briefly, akin to the results from A549-hACE2 cells, we identified 292 differentially expressed proteins that were coded by poised mRNAs, most without a corresponding change in transcript level, following UNC0642 treatment of patient PBMCs ( A; A). Several proteins were host interactors of various SARS-CoV1/2- and MERS-CoV-encoded proteins and, partially by m6A modification of transcripts, their turnover/translation was regulated in a G9a-dependent manner in ET macrophages ( A). Overall, G9a regulates protein expression/abundance of transcripts related to translation, immunity/infection, lipid metabolism, DDR, cellular energetics, ubiquitination, and unfolded protein response in patient PBMCs ( B). Like A549-hACE2 cells, UNC0642 treatment of COVID-19 patient PBMCs also reversed SARS-CoV-2 regulated m6A modification in the CDS (decrease) and 3′-UTR (increase) regions of host transcripts. However, unlike A549-hACE2 cells, overall m6A (particularly in the promotor/5′-UTR region) increased following UNC0642 treatment ( A), possibly owing to cell-typic differences in m6A regulator expression. Overall, most m6A modified transcripts in control (DMSO) patient PBMCs belonged to type I/II interferon regulated genes ( B) involved in adaptive immune response pathways, translation, infection/endocytosis, blood coagulation, and antibiotic response, a pattern largely absent from UNC0642-treated patient PBMCs ( C). 
Notably, several of the virus/G9a-dysregulated and inhibitor-reversed entities identified earlier ( D) are known markers of Long COVID or post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection, blood/plasma markers of severe COVID-19, , and are dysregulated in autopsy samples ( E). Thus, from our A549-hACE2 global proteomics (LFQ+TMT) datasets, we assessed clinical data to identify 88 SARS-dysregulated/G9a-reversed proteins that showed similar aberrant expression in multi-organ proteomics data from autopsy samples ( C), with nearly all transcripts carrying G9a regulated m6A modification in ET macrophages, A549-hACE2 cells, and/or COVID-19 patient PBMCs ( B). As expected, these G9a regulated patient-specific proteins were involved in immunity (neutrophil degranulation/VEGF signaling/stress response), energy metabolism, and cellular transport/localization pathways ( D). Taken together, we show that G9a regulates translation of certain poised mRNAs in COVID-19 patient PBMCs and autopsy samples following SARS-CoV-2 infection, at least partly by the m6A modification pathway, further establishing the clinicopathological relevance of our multi-omics results. More significantly, these COVID-19 proteomic and phosphoproteomic landscapes can be reversed by inhibitor treatment, indicating possible clinical efficacy of G9a inhibitors for COVID-19 therapy or treatment of COVID-19 sequalae.

## Pharmacological intervention of G9a-associating translation machinery suppressed SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis
Because EZH2 may be a key factor in G9a-mediated translational regulation of COVID-19 pathogenesis, we inhibited EZH2 with UNC1999 and measured proteome and phosphoproteome changes in SARS-CoV-2 infected A549-hACE2 cells. UNC1999 treatment resulted in a distinct proteomic landscape compared with controls ( A and 6B; A and S5B) with good reproducibility between and across replicates ( C). From a systems view, UNC1999 treatment led to significant reduction in expression of SARS-CoV-2 encoded proteins along with overall reversal in SARS-CoV-2 induced changes in the host proteome (correlation = −0.349; D) and phosphoproteome (correlation −0.281; E). Notably, similar to effects of G9a inhibition, UNC1999 treatment reversed SARS-CoV-2 induced changes primarily at the phosphoproteomic level as opposed to changes in protein abundance in SARS-CoV-2 infected cells ( D and 6E). Most of these UNC1999-affected phosphoproteins are functionally associated with coronavirus replication, virus entry/egress, immune response, and cholesterol signaling ( F). Specifically, on the basis of quantitative phosphoproteomic identification of SARS-CoV-2-induced proteins whose phosphorylation was reversed by UNC1999, we found that SARS-CoV-2 infection activated multiple kinase-mediated signaling pathways, including MAP/ERK pathway (MAPK1, MAPK13, and ERK), RTK family (EGFR and PDGFR), cell cycle (CDK1/6 CCNB1, and CDC2), Casein kinase (CSNK2A1/2), AKT/PI3K pathway (MTORC1, RPS6KA1/B1, and AKT3), Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinases (DAPK1 and PRKAA2), PKC family (PRKCA, PRKCE, and PRKCG) and DDR (ATM and PLK1) related kinases. In parallel, decreased activity was observed for specific kinases related to cell cycle (CDKN1B) and cytoskeleton regulator (ROCK2) ( G). Overall, the abundance and/or phosphorylation pattern of 235 entities dysregulated by SARS-CoV-2 infection were reversed upon UNC1999 treatment, including several coronavirus pathogenesis related entities, e.g., viral transcripts/proteins, host receptors (ACE2), fibrosis markers, cytokines, coagulation/angiogenesis-related proteins, and transcription factors ( H). Most of these proteins were host interactors of SARS-CoV-1/2- MERS-CoV-encoded proteins, further highlighting Ezh2’s function in promoting expression and/or phosphorylation of host factors necessary for SARS-CoV-2 infection and replication ( I). Together, these SARS-CoV2-induced/UNC1999-reversed host interactors were involved in antiviral/stress response, cell cycle, RNA metabolism, protein transport, and DDR related pathways ( J). 
Pharmacological inhibitors of Ezh2 are approved for treatment of epithelioid sarcoma and follicular lymphoma ; therefore, these inhibitors could be repurposed for COVID-19 therapy. Thus, we investigated the effect of tazemetostat, an FDA-approved inhibitor of Ezh2, on coronavirus-related proteins in clinical setting, i.e., ex vivo culture of PBMCs from two severe COVID-19 patients. Out of 4221 proteins quantified by LFQ-MS, 420 proteins (305 down, 115 up) were differentially regulated following treatment ( A; C). Strikingly, 193 dysregulated proteins (157 down, 36 up) were host interactors of SARS-CoV-1/2- and MERS-encoded proteins, clearly demonstrating that these tazemetostat-downregulated proteins are required for efficient SARS-CoV-2 replication or infection. Overall, tazemetostat-dysregulated proteins were involved in viral-entry (i.e., coronavirus pathogenesis, endocytosis, and phagocytosis), translation (EIF2, mTOR, eIF4, and p70S6K), immune response (interleukin/cytokine, neutrophil, macrophage, inflammation, NF-kB, apoptosis, and autophagy) and cellular metabolism (nucleotide, cholesterol, and amino acid) related signaling ( B). Several proteins in these pathways are among the top hits/host factors necessary for coronavirus pathogenesis, characterized by multiple genome-wide siRNA/CRISPR studies. , , , , , For example, tazemetostat suppressed the expression of 12 host factors known to hinder SARS-CoV-2 infection, including CSTL/VPS34 (spike cleavage and membrane fusion), PIK3C3 (endosome maturation) and ERMP1 (ER/Golgi-trafficking) ( C). Systematic analysis of disease-related signaling cascades showed a strong suppression of viral/bacterial infection and immune system activation ( C), further corroborated by UNC1999-mediated suppression of translation (EIF2/4) and inflammation (NF-kB, IL-6, and IL-8) related network activity ( D and S6E). Together, Ezh2 inhibition compromised SARS-CoV-2-mediated changes to host proteome and phosphoproteome, thereby hindering SARS-CoV-2 replication in A549-hACE2 cells and, more importantly, Ezh2 inhibition suppressed (1) host interactors of SARS-CoV-2 encoded proteins, (2) host factors required for efficient SARS-CoV-2 infection/replication, and (3) critical pathways involved in coronavirus pathogenesis in COVID-19 patient PBMCs. Combined results indicated that EZH2 is a key component of the G9a translational regulatory machinery whereby G9a and Ezh2 cooperatively promote SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis primarily at the translational and/or post-translational level.

## Discussion
We investigated how SARS-CoV-2 hijacks the host response mechanism to produce specific proteins that are the primary executers of COVID-19 pathogenesis. In line with the fact that dysregulated translation of specific proteins directly contributes to disease pathogenesis, we established a noncanonical G9a-METTL3/m6A-Ezh2 axis that broadly regulates widespread SARS-CoV-2-hijacked translation pathways associated with viral replication, hyperinflammation, T cell exhaustion, and suppressed host antiviral response ( D, left panel). In parallel, we revealed the mechanism of inhibitor action for both virus- and host-directed therapeutics of COVID-19, whereby G9a/Ezh2 inhibitors reverse SARS-CoV-2 dysregulated translation processes ( D, right panel). Importantly, these mechanistic findings are highly correlated with in vivo efficacy of G9a inhibitor (UNC0642) in reducing SARS-CoV-2 growth and infection-induced lung damage. Given higher resistance barrier, broader activity against coronavirus strains/species, and potential synergy with other direct-acting antiviral drugs, , our approach of targeting G9a-regulated mechanisms of COVID-19 pathogenesis represents broad-spectrum, precision therapeutics to counter any emerging coronavirus variant and to prevent COVID-19 sequelae.
Evidently, m6A modification is the most prevalent hallmark of SARS-CoV-2-hijacked translation pathways. Increased viral m6A modification stabilized SARS-CoV-2 transcripts to promote replication and translation of SARS-CoV-2 genome , , and to evade RIG-1-dependent sensing and activation of the innate immune response. Simultaneously, SARS-CoV-2 infection rewired the host m6A epitranscriptome to promote programmed cell death in lymphocytes and upregulate expression of pro-viral and inflammatory response genes. , , , As an m6A writer, METTL3 interacts with SARS-CoV-2 RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) in the host to facilitate SARS-CoV-2 RNA m6A modification and viral replication. Similarly, an elevated level of METTL3 and m6A readers, such as RBM15B, IGF2BP1, hnRNPA1, coupled with a decrease in m6A demethylase (FTO, ALKBH5) expression was reported in SARS-CoV-2 infected cell lines , , , and clinical isolates from severe COVID-19 patients. , , , Correspondingly, we identified by ChaC most of m6A regulators (e.g., writers or readers) as the COVID-19 phenotypic interactors and showed that G9a inhibition reversed the SARS-CoV-2-induced m6A landscape ( B and 3C); thus, via the METTL3-m6A axis, G9a regulates select SARS-CoV-2-hijacked translation pathways. For example, in correlation with the observation that compromised antigen presentation by METTL3hiCD155hi macrophage cells diminishes antiviral T cell response against SARS-CoV-2 antigens in COVID-19 patients with coronary artery disease, we found that G9a inhibition reversed the level of select m6A mRNAs associated with macrophage proliferation, T cell dysfunction, and dysregulation of blood coagulation. Presently, in the absence of good clinical/pre-clinical molecules that target m6A regulators (METTL3), our results demonstrate that inhibition of G9a, the upstream regulator of SARS-CoV-2 induced m6A epitranscriptome, represents a host mechanism-directed therapeutic approach to combat SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Multiomics-correlated analysis identified poised mRNAs whose translation was triggered by SARS-CoV-2 infection in a G9a activity-dependent manner. As a result, G9a translates these poised mRNAs into proteins that promote SARS-CoV-2 replication, including ACE2 binding/entry and pathogenesis. Further, phosphoproteomic data showed that G9a regulated host kinase signaling, indicating that most regulation of SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis occurs by post-translational modification (phosphorylation or secretion) as opposed to regulating protein abundance.
Pathogenic influenza and β-coronaviruses (SARS-CoV-1/2 and MERS-CoV) suppress transcription of IFN-regulated genes , , by multiple mechanisms that include increased repressive marks (H3K9me and H3K27me) and histone mimicry employed by SARS-CoV-2. , Interestingly, Hu et al. reported that EZH2 interacts with METTL3 and Yi et al. described a PRC2-independent function for EZH2 in IRES-dependent translation, raising the possibility that EZH2 might be a key component of the G9a-associated translational regulatory machinery that promotes COVID-19 pathogenesis. In this study, we showed that multiple members of G9a, EZH2, and METTL3 complexes were upregulated in nasopharyngeal swabs and/or autopsy samples from severe COVID-19 patients ( A and S1B). G9a and Ezh2 interacted with the same translational regulators in ET macrophage and COVID-19 patient PBMC cells ( B and 1C) to help G9a promote turnover of host interactors of SARS-CoV-1/2- and MERS-encoded proteins and other pro-viral host factors ( D). Drugs targeting G9a and Ezh2 were potent inhibitors of SARS-CoV-2 replication ( E) and reversed multi-omic effects of SARS-CoV-2 infection in A549-hACE2 cells and COVID-19 patient PBMCs ( , , , , and ; ). We identified a mechanistic axis by which G9a remodels viral and host m6A epi-transcriptome following SARS-CoV-2 infection ( and ) to promote viral replication and infection by upregulating expression of various viral receptors (including ACE2), transcription factors, cytokines (and their receptors), coagulation/angiogenesis related proteins, and fibrosis markers in A549-hACE2 and COVID-19 patient PBMCs ( ) with said proteins showing similar dysregulation pattern in multiorgan autopsy samples taken from deceased COVID-19 patients ( ). Together, we showed that G9a inhibition suppressed SARS-CoV-2 replication while reducing inflammatory cytokine and proviral gene expression to enhance antiviral response ( D). Overall, we extend G9a function(s) beyond transcription to translational regulation during COVID-19 pathogenesis.
Our inhibitor proteomics data provided the mechanistic details about in vivo efficacy of inhibitor treatment of COVID-19. In correlation with inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 replication, inflammation, and lung fibrosis by UNC0642 in a hamster infection model, we identified in SARS-CoV-2 infected A549-hACE2 cells numerous proteins showing SARS-CoV-2-induced, UNC0642-reversed/reduced expression (e.g., ADAMTS9, AREG, FOS, IL11, and LOX), secretion (e.g., ACE2, AHSA1, CALR, COMP, FABP5, HMGB1, SERPINH1, SOD1, TXNDC5, and VIM) and/or phosphorylation. These G9a-translated proteins include SARS-CoV-2 receptors (ACE2 and CEACAM1), fibrosis markers, inflammatory cytokines, and angiogenesis/coagulation factors, whose functions are associated with virus replication, inflammation, and lung fibrosis ( D and H; and ). In addition, corresponding to the in vivo effect of DZNep, an S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase inhibitor of Ezh2 that reduces SARS-CoV-2 load and virus-induced inflammation in C57BL/6 mice, Ezh2 inhibition by UNC1999 treatment affected similar G9a-translated pathologic pathways ( H; ). These animal-to-human conserved effects confirmed the in vivo or clinicopathologic accuracy of G9a translation regulatory mechanisms of COVID-19 pathogenesis and the G9a-target mechanism of COVID-19 therapeutics. Interestingly, AMPK-mediated phosphorylation of EZH2 at T311 is known to suppress the activity of the PRC2 complex. Recently, we developed a USP7-based deubiquitinase-targeting chimera (DUBTAC) that stabilizes AMPK. It would be interesting to investigate whether this DUBTAC targeting AMPK also hinders SARS-CoV-2 replication through the EZH2/G9a-driven translation mechanism reported here.
Emerging and future coronaviruses require new therapeutics to increase antiviral breadth, combat emerging resistance and improve tolerability. Drugs that target G9a and its interacting protein EZH2 have known safety profiles and targeting methyltransferase complexes in a transient manner offers several advantages in the regulation of sarbecovirus infection. First, the translation regulatory function of G9a, by way of the G9a-METTL3-m6A axis, is anticipated to be synergistic with existing direct-acting antiviral (remdesivir, molnupiravir, and paxlovid) and host immunomodulatory drugs (dexamethasone). Second, by suppressing secretion of ACE2 ( D), G9a inhibitors can hinder entry of ACE2-dependent viruses including SARS-CoV-1/2, HCoV-NL63, and various bat sarbecoviruses with potential for spillover to humans. , , Third, G9a targets multiple stages of the SARS-CoV-2 replication/life cycle, exhibiting multifaceted effects that include reduction in infection-induced hyperinflammation and thrombosis/lung-fibrosis marker expression, curbing T cell depletion/dysfunction and suppression of viral replication ( D and D; also see ref; ). Fourth, the m6a modification pathway is hijacked by several RNA viruses (e.g., influenza A, HCV, HBV, EV71, and HIV) for propagation and persistence , , , and, accordingly, sites of m6A modification are conserved in various SARS-CoV-2 variants, highlighting a potential evolutionary function of these sites in transmission and epidemiology. Indeed, Batista-Roche et al. reported that SARS-CoV-2 variants (epsilon > B.1.1.519 > alpha/gamma > omicron) and vaccination status (unvaccinated > partially vaccinated > vaccinated) modulated genome and/or viral m6A levels differentially. Taken together, our data suggest that methyltransferase inhibitors (G9a/Ezh2) can be repurposed into broad-spectrum antivirals and represent a novel class of host mechanism-directed therapeutics to counter emerging drug resistance and infection.

## Limitations of the study
Findings in this study should be considered in light of the following limitations, most of which require additional research. First, a comprehensive investigation that discriminates between the canonical (transcriptional repression) and noncanonical (translation promotion) functions of the G9a complex during viral infection is needed. Second, the exact function of EZH2 during SARS-CoV-2 infection requires further investigation. Third, comprehensive studies are needed in animal and/or human models (1) to further understand mechanistic details, (2) to evaluate efficacy and synergy of G9a/Ezh2 inhibition in combination with existing direct-action and immunomodulatory antivirals, and (3) to study potential antiviral activity against other m6A modification dependent RNA viruses (e.g., influenza A, HCV, HBV, EV71, and HIV). Third, the influence (or association) of gender on the results of this study has not been investigated. Lastly, COVID-19 accelerates Alzheimer’s-related symptoms and dementia, , and we recently reported on development of a blood-brain-barrier penetrant G9a inhibitor that reversed m6A modification and expression of AD-dysregulated transcripts to reverse cognitive and noncognitive effects of Alzheimer’s in multiple mouse models. Thus, it will be interesting to study the effects of G9a inhibition in mouse models of Alzheimer’s with COVID-19.

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Requests for further information and resources should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Xian Chen (xianc@email.unc.edu).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.

## Data and code availability

•RNA-seq and MeRIP-seq datasets have been deposited to the GEO repository (GSE282914) and are publicly available as of the date of publication. Mass spectrometry proteomics datasets have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository (PXD058743) and are publicly available as of the date of publication.
•This paper does not report original code.
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.

## Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by grants 10.13039/100000002NIH
R21AG071229, 1R41AG085859-01, 1R41DK133051-01A1, R01 GM133107-01, and UNC University Cancer Research Fund (to X.C.). P.-Y.S. was partially supported by awards from the 10.13039/100019231Sealy & Smith Foundation, the 10.13039/100012394Kleberg Foundation, the 10.13039/100006988John S. Dunn Foundation, the 10.13039/100001023Amon G. Carter Foundation, the Summerfield Robert Foundation, and the Edith and Robert Zinn Foundation. 10.13039/100000002NIH
R35NS116843 (to H.S.), R01HD088626, R01AG084184, and an endowed professorship from the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai (to J.J.). 10.13039/100000002NIH
R01 NS125778 and John S. Dunn Research Foundation (to P.W.). 10.13039/100000002NIH
R35NS097370 and Dr. Miriam and Sheldon G. Adelson Medical Research Foundation (to G.-L.M.). MS1262 is protected by US provisional patent applications jointly filed by Mount Sinai and UNC-CH.

## Author contributions
X.C. conceived, designed, supervised the project, and wrote the manuscript. A.M. analyzed and interpreted data and wrote the manuscript. L.X. performed inhibitor treatment, sample preparation and processing for MS/MS experimental analysis and analyzed data. F.Z., H.S., and J.S. performed RNA-seq, MeRIP-seq, and analyzed the data. X.X., P.-Y.S., and P.W. performed inhibitor treatment and collected antiviral and cytotoxicity data. J.A.W. analyzed RNA-seq and MeRIP-seq data. Y.X., X.Y., and J.J. provided UNC0965, UNC0642, UNC1999, and MS1262 targeting G9a/Ezh2.

## Declaration of interests
X.C. is the founder of TransChromix, LLC. J.J. is a cofounder and equity shareholder in Cullgen, Inc., a scientific cofounder and scientific advisory board member of Onsero Therapeutics, Inc., and a consultant for Cullgen, Inc., EpiCypher, Inc., Accent Therapeutics, Inc, and Tavotek Biotherapeutics, Inc. The Jin laboratory received research funds from Celgene Corporation, Levo Therapeutics Inc., Cullgen, Inc. and Cullinan Oncology, Inc. The indication of using clinically trialed G9a/Ezh2 inhibitors for COVID-19 therapy is protected by US provisional patent application #63/113,211 as “Use of Method”.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Experimental model and study participant details

## Cell lines and primary cultures of human origin
Human alveolar epithelial cells that overexpress hACE2 receptor (A549-hACE2) were maintained in high-glucose DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1% penicillin/streptomycin (P/S; 10,000 U/mL), 1% 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) and 10 μg/mL Blasticidin S. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) isolated from patients with COVID-19 were purchased from RayBiotech Life (Peachtree Corners, GA) and were maintained in RPMI 1640 containing 10% FBS, 100 units/ml P/S, 2 mM L-glutaMax (Gibco), 10 mM HEPES and 1 mM Sodium Pyruvate at a density of 1.5 × 106 cells/ml. Patient PBMC related metadata (gender, age, disease severity, etc.) is provided in B. The cells were treated with UNC0642, MS1262, UNC1999 or TAZVERIK (Taz, Tazemetostat) at 1 μM for 0 to 48 h before being harvested for subsequent proteomic, RNA-seq, and molecular/cell biological studies. All cells were grown at 37°C in humidified air with 5% carbon dioxide and tested negative for mycoplasma.

## COVID-19 patient data
Publicly available shotgun transcriptome (bulk RNA-seq), spatial omics (GeoMx), and isothermal profiling datasets along with associated metadata from dbGAP (accession #38851 and ID phs002258.v1.p1), GEO (GSE169504) and Mendeley (https://doi.org/10.17632/f4wh42nshy.2) were used to investigate changes in expression of G9a, EZH2, and METTL3 complex members ( A and S1B), and G9a/METTL3-coregulated m6A modified transcripts ( C) in naso/oropharyngeal swabs (n = 669) and autopsy samples (liver, kidney, heart, lung, lymph node) from COVID-19 patients (n = 39). , Additional information is provided in relevant figure legends. Processed bulk RNA-seq data is also available online for simple visualization and exploration of gene expression and enriched pathways (https://covidgenes.weill.cornell.edu/). , 

## Method details

## Chemicals and reagents
Cell culture media, other components, and fetal bovine serum were obtained from Gibco/ThermoFisher. Trypsin was purchased from Promega. A549-hACE2 cell line was purchased from InvivoGen. All chemicals used during preparation of proteomic samples were HPLC-grade unless specifically indicated. Inhibitors (UNC0642, UNC1999 and MS1262) and probes (UNC0965, UNC2399) targeting G9a/Ezh2 were synthesized in Dr. Jian Jin’s lab. Tazemetostat (Cat. S7128) was purchased from Selleck. TMT 11-plex isobaric labeling reagent kit was purchased from Thermo-Fisher (Cat. A34808).

## SARS-CoV-2-Nluc antiviral assay
A549-hACE2 and SARS-CoV-2-Nluc were used for evaluating the compounds as described. Briefly, A549-hACE2 cells (12,000 cells per well in phenol red-free medium containing 2% FBS) were plated into a white opaque 96-well plate (Corning). On the next day, 3-fold serial dilutions of compounds were prepared in DMSO. One microliter of compound was mixed with 99 μL of SARS-CoV-2-Nluc virus that was diluted in phenol red-free culture medium containing 2% FBS. Compound-virus mixtures (50 μL) were added to each well of the 96-well plates containing A549-hACE2 cells (MOI 0.025). At 48 h post-infection, 50 μL of Nanoluciferase substrates (Promega) were added to each well. Luciferase signals were measured using a Synergy Neo2 microplate reader (BioTek). The relative luciferase signals were calculated by normalizing the luciferase signals of the compound-treated groups to the signals of the DMSO-treated groups (set as 100%). The relative luciferase signal (Y-axis) versus the log10 values of compound concentration (X-axis) was plotted in software Prism 9. The EC50 (compound concentration for reducing 50% of luciferase signal) was calculated using a nonlinear regression model (four parameters). Two experiments were performed with technical duplicates.

## Cytotoxicity assay
A549-hACE2 cells (5000 cells per well in phenol red-free medium containing 2% FBS) were plated into a clear flat-bottom 96-well plate (Nunc). On the next day, 3-fold serial dilutions of compounds were prepared in DMSO. The compounds were further diluted 100-fold. Diluted compound solutions (50 μL) were added to each well of the cell plates. At 72 h post-treatment, 4 μL of Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8; Sigma-Aldrich) was added to each well. After incubation at 37°C for 90 min, absorbance at 450 nm was measured using the Cytation5 multi-mode microplate reader (BioTek). The relative cell viability was calculated by normalizing the absorbance of the compound-treated groups to the absorbance of the DMSO-treated groups (set as 100%). The relative cell viability (Y-axis) versus the log10 values of compound concentration (X-axis) were plotted in software Prism 8. The CC50 (compound concentration for reducing 50% of cell viability) was calculated using a nonlinear regression model (four parameters). Two experiments were performed with technical duplicates.

## m6A RNA immunoprecipitation sequencing (m6A/MeRIP-seq) and data analysis
The m6A/MeRIP-Seq was performed as described with some modifications. Briefly, total RNA was extracted from A549-hACE2 and patient PBMCs using TRIzol (Life Technologies) followed by purification using illustraTM RNA spin Mini kit (GE Healthcare, UK). mRNA was isolated from 10 μg total RNA using Dynabeads Oligo (dT)25 (Thermo Fisher; 61006) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Ten percent of a total of 150 ng mRNA was used as input, while the rest was incubated with 3 μg anti-m6A polyclonal antibody (Synaptic Systems; 202003) that was pre-conjugated to Dynabeads Protein A (Thermo Fisher; 10001D) in 500 μL IP buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Igepal CA-630) for 2 h at 4°C. After washing the beads twice with IP-buffer and twice with high-salt wash buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 0.1% Igepal CA-630) for 5 min each, the m6A-tagged mRNA was eluted using 100 μL IP-buffer containing 6.7 mM N6-Methyladenosine (Sigma-Aldrich; M2780) and 40 U RNase Inhibitor (NEB, M0314S) and then recovered with RNA Clean and Concentrator-5 spin columns (Zymo; R1015).
The input and m6A-IPed mRNA were subjected to library generation using the SMART-seq protocol as described. For first strand cDNA synthesis, the mRNA was mixed with 0.25 μL RNase inhibitor and 1 μL CDS primer (5′-AAGCAGTGGTATCAACGCAGAGTACT30VN-3′) and heated to 70°C for 2 min. Then the mixture containing 0.5 μL of 100 mM DTT, 0.3 μL of 200 mM MgCl2, 1 μL of 10 mM dNTPs, 0.25 μL RNase inhibitor, 1 μL of 10 μM TSO primer (5′-AAGCAGTGGTATCAACGCAGAGTACATrGrGrG-3′), 2 μL of 5X SMARTScribe RT buffer and 0.5 μL SMARTScribe reverse transcriptase (Takara, 639536) was added to perform reverse transcription. The cDNA was then amplified by Advantage Polymerase Mix (TAKARA, 639201) with IS primer (5′-AAGCAGTGGTATCAACGCAGAGT-3′). After purification with 0.8X AMPure XP beads (Fisher Scientific, A63880), the fragmentation of 100 pg cDNA was performed with EZ Tn5 Transposase (Lucigen, TNP92110). Fragments of cDNA were amplified by KAPA HiFi hotstart readymix (EMSCO/FISHER, KK2601) with the Nextera i7 primer and Nextera i5 primer. The DNA was purified with 0.8X AMPure XP beads and quantified by qPCR with KAPA Library Quantification Kit (Fisher, NC0078468). The DNA from different samples was pooled at equal molar amounts, and the final sequencing library was loaded at concentrations of 2.7 pM and sequenced on a NextSeq 550 (Illumina) for single-end sequencing.
Raw sequencing data were de-multiplexed using bcl2fastq2 v2.17.1.14 (Illumina) and adapters were removed using Trimmomatic-0.32 software. Then the Input and m6A-IP reads were mapped to a combined reference genome consisting of human (GRCh38/hg38) and Ensembl SARS-CoV-2 isolate Wuhan-Hu-1 genomes (Genome Assembly: ASM985889v3, Accession: GCA_009858895.3; Sequence: MN908947.3) using STAR v.2.7.6a. Only uniquely mapping reads at the exon level for each gene were quantified and summarized to gene counts. Differential gene expression analysis was performed using DESeq2 v.1.32.0. Resulting bam files were sorted and indexed using SAMtools v.1.1, and MACS2 v.2.2.7.1 was used for m6A peak calling using the bam files for each m6A-IP/input pair. The R packages GenomicRanges v1.36.1 and AnnotationHub v.3.4.0 were used to identify genes overlapping the peaks determined by MACS2, and CHIPseeker v.1.30.3 was used to create profile plots.

## ChaC pull-down with biotin-conjugated inhibitors UNC0965 and UNC2399
ChaC pull-downs were conducted as described, with a few modifications. Briefly, cell pellets were resuspended in extraction buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl at pH7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% IGPAL-CA630 and 1 mM PMSF) followed by brief sonication and centrifugation to collect supernatant. Cell lysate (1 mg) was incubated overnight at 4°C with 2 nmol UNC0965/UNC2399 pre-coupled to 50 μL neutravidin-agarose (Thermo-Fisher) and washed thrice with 1 mL extraction buffer to remove nonspecific proteins. For on-beads sampling and processing, five additional washes with wash buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM PMSF) were used to remove residual detergents. On-beads tryptic digestion was performed with 100 μL buffer containing 2 M urea, 25 mM Tris-HCl pH8.0, 1 mM DTT, 400 ng trypsin (Promega) for 30 min at room temperature on a mixer (Eppendorf). Partial digests were collected, and beads eluted twice more with 100 μL elution buffer (2 M urea, 25 mM Tris-HCl pH8.0, 5 mM iodoacetamide), incubated for 30 min at room temperature with shaking. Combined eluates were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid at final concentration of 1% (TFA, mass spec grade, Thermo-Fisher) and desalted with homemade C18 stage tips.

## Proteomics sample preparation
Patient PBMCs and A549-hACE2 cells were lysed in 2x Laemmli buffer followed by protein precipitation using a methanol-chloroform method. The resulting supernatant was mixed with Trizol LS reagent (Invitrogen, Cat 10296010), and proteins were further isolated and precipitated following the manufacturer’s instructions. Protein pellets were resuspended in 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, reduced with dithiothreitol (5 mM final) for 30 min at room temperature, and alkylated with iodoacetamide (15 mM final) for 45 min in the dark at room temperature. Samples were diluted 4-fold with 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM CaCl2 and digested with trypsin at 1:100 (w/w, trypsin:protein) ratio overnight at ambient temperature. Peptides were desalted using homemade C18 stage tips, and their concentrations were determined (Peptide assay, Thermo 23275). The cleaned peptides were used for LC-MS analysis or for additional labeling.
For TMT-labeling, 100 μg of each peptide sample was used for labeling with isobaric stable tandem mass tags (TMT11, Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) following manufacture instruction. The mixture of labeled peptides was desalted on Cep-Pak light C18 cartridge (Waters). Phosphopeptides were enriched with High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Scientific). Non-phosphopeptides (100 μg) were fractionated into 24 fractions using C18 stage tips and 10 mM TMAB (pH 8.5) containing 5–50% acetonitrile.
For secretome studies, secreted proteins were isolated from mixtures of culture supernatant and Trizol LS reagent (Invitrogen, Cat 10296010) following manufacturer’s instruction. Resulting protein pellets were solubilized in buffer containing 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0) and 8 M urea, then processed in the same way as that for proteome to obtain purified peptides. LFQ was used for protein quantification of secretome.

## LC-MS/MS analysis details parameters
Dried peptides were dissolved in 30 μL of 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile. One microgram phosphopeptides or 0.5 μg non-phosphopeptides from each fraction was analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF-X coupled with an Easy nanoLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Peptides were loaded on to a nanoEase MZ HSS T3 Column (100 Å, 1.8 μm, 75 μm × 250 mm, Waters). Parameters for MS and LC are listed in A.

## Quantification and statistical analysis

## Raw proteomics data processing and analysis
Mass spectra were processed, and peptide identification/quantification performed using MaxQuant software version 2.1.0.0 (Max Planck Institute, Germany). All protein database searches were performed against the UniProt human protein sequence database (UP000005640). False discovery rates (FDR) for peptide-spectrum match (PSM) and protein assignment were set at 1%. Search parameters included up to two missed cleavages at Lys/Arg, oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was considered as a static modification. Peptide identifications are reported by filtering of reverse and contaminant entries and assigning to their leading razor protein. Data processing and statistical analysis were performed using Perseus (Version 1.6.10.50). Protein quantitation was performed on biological replicates and a two-sample t-test statistic was used with a p-value of 5% to report statistically significant protein or phosphopeptide abundance fold-changes. LFQ was used during ChaC-MS ( B, 1C, and C–S1E), G9a/Ezh2-inhibitor treatment of COVID-19 patient PBMCs (5a & S6), and secretome studies (parts of and ). All other experiments used TMT-labeling. To correct for batch/experiment effect, TMT intensities were normalized to the replicate with lowest total intensity (for global, phospho & secretome studies). ChaC-MS intensities were not normalized, as intensity is directly proportional to the strength of interaction with bait protein (instead empty/negative-probe controls were used to screen out false positives).

## Analysis of functional category and networks
Canonical pathway, biological function and upstream regulator analyses were performed using IPA (https://www.ingenuity.com/), DAVID (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/), Metascape (https://metascape.org/), and STRING (http://string-db.org/). Figures were generated using RStudio and interactome analyses were performed in Cytoscape v3.8.0. When comparing two conditions (overall m6A-modification levels), Mann Whitney–U test was used. A p value ≤ 0.05 was considered as significant. When p values were depicted as asterisks the following applies: ∗ <0.05; ∗∗ <0.01; ∗∗∗ <0.001; ∗∗∗∗ <0.0001. For other figures, the statistical test and exact p value used for calculating the significance of each graph is indicated in the figure legend.

 

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S16

## Table S1. Summary of patient-PMBC/ET-macrophage ChaC-MS results along with translatome & meRIP-Seq data for coronavirus pathogenesis, related proteins from ET macrophage cells, related to Figures 1, S1C–S1E, and S2
(A) Table summarizing ChaC-MS results for covid19 patient PBMC specific G9a/Ezh2 interactors.
(B) Table with lists of ChaC-MS identified G9a/Ezh2 interactors in patient-PBMC & endo-toxin tolerant (ET) macrophage cells.
(C) Table summarizing translatome proteomics and meRIP-Seq results for coronavirus pathogenesis related proteins in ET macrophage cells.

## Table S2. Summary of multiomic analysis of SARS-CoV-2/mock infected A549-hACE2 cells with or without UNC0642 treatment, related to Figures 2, 3, and S3
(A) Table summarizing RNA-Seq data from SARS-CoV-2/mock infected A549-hACE2 cells with/without UNC0642 treatment.
(B) Table summarizing TMT labeled global proteomics data from SARS-CoV-2/mock infected A549-hACE2 cells with/without UNC0642 treatment.
(C) Table summarizing TMT labeled phospho-proteomics data from SARS-CoV-2/mock infected A549-hACE2 cells with/without UNC0642 treatment.
(D) Table summarizing LFQ based secretome data from SARS-CoV-2/mock infected A549-hACE2 cells with/without UNC0642 treatment.
(E) Summary of 3211 significantly regulated entities in transcriptome, global/phospho-proteome and secretome datasets from UNC0642 treated A549-hACE2 cells with relevant annotations.
(F) Table summarizing results of pathway enrichment & Activation score estimation based on significant entities tabulated in E.

## Table S3. Summary of multiomic data to identify differentially m6A modified transcripts (meRIP-Seq) and poised-mRNAs (RNA-Seq, LFQ-MS) in SARS-CoV-2/mock infected A549-hACE2 cells with or without UNC0642 treatment, related to Figures 4 and S4
(A) Table summarizing meRIP-Seq results from UNC0642 treated A549-hACE2 cells.
(B) Table with relevant RNA-Seq (transcriptomics) and LFQ-MS (global proteomics) data from A549-hACE2 cells for identification of SARS-CoV-2/G9a regulated poised-mRNAs.

## Table S4. Summary of multiomic data (proteomics, RNA/meRIP-Seq) to identify poised-mRNAs in COVID-19 patient-derived PBMCs & correlated analysis of G9a regulated poised-mRNAs in multi-organ autopsy samples, related to Figures 5 and S5
(A) Table summarizing multiomic data from UNC0642 treated COVID-19 patient-derived PBMCs along with relevant annotations.
(B) Table looking at correlated expression of poised-mRNAs from A549-hACE2 cells in autopsy samples from covid19 patients.

## Table S5. Summary of global/phospho-proteomic data from UNC1999 treated mock/SARS2 infected A549-hACE2 cells, related to Figures 6 and S6
Analysis of tazemetostat treated COVID-19 patient PBMCs is also included.
(A) Table summarizing TMT labeled global/phospho-proteomics data from SARS-CoV-2/mock infected A549-hACE2 cells with/without UNC1999 treatment.
(B) Table summarizing results of pathway enrichment & Activation score estimation based on significant entities tabulated in A.
(C) Table summarizing LFQ-MS results of Tazemetostat treatment of covid19 patient PBMCs.

## Table S6. Summary of LC-MS parameters and COVID19 patient PBMCs used in this study, related to Figures 1–6 and S1–S6
(A) Table summarizing details of LC-MS parameters for different global/phospho/secretome datasets in this study.
(B) Table summarizing information about COVID-19 patient PBMCs used in the study.

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2025.112632.