pmcImmunol Cell BiolImmunol Cell Biol379blackwellopenIMCBImmunology and Cell Biology0818-96411440-1711pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleWiley Open Access CollectionPMC12972239PMC12972239.112972239129722394173327910.1111/imcb.70081IMCB70081ICB-25-OAR-02261Original ArticleOriginal ArticleTreg cells retain stable lineage commitment during pregnancy in mice after late gestation inflammatory challenge
Treg cells are lineage‐stable in pregnant miceKL Foyle et al.
FoyleKerrie L kerrie.foyle@adelaide.edu.auGreenElla S Walker‐RogersJessie R TranHa M OlsonDavid M MoldenhauerLachlan M RobertsonSarah A 

1

The Robinson Research Institute and Adelaide Medical School
University of Adelaide
Adelaide
SA
Australia

2

Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Pediatrics and Physiology
University of Alberta
Edmonton
AB
Canada

*
Correspondence

Kerrie L Foyle, The Robinson Research Institute, Adelaide Medical School, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia.
E‐mail: kerrie.foyle@adelaide.edu.au

a
Equal contributors.
242202632026104350917310.1111/imcb.v104.3276311
22122025
07102025
2012026
100320261103202611032026© 2026 The Author(s). Immunology & Cell Biology published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of the Australian and New Zealand Society for Immunology, Inc.https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

## Abstract
Inflammation is a major driver of preterm birth, a common pregnancy disorder and the leading cause of childhood death. T regulatory (Treg) cells are essential mediators of maternal fetal tolerance and are critical for constraining uterine inflammation. In some tissue settings, loss of Foxp3 expression can cause instability in Treg cell lineage commitment, elevated production of proinflammatory cytokines and compromised suppressive function. Whether preterm birth susceptibility is associated with loss of lineage fidelity and adoption of proinflammatory phenotypes in Treg cells is unknown. In this study, we investigated the lineage stability of Treg cells in vivo in pregnant mice using a Foxp3 fate‐mapping system and models of preterm birth induced by late‐gestation inflammatory challenge with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or interleukin‐1β (IL‐1β). Ex‐Foxp3‐expressing (ex‐Foxp3) cells were observed in the uterus‐draining lymph nodes (udLNs) in non‐pregnant mice and in similar abundance across normal gestation, and a proportion expressed proinflammatory cytokines IFNγ and/or IL‐17A. Bulk RNA‐sequencing of sorted Treg and ex‐Foxp3 cells from late‐gestation udLNs revealed substantial loss of the Treg cell lineage program in ex‐Foxp3 cells, characterized by reversal in expression of canonical Treg cell genes and pathways. Late gestation LPS or IL‐1β administration to induce preterm birth did not expand the ex‐Foxp3 cell population in the uDLNs or uterine decidua. We conclude that uterine Treg cells exhibit a high level of lineage stability in pregnancy regardless of proinflammatory challenge. Whether there is any biological or pathophysiological significance of ex‐Foxp3 cells in gestational tissues remains to be defined.

In this study, we used Foxp3‐fatemapping mice to examine the cell lineage stability of Treg cells in pregnancy. Ex‐Foxp3 cells were identified in gestational tissues. However, Treg cells retained lineage stability with no increased ex‐Foxp3 generation, regardless of inflammatory challenges that induce preterm birth. 

Ex‐Foxp3 cellslineage stabilitypregnancypreterm birthreproductionTreg cells
Channel 7 Children's Research Foundation10.13039/501100001075
22‐20669673
National Health and Medical Research Council10.13039/501100000925
ID1198172
Canadian Institutes of Health Research10.13039/501100000024
ID421180 Dams administered IL‐1β showed an overall increase in udLN leukocytes (Supplementary figure  ), including an increased number of CD4+ T cells (Figure  ), although CD4+ T cells were not specifically enriched as a proportion of CD45+ leukocytes (Supplementary figure  ). Similarly, while Foxp3+ Treg cells did not increase as a proportion of CD4+ T cells (Figure  ), there was an increased number of Foxp3+ cells (Figure  ). An increase in the total number of both thymic Treg (tTreg) and peripheral Treg (pTreg) cells was seen, but tTreg cells comprised a smaller proportion of the Treg cell pool following inflammatory challenge (Figure  , Supplementary figure  ).
Treg cells exhibiting phenotypic plasticity in other studies often adopt expression of Th17 cell‐associated molecules. We therefore next examined expression of the Th17‐related molecules RORγt, IL‐17A and CCR6 by Foxp3+ cells. The proportions of Foxp3+ cells expressing RORγt or IL‐17A did not change after IL‐1β challenge, although due to the increase in total Foxp3+ cells, overall there were 1.84‐fold more IL‐17A+ Treg cells (Figure  , Supplementary figure  ). Also, the level of IL‐17A expression by IL‐17A+ Treg cells was increased, as indicated by a 1.23‐fold increased mean fluorescence index (MFI; Figure  ). A similar pattern was observed for CCR6 expression, whereby there was no significant increase in the proportion of CCR6+ Treg cells in IL‐1β‐treated mice, although they increased 1.78‐fold in number and exhibited a 1.3‐fold elevated level of CCR6 expression (Figure  ). We also investigated the expression of Th1‐associated molecules Tbet and IFNγ and found non‐significant trends for increased Tbet+ and IFNγ+ Treg cell numbers, although their proportions among Treg cells were unchanged (Supplementary figure  ). The level of IFNγ expression by Treg cells indicated by MFI was also unchanged (data not shown).
Tconv cells were increased 1.5‐fold in number after IL‐1β challenge, but were not enriched as a proportion of CD4+ T cells (Figure  ). IFNγ+ Th1 cells comprised a very small population (<3% of CD4+ T cells, Figure  ), and while their proportion among CD4+ T cells decreased, their total number was unchanged (Figure  ). IL‐1β challenge did not change the proportion or number of IL‐17A+ Th17 cells (Figure  ), or the MFI of IL‐17A or IFNγ expressed by Th1 or Th17 cells (data not shown).

## Ex‐Foxp3 cells are present throughout gestation and are predominantly Nrp1− cells
The increased level of expression of Th17‐related molecules IL‐17A and CCR6 by Treg cells after IL‐1β administration in late gestation raised the question of whether these Treg cells exhibit lineage instability. To examine whether Treg cells undergo loss of Foxp3 in pregnancy, we employed an in vivo Foxp3 fate‐mapping system. Foxp3‐eGFPCre mice were crossed with Rosa26RFP mice to generate Foxp3eGFP‐CreRosa26RFP Treg cell fate‐mapping mice (Supplementary figure  ). In these mice, expression of Cre recombinase under the control of the Foxp3 promoter leads to recombination of two loxP sites flanking a STOP codon that precedes RFP transcription, resulting in excision of the STOP codon. Therefore, all cells that initiate Foxp3 expression become permanently marked by RFP, including cells that later switch off Foxp3 expression, while current Foxp3 expression is simultaneously marked by GFP. Therefore, Treg cells are identified as RFP+GFP+ cells, while RFP+GFP− cells represent a population of ex‐Foxp3 cells converted from Treg cells, or alternatively a population of CD4+ T cells that previously expressed Foxp3 at a low level without committing to the Treg cell transcriptional program of differentiation. 

Using the Foxp3 fate‐mapping model, we looked for ex‐Foxp3 cells in the udLNs of non‐pregnant mice and pregnant mice across gestation including around embryo implantation (GD4.5), mid‐late gestation (GD16.5), and late gestation (GD18.5) (Figure  ). As well as udLN, we examined spleen to inform on systemic effects. The total cellularity of the udLNs and spleen and the number of CD4+ and CD8+ cells in these tissues did not change across gestation (Supplementary figure  ). In the udLNs, the number of RFP+GFP+ Treg cells did not change across timepoints (Figure  ). However, as a proportion of CD4+ T cells, their frequency at GD18.5 was increased 1.8 and 2.0‐fold compared to non‐pregnant and early pregnancy (GD4.5), respectively (Figure  ). tTreg cells (Nrp1+) comprised the majority (76–80%) of Treg cells in the udLNs at all time‐points (Figure  ). In the spleen, Treg cells were also not significantly altered in proportion or number, and splenic tTreg cells were similarly more abundant than pTreg cells across gestation (Supplementary figure  ).
 A small population of RFP+GFP− ex‐Foxp3 cells was present in the udLNs at all time‐points. In non‐pregnant mice, ex‐Foxp3 cells were 3.6% of udLN CD4+ T cells, and they did not change in proportion or number in non‐pregnant versus pregnant mice, or over the course of pregnancy (Figure  ). The majority of udLN ex‐Foxp3 cells, ranging from 52% to 62% across gestation, were Nrp1−. In contrast, Nrp1+ cells comprised only 39–48% of the total udLN ex‐Foxp3 pool, which was 1.6 to 2.1‐fold less than for RFP+GFP+ Treg cells (Figure  ). Ex‐Foxp3 cells were also present in the spleen, representing 6.2% of CD4+ T cells in non‐pregnant mice, but their abundance did not change over gestation (Supplementary figure  ). As in the udLNs, splenic Nrp1− cells comprised a greater proportion of ex‐Foxp3 cells compared with Treg cells (Supplementary figure  ). The fact that Nrp1− cells contributed to a larger fraction of the ex‐Foxp3 pool in udLNs and spleen is consistent with ex‐Foxp3 cells arising from either unstable pTreg cells or briefly activated T conventional (Tconv) cells.
To further determine whether increased conversion to ex‐Foxp3 occurred during pregnancy, we measured the ex‐Foxp3:Treg cell ratio, expecting it would be increased if more Treg cells converted to ex‐Foxp3 cells. In contrast, there was a significant decrease in the ratio of ex‐Foxp3:Treg cells in the udLN at GD18.5 compared to GD4.5, indicating that overall, Treg cells do not exhibit increased instability and conversion to ex‐Foxp3 cells in late gestation (Figure  ). Instead, they appear to remain stable or may even increase in stability as gestation progresses. In the spleen, the ratio of ex‐Foxp3:Treg cells was unchanged across gestation, implying that Treg cells are stable in pregnancy at the systemic level (Supplementary figure  ).
Like Treg cells and ex‐Foxp3 cells, Tconv cells were unchanged in number in the udLN across gestation. However, there was a decrease in the proportion of Tconv cells in late gestation (GD18.5) compared to early pregnancy (GD4.5) (Figure  ), in contrast to the increase in the proportion of Treg cells (Figure  ). In the spleen, Tconv cell proportion and number were unchanged across pregnancy (Supplementary figure  ).

## Ex‐Foxp3 cells maintain proinflammatory cytokine expression during pregnancy
We next investigated whether the ex‐Foxp3 cells found in the udLNs and spleen expressed T helper cytokines that might mediate pathogenic effects. Expression of the Th1 and Th17 cytokines IFNγ and IL‐17A was measured in ex‐Foxp3 cells as well as in Treg cells and Tconv cells across gestation.
Expression of IFNγ or IL‐17A in udLN Treg cells was rare in non‐pregnant dams and in early pregnancy GD4.5, at <0.8% and 1.6%, respectively (Figure  ). By GD16.5, there was a non‐significant trend to a 5.9‐fold increase in udLN Treg cells expressing IFNγ compared to GD4.5 (P = 0.076). There was no significant change in IL‐17A expression by Treg cells in the udLNs in late gestation, and the mean proportion of Treg cells expressing either of these cytokines at GD18.5 was still relatively small, at 1.5% and 3.1% for IFNγ and IL‐17A, respectively. Similarly low proportions and numbers of Treg cells expressing IFNγ or IL‐17A were observed in the spleen, and this did not significantly change across pregnancy (Supplementary figure  ).
 Compared to Treg cells, a larger proportion of udLN ex‐Foxp3 cells expressed IFNγ or IL‐17A in non‐pregnant dams and early pregnancy (Figure  ). In fact, the mean expression of IFNγ in ex‐Foxp3 cells in the udLNs at GD4.5 was 4.4%, or 19.1‐fold higher than in Treg cells. Similarly, the mean proportion of IL‐17A‐expressing ex‐Foxp3 cells at GD4.5 was 14.8‐fold higher than Treg cells, at 11.3% in the udLNs. In the spleen, a higher proportion of IFNγ expression was observed in the ex‐Foxp3 population, at 6.7% on GD4.5, while the proportion of IL‐17A‐expressing ex‐Foxp3 cells was 5.8% at GD4.5, which was lower than in udLNs (Supplementary figure  ). Expression of these cytokines did not change in ex‐Foxp3 cells across gestation in either the udLNs or spleen.
The frequency of IFNγ+ or IL‐17A+ cells among Tconv cells was lower than for ex‐Foxp3 cells across all of gestation in both the udLNs and spleen (Figure  , Supplementary figure  ). At GD4.5, a mean of 1.3% and 1.4% of udLN Tconv cells, respectively, expressed IFNγ or IL‐17A, which was 3.3 and 8.3‐fold lower than ex‐Foxp3 cells at the same time‐point, and not much higher than in Treg cells (Figure  ). In the spleen, 5.4% of Tconv cells were IFNγ+ at GD4.5, while 1.3% expressed IL‐17A (Supplementary figure  ). There was no significant increase in cytokine expression among Tconv cells at late gestation in either the udLNs or spleen.
These findings indicate that although ex‐Foxp3 cells represent a much smaller population than Tconv cells, they are enriched for proinflammatory cytokine expression. However, ex‐Foxp3 cell expression of these cytokines does not appear to increase in late gestation in normal pregnancy.

## Ex‐Foxp3 cells do not express the canonical Treg cell lineage transcriptional program
The presence of ex‐Foxp3 cells in the udLN across gestation led us to investigate whether these cells have a distinct transcriptional profile compared to Treg cells. Ex‐Foxp3 cells and Treg cells were sorted from the udLN on GD18.5 and compared by RNA‐sequencing (Figure  ).
 Principal component analysis showed clustering of samples based on their cellular identity as Treg or ex‐Foxp3 cells on the first component PC1, representing 66.3% of the variation in the data (Figure  ). Differential gene expression analysis revealed differential expression of 7840 genes (adj.P < 0.05, no fold‐change (lfc) threshold), of which approximately half were upregulated and half downregulated. Among these, 418 genes showed a lfc >1, equivalent to at least 2‐fold change in expression, with 284 of these genes upregulated and 134 downregulated in ex‐Foxp3 cells (Figure  , Table  ).
 The 2 most significantly suppressed genes in ex‐Foxp3 cells were Foxp3 and Il2ra encoding the key Treg cell identifying molecules Foxp3 and CD25 (Figure  ). A suite of other genes associated with Treg cell identity or function were similarly downregulated, including Ikzf4 (encoding Eos), Ctla4, Tnfrsf18 (GITR), Tnfrsf4 (CD134/OX40), Tnfrsf9 (CD137/4‐1BB), Lrrc32 (GARP), Rgs1, Ebi3, and many others (Table  ). There was upregulation of some genes associated with improved Treg cell fitness, function, or survival, including Themis, Sema4a and Vdr. There were 8 identified differentially expressed transcription factors, among which Foxp3, Gata1, Ikzf4 (Eos) and Tcf7l2 (TCF‐4) were downregulated, while Tcf7 (TCF‐1), Tox2, Id2 and Zeb2 were upregulated (Figure  ).
Among the transcriptional changes in ex‐Foxp3 cells, we also identified downregulation of genes that suppress T helper cell programming including the IL‐4/STAT6‐suppressing genes Socs2 and Cish (Figure  ). Furthermore, there was upregulation of T helper cell effector molecules including the cytokines Il21, Il2, Il4 and Ifng (Figure  ). Other effector molecules that were differentially expressed included granzymes, with Gzmb and Gzmc downregulated and Gzmk upregulated in ex‐Foxp3 cells (Figure  ). Chemokine receptor expression was dysregulated in ex‐Foxp3 cells, such that Cxcr5, Cxcr6 and Xcr1 were upregulated and Ccr3, Ccr6 and Ccr8 were downregulated (Figure  ).
Pathway enrichment analysis using the Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (Kegg) databases for the top 100 most significantly differentially expressed genes using ClusterProfiler , indicated dysregulation of T cell activity in ex‐Foxp3 cells. GO analysis, with removal of redundant terms using ClusterProfiler ‘simplify’, revealed enrichment for 69 Biological Process, 2 Cellular Component and 5 Molecular Function terms (Table  ). Among the top 10 enriched terms in the Biological Process ontology, 9 were related to T cell or leukocyte activation or differentiation. The other term was ‘regulation of immunoglobulin production’, for which associated differentially expressed genes were related to upregulation of Th2 or T follicular helper or regulatory (TFH or TFR) cell genes, Il4, Il21, Cd40lg and Tnfrsf4 (OX40), and the MHC gene H2‐Q2. Other enriched terms included ‘cellular response to interleukin‐2’, ‘negative regulation of T‐helper 17 type immune response’, ‘immune effector process’, ‘regulation of interleukin‐10 production’, ‘cell fate commitment’ and ‘regulation of inflammatory response’. Examination of the genes annotated with these terms showed they were mostly either down‐regulated, or would result in suppression of the process. Enriched terms in the Molecular Function ontology were related to cytokine or signaling receptor activity, highlighting the dysregulated chemokine receptors and cytokine transcriptional changes described above. This was consistent with the enriched terms in the Cellular Component ontology, which were ‘cell surface’ and ‘external side of plasma membrane’ and in which the genes annotated with these terms were mainly cytokines, cytokine receptors and other cell‐surface receptors such as those from the TNFR superfamily. Overall, these changes indicate that ex‐Foxp3 cells exhibit a lack of Treg cell programming and function and de‐repression of the T helper cell differentiation programs and their inflammatory effector functions.
 Kegg‐enrichment analysis revealed 21 enriched terms, including 7 being in the Immune system or Immune disease subcategories, 5 terms related to signaling molecules or signal transduction and 3 terms related to metabolism (Table  ). The immune‐related terms hinted at inflammatory potential, which is consistent with poor Treg cell immunosuppressive identity and function. These terms were related to differentiation to T helper subsets (‘Th17 differentiation’ and ‘Th1 and Th2 cell differentiation’) and inflammatory conditions (‘Inflammatory bowel disease’ and ‘Allograft rejection’).
 

## Treg and ex‐Foxp3 cells are refractory to late‐gestation LPS or IL‐1β challenge
Finally, although Treg cells appeared to be stable over the course of normal pregnancy, our finding that Treg cells expressed higher levels of Th17‐related molecules IL‐17A and CCR6 after IL‐1β‐administration in C57Bl/6 mice (Figure  ) prompted us to test whether inflammatory challenges that induce preterm birth can destabilize Treg cells and increase their conversion to ex‐Foxp3 cells. Here, we utilized IL‐1β as described above, as well as a second model of preterm birth induced by systemic administration of the gram‐negative bacterial cell wall component lipopolysaccharide (LPS). LPS induces inflammation via the TLR4 pathway, in which IL‐1β is a downstream mediator. DCs activated with LPS have demonstrated capacity to induce Treg cell lineage conversion in vitro. The timing and dose of LPS or IL‐1β were each optimized to ensure they effectively induced preterm birth yet maintained relatively high fetal viability (Supplementary figure  ). Dams were injected intraperitoneally with 4 μg LPS at 0900 h on GD17.5, and a separate group of dams was injected with 4 μg IL‐1β at 1900 h on GD17.5 (Figure  ). Control dams received vehicle (PBS/0.1% BSA). The later injection time was used for IL‐1β since it is downstream in the inflammatory cascade and therefore causes faster progression to preterm birth than LPS. In these experiments, we tracked ex‐Foxp3 cells in the udLNs and spleen and also included the uterine decidua to examine local changes at the placental‐maternal interface where effects on uterine contractility and fetal expulsion are manifested.
 The total number of CD4+ T cells in the udLN, decidua and spleen was not significantly different after LPS or IL‐1β challenge (Figure  , Supplementary figure  ). RFP+GFP+ Treg cells were also unchanged both as a proportion of CD4+ T cells and in cell number (Figure  , Supplementary figure  ). Likewise, RFP+GFP− ex‐Foxp3 cells were not significantly different as a proportion of CD4+ T cells or as cell number after either LPS or IL‐1β (Figure  , Supplementary figure  ). This shows there is no specific induction of ex‐Foxp3 cells following inflammatory challenge in either model. There were also no changes in RFP−GFP− Tconv cell proportion or number (Figure  , Supplementary figure  ). Although the total number of Treg cells, ex‐Foxp3 cells and Tconv cells appeared to increase slightly after LPS administration in udLNs, decidua and spleen, this was not statistically significant (Figure  , Supplementary figure  ).
The expression of IFNγ and IL‐17A in Treg, ex‐Foxp3, and Tconv cells was also measured to evaluate inflammatory potential. In mice treated with LPS, but not IL‐1β, IFNγ+ Treg cells appeared to increase in the udLN and decrease in the decidua, but this was not statistically significant (Figure  ). There were no changes in the expression of IFNγ by ex‐Foxp3 cells or Tconv cells in the udLN or decidua after LPS or IL‐1β challenge in late gestation (Figure  ). IL‐17A expression by udLN and decidual Treg, ex‐Foxp3, or Tconv cells was also not significantly altered by LPS or IL‐1β administration (Figure  ). Treg cells, ex‐Foxp3 cells, and Tconv cells also showed no changes in the proportion of IFNγ or IL‐17A expressing cells in the spleen of LPS or IL‐1β‐treated mice (Supplementary figure  ). Overall, this indicates that although ex‐Foxp3 cells present in the decidua and systemically express T helper cytokines, this expression is not amplified by proinflammatory challenge with LPS or IL‐1β in late gestation.
 

## DISCUSSION
Abundant populations of uterine Treg cells with potent immunosuppressive function are essential for pregnancy success, yet we have discovered that a small population of ex‐Foxp3 cells lacking key Treg cell functional genes are present in the uterine decidua, udLNs and spleen during pregnancy in mice. These cells most likely arise from Treg cells which have lost expression of Foxp3 and undergone cell lineage conversion. Alternatively, since activation of CD4+ T cells can transiently induce Foxp3 expression without leading to Treg cell differentiation, these ex‐Foxp3 cells may be a subpopulation of Tconv cells derived through this pathway. Regardless of their ontogeny, elevated expression of inflammatory cytokines by ex‐Foxp3 cells compared with Treg cells and Tconv cells, and their deficit in expression of immunoregulatory molecules, leaves open the potential for them to contribute to immune‐mediated pregnancy pathology.
Treg cells are thought to exhibit plasticity and instability in various in vitro and in vivo inflammatory or lymphopenic settings. Lineage tracing methods have identified that ex‐Foxp3 cells can gain effector T cell functions, , , , and indicate a contribution to loss of allotolerance in transplantation, as well as autoimmune disease pathology in inflammatory arthritis and Type I diabetes. , However, it is unclear if ex‐Foxp3 cells arise after conversion from Treg cells rendered unstable by inflammation or whether ex‐Foxp3 cells are an accumulated population of Tconv cells that transiently express Foxp3 in their ontogeny. Whether Treg cells exhibit instability in normal pregnancy, and importantly whether this might have a causal role in inflammatory pregnancy complications, such as miscarriage, preeclampsia and preterm birth, are important questions that have not been explored.
During pregnancy, induction of Treg cells mediating tolerance of paternally inherited alloantigens is controlled by pregnancy hormones, seminal fluid and paternal and fetal antigens. The most vulnerable periods of gestation in which Treg cell switching reasonably might occur are during the post‐coital response to seminal fluid priming, during embryo implantation, upon completion of placental development when the maternal blood and circulating immune cells make direct contact with placental antigens, and during parturition when inflammatory cytokines are released. Seminal fluid exposure is particularly important in the generation of Treg cells in the udLN and uterus, , as this fluid delivers male partner alloantigens in the context of abundant TGF‐β and other pro‐tolerogenic factors, and its composition has potential to affect the stability of Treg cells. Progesterone (P4), which is high throughout pregnancy until luteolysis in late gestation, also regulates Treg cell abundance and phenotype, , and acts to reduce IFNγ expression in both Treg and Tconv cells and inhibit Th17 cell differentiation. P4 has been demonstrated to increase the stability of Foxp3 expression in Treg cells induced in vitro, so Treg cell lineage instability due to luteal phase P4 insufficiency may be a key factor affecting risk of reproductive and pregnancy disorders.
The apparent stability of Treg cells demonstrated in the current study is consistent with our previous finding in mice that hypomethylation of the CNS1 region of the Foxp3 promoter occurs in tTreg cells after seminal fluid exposure to reinforce and stabilize the Treg cell lineage program. pTreg cells do not exhibit this same hypomethylation adaptation in early pregnancy, which may predispose them to greater instability. Indeed, we found that the ex‐Foxp3 cell pool was enriched for Nrp1− cells compared to the Treg cell pool, indicating that pTreg cells convert to ex‐Foxp3 at a greater rate than tTreg cells. However, this was equivalent in non‐pregnant and pregnant females, and no increased propensity for either tTreg or pTreg conversion was seen over the course of gestation either locally in the udLNs or systemically in the spleen.
Evidence from in vitro differentiation experiments highlights the necessity of several environmental cues for proper F
oxp
3 TSDR demethylation and Treg cell lineage commitment. , It is possible that in some pregnancies, absence of certain signals or the presence of signals that skew lineage commitment, such as IL‐6 which favors Th17 cell generation rather than Treg cells, may occur in the udLN and uterus when P4 and/or seminal fluid factors are suboptimal. This could reasonably lead to Treg cell instability and conversion to ex‐Foxp3 cells with effector functions, to compromise maternal immune tolerance and contribute to pathologies associated with a T cell imbalance such as miscarriage, preeclampsia and preterm birth. Alternatively, women predisposed to Treg cell instability due to genetic or environmental factors may have elevated risk of infertility and/or pregnancy pathologies. Consistent with this, we recently identified that women experiencing recurrent implantation failure or recurrent miscarriage have fewer Treg cells and bear hallmarks of lineage instability, in the form of lower Foxp3 levels and an aberrant transcriptional signature including proinflammatory cytokines upon activation in vitro, compared to fertile women. As Foxp3 TSDR hypermethylation in recurrent miscarriage patients negatively correlates with Treg cell abundance, both the scale and stability of the Treg cell response initiated at conception are likely to be instrumental for pregnancy tolerance.
The ex‐Foxp3 cells observed in udLNs in late‐gestation were transcriptionally distinct from Treg cells, including downregulation of four major genes that show Treg cell‐specific CpG hypomethylation during lineage commitment: Foxp3, Tnfrsf18 (GITR), Ctla4 and Ikzf4 (Eos). , This was accompanied by other widespread transcriptional changes suggesting a deviation away from the Treg cell phenotype, including upregulation of proinflammatory Th cell cytokines and downregulation of genes for Treg cell fitness and immunosuppressive functions. These changes are consistent with findings from other studies of the transcriptome of ex‐Foxp3 cells, , including after deletion of Foxp3 in mature Treg cells. Although Foxp3 is important for conferring immunosuppressive capacity and repressing effector cytokine production, , , transcriptional factors other than Foxp3 are required for Treg cell lineage‐specification, and Id2, Zeb2, Gata1 and Tcf7 were also differentially expressed in ex‐Foxp3 cells in a direction that could contribute to either failure to commit to or loss of the Treg cell transcriptional program. , , A direct transcriptional comparison of ex‐Foxp3 cells to Tconv cells was not performed, limiting capacity to determine if ex‐Foxp3 cells bear greater similarity to Tconv or Treg cells. However, the marked absence of Treg cell functional markers and gain of some Tconv cell molecules including effector cytokines is reminiscent of Tconv cell types, though this must be investigated in more detail and with functional assays. Freuchet et al, showed that human ex‐Foxp3 cells, though clonally expanded from Treg cells, transcriptionally clustered closely to and overlapped with effector memory T cells on a uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) plot, supporting probable Tconv cell functions for this subset.
Surprisingly, ex‐Foxp3 cells did not accumulate in late gestation, nor were they increased after inflammatory challenge with LPS or IL‐1β. The lack of influence of the inflammatory interventions we evaluated on ex‐Foxp3 generation is difficult to reconcile with findings in other experimental settings of increased Treg cell instability and loss of Foxp3 in the presence of inflammation, or proinflammatory mediators such as IL‐6. , 
Il6 null mutant mice show impaired induction of normal labor and are less susceptible to LPS‐induced preterm birth, while IL‐6 signaling inhibitors are effective in preventing LPS‐induced preterm birth. , We considered this to suggest potential for IL‐6‐mediated changes in T cells contributing to pathology at this critical phase of pregnancy. However, the current data do not support this postulate, and instead indicate that Treg cells are a highly stable lineage with unique ability to withstand lineage conversion during inflammatory states. This state may be entrained by Treg cell exposure to the high levels of P4 characteristic of pregnancy. 

It is possible that ex‐Foxp3 cells in udLNs and uterus arise from expansion of rare cells that transiently express Foxp3 without committing to the Treg cell program. , An alternative interpretation to Treg cell instability or transient Foxp3 upregulation by uncommitted cells is that the ex‐Foxp3 population contains latent Treg cells that have transiently downregulated Foxp3. It has been shown that the ex‐Foxp3 population is heterogeneous, containing cells that do not permanently lose ‘memory’ of their Treg cell identity, but can re‐express Foxp3 upon stimulation. Consistent with this possibility, it was recently demonstrated using cell transfer experiments that ex‐Foxp3 latent Treg cells with fetal specificity are retained postpartum, and act to regenerate the Treg cell pool in subsequent pregnancies sired by genetically similar males. Unfortunately, the rarity of ex‐Foxp3 cells in the udLN and decidua makes it difficult to perform in vitro restimulation, sorting and TSDR methylation analysis that could confirm whether the ex‐Foxp3 cells in these tissues are, in fact, latent Treg cells. The limited number of decidual ex‐Foxp3 cells was also a constraint for sorting and analyzing them by RNAseq.
In late gestation, ex‐Foxp3 cells were enriched in the uterine decidua compared to the udLNs and spleen. A limitation of this study is that we did not evaluate decidua or other regions of the uterus across the course of gestation, so whether there are gestation‐dependent changes in uterine ex‐Foxp3 abundance remains unknown. However, their relative enrichment in the decidua raises the question of whether this is due to the presence of cognate antigen or other physiological cues that promote lineage switching, homing, or expansion of existing ex‐Foxp3 cells. For example, increased loss of Foxp3 likely as a consequence of strong TCR engagement with self‐antigen in an inflamed setting has been observed in the pancreas of NOD Type I diabetic mice relative to draining LNs. While we did not observe increased Treg lineage switching in decidua, cognate antigen may contribute to the accumulation of ex‐Foxp3 cells in the decidua relative to the udLNs and spleen. Furthermore, since Shao et al., found that only fetal‐specific ex‐Foxp3 cells were expanded postpartum, it is possible that examining bulk ex‐Foxp3 cell abundance also limited our ability to detect a change in fetal‐specific ex‐Foxp3 cell generation during first pregnancy. Alternatively, this conversion may occur postpartum during contraction of the immune response.
Whether the ex‐Foxp3 cells we observed in gestational tissues during pregnancy can adopt Th cell or other detrimental functions in pregnancy is an important consideration. Overwhelmingly, the enriched Kegg terms for ex‐Foxp3 cell DE genes were related to Th cells and inflammatory conditions, suggesting that the ex‐Foxp3 cells would be detrimental to immune tolerance. While the exact contributions of IFNγ and IL‐17A to preterm birth pathogenesis are not defined, due to a lack of studies investigating the potential efficacy of blocking these cytokines in preventing preterm birth, numerous studies link increased IFNγ, IL‐17A, Th1 cells or Th17 cells with gestational disorders such as recurrent miscarriage. , , , , Increased expression of proinflammatory cytokines IFNγ or IL‐17A is often observed in ex‐Foxp3 cells compared with Treg cells, , which may result directly from loss of Foxp3, which suppresses inflammatory cytokine expression during Treg cell differentiation. Indeed, ex‐Foxp3 cells in the udLNs of pregnant mice in our study expressed increased inflammatory cytokines Ifng, Il4 and IL21. Also, flow cytometry showed that in the udLNs and spleen across the whole of gestation and including in non‐pregnant females, ex‐Foxp3 cells contained the highest proportions of cells expressing IFNγ or IL‐17A relative to both Treg cells and Tconv cells, highlighting their inflammatory potential. However, the Tconv cell population in udLNs and spleen largely consisted of naïve CD4+ T cells, so the relatively higher frequency of cytokine‐expressing cells among ex‐Foxp3 cells may be an artifact of selectively analyzing a population that is already enriched for cells likely to have undergone TCR stimulation in the past. Despite this, in the decidua, the proportions of IFNγ+ or IL‐17A+ ex‐Foxp3 cells were contrastingly low. Instead, Treg cells were the dominant expressers of these cytokines in the decidua, even more than Tconv cells. As such, it is likely that mechanisms to keep ex‐Foxp3 cell activity in check are at play in the uterus, though whether these are the same mechanisms that constrain Tconv activity during pregnancy is unknown.
Contrary to reports that ex‐Foxp3 cells can express granzymes and adopt cytotoxic functions, , we found that Gzmb and Gzmc genes were downregulated in ex‐Foxp3 cells, although Gzmk, a proinflammatory granzyme, , , was upregulated. Therefore, the ex‐Foxp3 cells in the udLNs of pregnant mice do not appear to be cytotoxic cells. Consistent with our results, deletion of Foxp3 in mature Treg cells has been shown to induce the loss of Gzmb, and since Granzyme B is used by Treg cells to constrain NK and CD8+ T‐cell responses, this is consistent with the loss of immunosuppressive function in ex‐Foxp3 cells.
The significance of RORγt, IL‐17A and IFNγ expression in Treg cells in pregnancy is not clear. The expression of Th transcription factors by Treg cells has been suggested to endow them with properties that increase their stability, promote their suppressive capacity more specifically to cognate Th subsets or with specialized transcriptional programs and functions such as prevention of excessive Type 1 and Type 2 immune responses by Tbet+ and RORγt+ Treg cells. , , However, while Th transcription factors are expressed by mature Treg cell subsets, this does not necessarily lead to expression of Th cytokines that are usually repressed by Foxp3, , indicating complex and context‐dependent transcription factor effects. Further investigation into the significance of Treg cell inflammatory cytokine expression will be important for understanding whether they are dysfunctional or lineage unstable. Of note, expression of Th cytokines has been reported to be higher in Treg cells that show lineage instability and convert to ex‐Foxp3 cells. Despite this, the lack of increase in ex‐Foxp3 cells despite increased expression of these cytokines by Treg cells in our study again indicates Treg cell stability in pregnancy and raises the prospect of functions for Treg cell adoption of Th cytokines that remain to be elucidated. Unfortunately, there is currently no method available for specific depletion of ex‐Foxp3 cells, which limits the feasibility of definitively demonstrating their functions.
Due to the importance of Treg cells in pregnancy for inducing and maintaining immune tolerance and promoting fetal and placental growth, there is interest in therapeutic interventions that increase Treg cell abundance or function in pregnancy to remediate recurrent implantation failure, recurrent miscarriage, preeclampsia and preterm birth. However, the stability of Treg cells is an important consideration for assessing the risk of such therapeutic strategies. Our study suggests that the risk of lineage switching in endogenous Treg cells in pregnancy may be low, at least provided that the Treg cells exhibit normal transcriptional and phenotypic qualities. Promisingly, therapeutically targeting IL‐2‐signaling, which is effective in mitigating fetal loss in mice, , can further stabilize Treg cells and reduce their conversion to ex‐Foxp3 cells. 

A key limitation of this study is that it is not possible in laboratory animals to fully replicate the range of genetic and environmental factors that contribute to potential Treg cell instability in humans. Therefore, it is possible that under other specific conditions, Treg cells may be less stable than demonstrated in the mouse. However, whether intrinsic defects in Treg cells of some individuals lead to Treg cell instability that contributes to pregnancy pathologies should be examined. Nevertheless, caution must be exercised in extrapolating our results to human pregnancy and preterm labor, as there are limitations in the extent to which these models accurately reflect preterm birth in humans. The proinflammatory cascade that precedes preterm labor in humans is not fully understood and is unlikely to be entirely recapitulated by delivery of LPS or IL‐1β alone. Further, it is increasingly clear that the underlying causal factors for spontaneous preterm birth emerge from perturbations arising in early pregnancy, especially to insufficient maternal immune tolerance. , Therefore experiments involving a longer period of inflammatory exposure, or exposure to inflammatory signals during Treg cell induction in early pregnancy, may reveal an impact on Treg cell stability not apparent in healthy gestation or under acute inflammatory conditions. Importantly, the short duration between inflammatory induction and analysis of the T‐cell response in these models may have limited our ability to detect measurable changes. Onset of labor after LPS or IL‐1β administration was rapid, limiting the timeframe in which T cell analysis could be performed before labor and birth. Other studies investigating Treg cell lineage‐conversion have analyzed results after 3 days in vitro
 or >1 week post‐stimulation or transfer in vivo. , 

In summary, this study shows that under normal circumstances, Treg cells in late gestation display a high degree of stability in late gestation and resistance to inflammatory challenge without the expected increase in conversion to ex‐Foxp3 cells. Our findings suggest that, although insufficiency in Treg cells is associated with preterm labor in women, and mouse studies directly link Treg cell deficiency with increased risk of both spontaneous and inflammation‐induced preterm labor, these declines in Treg cell activity are unlikely to be due to lineage switching. As such, other mechanisms to override Treg cells to enable on‐time birth, and to link pathological Treg cell deficiency with preterm labor, must be at play. Further studies are required to expand understanding of the origins and physiological significance of ex‐Foxp3 cells in pregnancy.

## METHODS

## Mice
All mice were held and bred in specific‐pathogen‐free conditions at the Adelaide Health and Medical School (AHMS) Animal Facility, University of Adelaide, Australia. All experiments were performed in accordance with the Australian Code of Practice for the Care and Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes 8th edition 2013 and were approved by the University of Adelaide Animal Ethics Committee (approval numbers M‐2015‐115, M‐2015‐115A, M‐2018‐035, M‐2019‐087). C57Bl/6 female mice and Balb/c males for mating were purchased from Ozgene (Perth, WA, Australia). B6129S‐Tg(Foxp3‐EGFP/cre)1aJbs/J (Foxp3eGFPCre) mice and B6.Cg‐Gt(ROSA)26Sortm(CAG‐tgTomato)Hze/J (Rosa26RFP) mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratories (Bay Harbor, ME, USA; IDs #023161 and #007914, respectively). Rosa26RFP mice were bred from homozygous (RFP/RFP) pairs. Foxp3eGFPCre mice were maintained by crossing hemizygous mice (GFP+) with wildtype littermates, since hemizygous x hemizygous breeding was often unsuccessful, consistent with Jackson Laboratories reports. Mice carrying the transgene were noticeably smaller and took longer to reach reproductive age than wildtype littermates. The Foxp3 fate‐mapping strain, Foxp3eGFPCre.Rosa26RFP, was created by crossing Foxp3eGFPCre mice to Rosa26RFP. Experimental females were obtained from the F1 generation of this cross, or from the F2 generation (Foxp3eGFPCre.Rosa26RFP x Rosa26RFP) after screening for the presence of the GFP transgene either by genotyping in‐house or using Transnetyx genotyping service (transnetyx.com).

## Matings
C57Bl/6 females aged 8–12 weeks were used for mating. Foxp3 fate‐mapper females aged 10–16 weeks were used due to their smaller size and delayed reproductive age. The estrus cycle of experimental female mice was tracked by phase‐contrast microscopy of vaginal lavage to determine the cycle stage, and those in proestrus and estrus were mated to proven fertile Balb/c males aged 10 weeks–12 months overnight and checked on the following morning between 0800 and 1100 h for the presence of a copulatory plug, designated GD0.5. The plugged females were separated and housed with other females mated on the same night, with a maximum of 3 females per cage.

## Lipopolysaccharide or IL‐1β treatment and monitoring for preterm birth
Females remaining pregnant at GD15.5 as determined by increase in weight were housed individually for inflammatory challenge and preterm birth induction. For optimization of IL‐1β‐induced preterm birth in C57Bl/6 mice, 0.5–8 μg of recombinant human IL‐1β (PeproTech, Rocky Hill, NJ, USA) or 0.1% bovine serum albumin (BSA; Gibco) in PBS (vehicle) control was injected i.p. at 0800–1000 h on GD15.5 in pregnant females. Timing of birth was determined by recording with a Sony HandyCam Video Camera with nightshot mode capability and tripod set up above the mice. Dams were given adequate food and a NECTA H20 gel pack for hydration (Able Scientific, Adelaide, SA, Australia) for the duration of filming. Timing of birth was designated after delivery of the first pup in the litter, and delivery before GD18.5 was considered preterm. The viability of pups was recorded and pup birth weight was measured at 12–24 h after delivery.
For optimization of LPS or IL‐1β‐induced preterm birth in Foxp3 fate‐mapping mice, 2 or 4 μg of LPS (Escherichia coli 0111B4 serotype; Sigma‐Aldrich) or IL‐1β was injected i.p. at 0900 h on GD16.5, or 0900 or 1900 h on GD17.5. Controls received vehicle (0.1% BSA in PBS).
For flow cytometry of the T cell response after IL‐1β challenge in C57Bl/6 mice, 6 μg was injected i.p. at 1900–2200 h on GD15.5 instead, thus delaying labor slightly on GD16.5 to enable collection of tissues prior to signs of parturition. For flow cytometry of the T cell response in Foxp3 fate‐mapping mice, the females were injected with 4 μg of LPS at 0900 h on GD17.5 or 4 μg of IL‐1β at 1900 h on GD17.5.

## Pregnancy outcomes and tissue collection
Mice were placed under deep anesthesia by i.p. injection of 15 μL g−1 body weight 2% Avertin (2.2.2‐tribromoethanol, Sigma‐Aldrich) to enable blood to be harvested by cardiac puncture using a 20 gauge needle and 1 mL Tuberculin syringe (BD Biosciences) for future analysis. The mice were immediately humanely killed by cervical dislocation. The blood was placed in Eppendorf tubes and rested at room temperature for a minimum of 10 min before centrifuging at 380 g for 10 min. For late‐gestation time‐points, pregnancy outcomes were also assessed. The number of implantation sites was recorded and classified as viable, non‐viable or resorbing/non‐viable. Non‐viable implantations were identified by small size and pale color of fetuses. Resorptions were characterized as small hemorrhagic masses. All viable and non‐viable fetuses were weighed following separation from the fetal membranes and umbilical cord, and placentas were also weighed. The udLN and decidua were collected for flow cytometry. Briefly, the uterine tissue was cut away from placentae and fetuses, and decidual tissue was gently scraped from the uterine myometrium to facilitate resolution of decidual T cells.

## Preparation of cells for flow cytometry
Uterine decidua was minced with scissors then digested in 1× Hank's Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS; Gibco) containing 1 mg mL−1 collagenase factor VIII (Sigma‐Aldrich), 0.28 mg mL−1 hyaluronidase (Sigma‐Aldrich) and 1 mg mL−1 BSA for 20 min shaking at 37°C. The suspension was filtered through a 70 μm cell strainer (Corning, NY, USA) and fresh digestion buffer was added to the remaining undigested tissue for a further 20 min before filtering and adding to the first round of digestion. Cells were then incubated with red cell lysis buffer (0.155 m NH4Cl, 10 mm KHCO3, 99.2 μm ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) disodium salt in reverse osmosis (RO) water) at 37°C for 5 min then rinsed with PBS before enumerating the cells with a hemocytometer and Trypan Blue (Sigma‐Aldrich). udLNs and spleens were gently homogenized to single cell suspensions in PBS through a 70 μm cell strainer using a syringe plunger, or by gently crushing between the frosted ends of two SuperFrost glass slides (HD Scientific Supplies Pty Ltd, Wetherill Park, NSW, Australia). Splenocytes were treated with red cell lysis buffer for 5 min at 37°C then rinsed with PBS.

## Flow cytometry
One to two × 106 cells were plated per well in a 96‐well plate (Corning). The cells were stimulated with 20 ng mL−1 phorbol 12‐myristate 13‐acetate (PMA; Sigma‐Aldrich, Bayswater, Vic, Australia), 1 nm ionomycin (Invitrogen) and 1/1500 Golgi Stop (BD Biosciences, Macquarie Park, NSW, Australia) for 4 h at 37°C and 5% CO2 in Iscove's Modified Dulbecco's Medium (IMDM) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Gibco, Themo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), 100 U mL−1 penicillin/streptomycin, and 0.002 m L‐glutamine (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific). After stimulation, the cells were rinsed in PBS and stained with viability dye (Fixable Viability Stain 620 or 700, BD Biosciences) for 20 min in the dark. After rinsing again, Fc receptors were blocked with 1/100 Fc block (BD Biosciences) in PBS/0.1% BSA/0.04% NaN3 for 15 min at room temperature before adding a master‐mix of fluorophore‐conjugated antibodies against surface antigens (Table  ), then continuing incubation for 25 min on ice. The cells were rinsed then fixed and permeabilized using the Foxp3 Staining Buffer Set (eBioscience) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Fixation was either 30 min at room temperature or overnight at 4°C. Intracellular staining was performed for 30 min on ice. Antibody master‐mixes were prepared in Brilliant Stain Buffer (BD Biosciences). The samples were acquired the same day or fixed in 1% methanol‐free formaldehyde in PBS and acquired the following day on a BD LSRFortessa X‐20. The gating strategy used for measuring the different T cell subsets and their expression of cytokines is shown in Supplementary figure  .
 

## RNAseq of Treg and ex‐Foxp3 cells
On GD18.5, udLNs were dissociated to single cell suspensions in PBS/5% fetal bovine serum (FBS) using scissors and a plunger through a 70 μm cell sieve (Corning). Cells were kept on ice in the dark at all times. They were stained and blocked with Fixable Viability Stain FVS780 (1/1000, BD Biosciences) and FC receptor block (1/100, BD Biosciences) in PBS/2% FBS, followed by staining with anti‐CD45:BUV395 and anti‐CD4:BV421 antibodies (Table  ) prepared in Brilliant Staining Buffer Plus (BD Biosciences). The cells were rinsed and resuspended in IMDM/5% FBS for sorting using a BD FACSAria Fusion. Treg cells and ex‐Foxp3 cells were sorted into IMDM/20% FBS, then centrifuged, rinsed with PBS and counted before finally resuspending in Buffer RLT Plus (RNeasy Micro Plus kit, Qiagen) with 10 μL mL−1 β‐mercaptoethanol for storage at −80°C. The samples were thawed for RNA extraction using the RNeasy Micro Plus kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. RNA purity was checked with a Nanodrop and quality was checked with an Agilent Tapestation. RNA from five mice with RIN >8.3 was pooled to generate each sample. >6 ng of RNA per sample was sent to NovogeneAIT Genomics Singapore Pte Ltd (Novogene (HK) Company Limited) for library preparation with the Clontech™ SMARTer Ultra Low Input RNA kit and paired‐end 150 base‐pair sequencing on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000.

## RNAseq data analysis
Read quality was checked with FastQC v0.12.1 (Babraham Bioinformatics, Cambridge, UK) before and after adapter trimming with bbduk v39.03. Reads were aligned to the GRCh39 mm39−1 mouse reference genome using STAR v2.7.10b_alpha_230301‐GCC‐11.2.0 and indexed with SAMtools v1.17‐GCC‐11.2.0. Median library size was 36 million reads (range 33–41 million reads), and with a threshold of 0.5 counts per million in at least 5 samples, 13 396 total genes were measured. DGE analysis was performed in R v4.3.3 and R studio v2023.12.1 + 401 using the limma v3.58.1 and voom
 packages and a log fold‐change of 1 (equivalent to 2‐fold difference in expression) and adj.P <0.05 were used to determine significance. The top 100 most significantly DE genes were used for pathway analysis. The R package ClusterProfiler v4.10.1 was used to measure enrichment of Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (Kegg) terms, and the simplify (cut‐off 0.6) function was used to reduce redundancy in the list of enriched terms. A BH‐adjusted P value of ≤0.05 was used to determine statistical significance.

## Statistical analysis
Flow cytometry data and preterm birth outcomes data were analyzed using two‐sided unpaired t‐tests or one‐way ANOVAs as appropriate in GraphPad Prism 10.1.0 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA). Fetal, placental and pup weight data were analyzed using a mixed model linear repeated measures ANOVA with post‐hoc LSD test with mother as subject and litter size as designated covariate in SPSS software (IBM Corporation, Armonk, NY, USA).

## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Kerrie L Foyle: Data curation; formal analysis; investigation; visualization; writing ‐ original draft, review and editing; Ella S Green: Conceptualization; funding acquisition; formal analysis; investigation; writing ‐ review and editing; Jessie R Walker‐Rogers: Formal analysis; investigation; writing ‐ review and editing; Ha M Tran: Data curation; formal analysis; writing ‐ review and editing; David M Olson: Conceptualization; funding acquisition; Lachlan M Moldenhauer: Conceptualization; writing ‐ review and editing; Sarah A Robertson: Conceptualization; funding acquisition; project administration; supervision; writing ‐ review and editing.

## CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.

## Supporting information

Supplementary figure 1–10

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was funded by the Channel 7 Children's Research Foundation, South Australia (22‐20669673), the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (ID421180) and an Australian National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) Investigator Grant (ID1198172). Open access publishing facilitated by Adelaide University, as part of the Wiley ‐ Adelaide University agreement via the Council of Australasian University Librarians

## DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The data that support the findings of this study are openly available in NCBI's Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gds through GEO Series accession number GSE308931.