pmcPharmacol RevPharmacol Rev831pharmrevPharmacological Reviews0031-69971521-0081American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental TherapeuticsPMC13095475PMC13095475.113095475130954753995269110.1124/pharmrev.124.001070S0031-6997(24)11611-01000111Review ArticleTherapeutic advantage of combinatorial chimeric antigen receptor T cell and chemotherapies
WardMeghan B.JonesAmber B.KrenciuteGiedreGiedre.Krenciute@stjude.org Department of Bone Marrow Transplantation and Cellular Therapy, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee∗Address correspondence to: Dr Giedre Krenciute, Department of Bone Marrow Transplantation and Cellular Therapy, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis TN, 38105. Giedre.Krenciute@stjude.org1202522112024771489256100011221120242204202622042026© 2024 The Authors2024https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cell therapies have transformed outcomes for many patients with hematological malignancies. However, some patients do not respond to CAR T cell treatment, and adapting CAR T cells for treatment of solid and brain tumors has been met with many challenges, including a hostile tumor microenvironment and poor CAR T cell persistence. Thus, it is unlikely that CAR T cell therapy alone will be sufficient for consistent, complete tumor clearance across patients with cancer. Combinatorial therapies of CAR T cells and chemotherapeutics are a promising approach for overcoming this because chemotherapeutics could augment CAR T cells for improved antitumor activity or work in tandem with CAR T cells to clear tumors. Herein, we review efforts toward achieving successful CAR T cell and chemical drug combination therapies. We focus on combination therapies with approved chemotherapeutics because these will be more easily translated to the clinic but also review nonapproved chemotherapeutics and drug screens designed to reveal promising new CAR T cell and chemical drug combinations. Overall, this review highlights the promise of CAR T cell and chemotherapy combinations with a specific focus on how combinatorial therapy overcomes challenges faced by either monotherapy and supports the potential of this therapeutic strategy to improve outcomes for patients with cancer.

## Significance Statement
Improving currently available CAR T cell products via combinatorial therapy with chemotherapeutics has the potential to drastically expand the types of cancers and number of patients that could benefit from these therapies when neither alone has been sufficient to achieve tumor clearance. Herein, we provide a thorough review of the current efforts toward studying CAR T and chemotherapy combinatorial therapies and offer perspectives on optimal ways to identify new and effective combinations moving forward.

## Graphical abstract
 
pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY

## Abbreviations
ALK1anaplastic lymphoma kinase 1
AMLacute myeloid leukemia
CAFcancer-associated fibroblast
CARchimeric antigen receptor
CLLchronic lymphocytic leukemia
CMLchronic myeloid leukemia
CTLA4cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-antigen 4
DIPGdiffuse intrinsic pontine glioma
DMGdiffuse midline glioma
DR5death receptor 5
ECMextracellular matrix
EGFRepidermal growth factor receptor
EpCAMepithelial cell adhesion molecule
ESCCesophageal squamous cell carcinoma
FDAFood and Drug Administration
FLT 3FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3
GBMglioblastoma
HSChematopoietic stem cell
IDO-1indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase
IFNinterferon
ITAMimmunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs
mAbmonoclonal antibody
MCLmantle cell lymphoma
MDSCmyeloid-derived suppressor cells
NBneuroblastoma
NKG2Dnatural killer group 2 member D
NKnatural killer
NSCLCnon–small cell lung carcinoma
PD-1programmed cell death protein 1
PD-L1programmed death ligand 1
ROR1receptor tyrosine kinase-like orphan receptor 1
SEAKERsynthetic enzyme-armed killer
SIPR3sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor 3
TAMtumor-associated macrophages
TCRT cell receptor
TNBCtriple-negative breast cancer
TRAILtissue necrosis factor–related apoptosis-inducing ligand
Treg cellT regulatory cell
Associate Editor: John Schuetz
I

## Introduction
Despite major advances in cancer research and treatment in just over 50 years since the signing of the National Cancer Act in 1971, cancer remains a significant healthcare crisis in the United States and worldwide. The American Cancer Society predicts that in 2024, >2 million Americans will be diagnosed with cancer, a record-breaking number. While cancer death rates are declining slightly, still >600,000 cancer-related deaths are predicted this year ( ). Moreover, the decline in the death rate is highly dependent on the cancer diagnosis. For example, significant progress in curing patients with lung and stomach cancer has been made in recent years, but prostate and central nervous system cancer death rates have not significantly improved ( ). Continued advancement in cancer treatment is needed to meet this growing health challenge.
Because molecular tools for understanding oncogenesis across cancer types have developed, targeted chemotherapeutics have been designed to tailor a treatment plan toward a specific diagnosis ( ). However, some cancers have yet to see an effective targeted chemotherapy developed, or chemotherapeutics do not elicit curative responses on their own. Some of the major challenges faced by chemotherapeutics are lack of tissue specificity, limited half-life in the body, primary or acquired resistance, and significant short-term and long-term off-tumor toxicities ( ; ). For example, primary or metastatic brain tumors are difficult to target owing to the lack of penetrance of chemotherapeutics across the blood-brain barrier ( ; ). This severely limits the local concentration at the tumor site and renders chemotherapeutics ineffective. Chemotherapeutics often have short half-lives in the body ( ). Systemic delivery means that the drugs must be stable long enough to reach the site of the tumor and retain activity. However, this leads to an additional challenge—many healthy organs, tissues, and circulating cells are exposed to the active chemotherapeutic agents—leading to the myriad adverse side effects that many patients experience ( ). Ideally, anticancer treatments will exhibit antitumor potency and be tissue penetrant, biologically stable, and minimize off-target effects.
In recent years, the number of annual US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approvals of new cytotoxic chemotherapeutics has largely flatlined, while the approval rate of targeted biologics and immunotherapies has skyrocketed ( ). Targeted biologics and immunotherapies have been shown to safely and specifically target tumor cells, limiting off-tumor toxicities and rendering them more tolerable than traditional chemotherapeutics ( ; ). The first immune-based therapy for cancer to gain FDA approval was the administration of interferon-alfa 2 (IFN-α2) to stimulate an anticancer response through both the innate and adaptive immune systems ( ; ). Since then, various monoclonal antibodies (mAbs), vaccines, and cell-based therapies have been approved as anticancer treatments ( ). One mechanism for these therapies is to either prime (vaccines) or reinvigorate/boost (mAbs) the endogenous immune system to fight a tumor ( ). Another is to isolate antitumorigenic immune effector cells from a patient, expand them ex vivo, and reinfuse them into the patient ( ). This strategy relies on the identification of an endogenous effector cell (T or natural killer) that has successfully infiltrated the tumor and has antitumor activity ( ; ). To broaden the applicability of the approach, researchers developed chimeric antigen receptors (CARs), synthetic molecules that recognize tumor-specific antigens and are transduced into peripherally isolated effector cells to elicit a targeted cytotoxic response ( ; ; ). This strategy does not rely on isolating endogenous tumor-reactive immune effector cells and is highly modular. Engineered T cell therapy is currently gaining the most traction with FDA approvals, and CAR T cell therapy is one of the primary focuses of this review.

II

## Chimeric antigen receptor T cell therapy
CAR T cells are isolated T cells that are genetically engineered to express CARs. Briefly, the CAR molecule is loosely based on the natural cytotoxic T cell receptor (TCR) and recognizes tumor-specific antigens on the surface of tumor cells and transduces the recognition signal into activation of T cell cytotoxicity ( A). CAR targets are identified based on high tumor-specific expression and low healthy tissue expression, limiting the potential of on-target off-tumor toxicity ( ; ). CAR T cell therapy has displayed promising success in treating certain hematologic malignancies, having received 6 approvals by the FDA (Kymriah, Yescarta, Tecartus, Breyanzi, Abecma, and Carvykti), and is actively being investigated as a treatment for additional blood-borne cancers, solid tumors, and brain tumors ( ; ; ; ). 
Manufacturing CAR T cells begins by harvesting peripheral blood mononuclear cells from patients (clinically) or healthy donors (preclinically). T cells are isolated and activated, virally transduced to express the CAR of interest, and expanded for infusion or preclinical testing ( ). Structurally, CARs have 4 primary domains: the antigen recognition domain, hinge region, transmembrane domain, and signaling domain ( ; ; ). The antigen recognition domain ( B) orients extracellularly and is responsible for CAR T cell recognition of the target antigen. Most CAR T cell constructs incorporate the single-chain variable fragment of a highly specific mAb for antigen recognition. Newer CAR designs have also used endogenous binding partners or peptide sequences known to strongly bind a target ( ; ; ).
The hinge region ( C) is a spacer between the antigen recognition and transmembrane domains. It facilitates antigen binding and signal transduction by imparting flexibility and adding length, making surface antigens more accessible and reducing rigidity and steric hindrance ( ). Ultimately, the hinge domain has been found to regulate the threshold at which antigen can be recognized and downstream signaling is initiated ( ).
The transmembrane domain ( D) is a crucial mediator for relaying extracellular antigen binding to intracellular signal transduction. It anchors the construct and offers essential stability for the CAR T cell. Selection of the transmembrane domain determines the overall surface expression level of the CAR construct as well as the recruitment of other signal-propagating components found in the native TCR ( ).
The signaling domain orients intracellularly and imparts the effector function of the CAR T cell upon antigen binding. The intracellular domain commonly consists of both costimulatory support ( E) and cytotoxic signaling components ( F) ( ). Phosphorylation of the 3 immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs of CD3ζ transduces downstream cytotoxic signaling cascades in a standard CAR, similar to that of the TCR. CD3ζ phosphorylation ultimately results in the secretion of perforin, granzyme B, and other cytokines that induce apoptosis in targeted cells and inflammatory responses in the endogenous immune system. Costimulatory domains ( E), such as CD28 or 4-1BB (CD137), which are currently included in all FDA-approved CAR T products, have been shown to augment the effector function of CAR T cells by increasing cytokine production, T cell proliferation, and potentiate antitumor activity over CAR T cells lacking costimulation ( ). These costimulatory domains differ in benefits; CD28 promotes initial rapid tumor clearance, while 41BB may favor long-term persistence ( ). Other costimulatory domains are actively being investigated including OX40 (CD134), inducible T cell costimulator, and CD27 ( ; ).
Multiple iterations of CAR structures have been investigated for therapeutic efficacy, leading to multiple generations of CAR design. All CAR T cell generations include the antigen recognition, hinge, transmembrane, and intracellular signaling domains. The first-generation CAR consisted of only a singular signaling domain with no costimulatory support. This single activation mechanism had limited cytokine production and poor overall effector performance. Second-generation CARs introduced a single costimulatory domain to the construct. All currently FDA-approved CAR T cell therapies are derived from second-generation CARs.
It was hypothesized that multiple costimulatory domains could provide further improvement to CAR T cell therapy, so the third-generation CAR incorporates ≥2 costimulatory domains. Unfortunately, the third-generation CAR failed to significantly outperform the second generation CAR ( ; ), so all further iterations have been modified from the second-generation structure. The fourth-generation CAR includes the addition of an inducible or constitutive transgenic protein or cytokine to support T cell effector function by favoring T cell maintenance and survival. Some examples of cytokines expressed in fourth-generation CARs include but are not limited to interleukin (IL)-15, IL-2, and IL-7, which are necessary for cytokine activation and expansion ( ; ). A more recent example of a fourth-generation CAR design is the constitutive overexpression of 41BBL on the surface of CAR T cells ( ). 41BBL binds the 41BB receptor in cis and provides additional CAR T cell sustainability support ( ).
As illustrated, CARs can differ substantially in structural design, spanning from the antigen being targeted to the intricate network of the signaling domain. CAR design may influence the efficacy at which tumors are targeted and is an important consideration as the field expands to combinatorial approaches. Taking this into consideration, throughout this review, we highlight the antigen being targeted as well as the costimulatory domain(s) expressed (denoted as Target.Costim).
Collectively, there is substantial preclinical and clinical evidence supporting CAR T cell immunotherapy for cancer treatment. However, there are significant challenges that have hindered the holistic treatment success of CAR T cells against cancer. Established challenges of CAR T cells include properties of the tumor itself (limited identification and sustainability of novel antigens, aggressive tumor burden, hostile immune microenvironment) and CAR T cell–intrinsic deficiencies (unsuccessful homing and tumor infiltration, minimal persistence over time; ) 

III

## Addressing challenges of chimeric antigen receptor T cell therapy with combinatorial chemotherapies
The challenges faced by CAR T cell therapy have hindered the success of clinical trials and ultimately the number of FDA approvals, especially for solid and brain tumors for which no therapies have been approved to date. Many groups are addressing CAR T cell–intrinsic deficiencies by introducing secondary genetic modifications that improve CAR T cell efficacy. Some examples include genetic knockdown of negative regulators such as programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) ( ), cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-antigen 4 (CTLA4) ( ), and lymphocyte activation gene 3 (LAG3) ( ), and negative epigenetic regulators such as DNA methyltransferase 3-α (DNMT3A) ( ), ten-eleven translocation 2 (TET2) ( ), and suppressor of variegation 3-9 homolog 1 (SUV39H1) ( ; ). An alternate strategy is the expression of positive signaling molecules such as C-Jun ( ) or runt-related transcription factor 3 ( ; ), or constitutively active cytokine receptors ( ). Secondary modifications have had instances of improving CAR T cell fitness/persistence and tumor infiltration, but other tumor-driven challenges such as antigen dilemma/tumor heterogeneity, tumor burden, and the hostile tumor microenvironment are challenging to address using these approaches ( ). Additionally, secondary genetic modifications require thorough preclinical efficacy and safety testing, which is time consuming and expensive, making it slow to implement in the clinic. However, adding an already FDA-approved chemotherapeutic agent to a cancer regimen in combination with CAR T cells is much more readily achieved. In addition to chemotherapies, multiple other avenues have been investigated to support the antitumor activity of CAR T cells. For example, investigators have sought to increase the persistence and potency of CAR T cells by combining them with supportive cytokines, IFNs, and antibodies. Although noteworthy, we have narrowed the scope of this review to studies focused on combination treatments with CAR T cells and chemotherapeutics.
To our knowledge, represents a comprehensive list of all preclinical investigations combining CAR T cells with chemotherapy. Our thorough literature review/search found 132 unique preclinical CAR T cells and chemotherapeutic combination studies involving 67 different compounds ( ). Studies are grouped based on the CAR T cell limitation that was addressed with combinatorial therapy. For more information, further elaborates on the mechanisms/primary findings for each publication. In the remainder of this review, we highlight some, but not all, published studies that explore the ability of chemotherapeutics to be used in combination with CAR T cells across multiple cancer types with varying CAR T cell targets. We highlight examples in which each of the challenges faced by CAR T cells can be addressed by a combinatorial approach. We further provide mechanistic insight into the chemotherapeutic augmented CAR T cell efficacy and how it may be more broadly investigated. 
A

## Antigen dilemma/tumor heterogeneity
When considering CAR T cell therapy for a given cancer, the first challenge is to identify a targetable tumor antigen ( ). To be a viable target, the tumor antigen is ideally a surface-anchored protein that is highly expressed on tumor cells for sufficient CAR T cell activation, not expressed on surrounding or distal healthy tissues and not expressed on the CAR T cells themselves or any immune cells ( ; ; ). The expression on healthy tissues leads to on-target off-tumor toxicity that can be harmful to a patient ( ; ). The expression of CAR T cells leads to fratricide, or self-killing, which diminishes the potency of the therapy against cancer ( ). Even once a target is identified, many tumors are heterogeneous, and not all cell populations may express the same surface antigen or at the same level, leading to incomplete tumor eradication. Different tumor types can regulate antigen expression in a variety of ways that may hinder CAR T cell efficacy. Broadly, the term “antigen dilemma” defines tumor-associated antigens that have low basal expression, are heterogeneous in nature, may downregulate in response to treatment, or are indiscriminate on tissue expression leading to off-target toxicities. To combat this limitation, it is desirable to identify chemotherapeutics that can modulate the expression of tumor antigens. Throughout this review, we will denote which branch of the antigen dilemma is being targeted by the different compounds. A complete list of compounds that address the antigen dilemma is found in and .
One way to accomplish this is to increase the expression of an antigen that is already present in tumor cells. published the first example of this with FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3).CD28 CAR T cells targeting acute myeloid leukemia (AML) ( ). FLT3.CD28 CAR T cell monotherapy had potent but limited antitumor efficacy against FLT3+ AML cell lines in vivo. Treatment with the preclinical FLT3 inhibitor crenolanib increased the surface expression of FLT3 on AML blasts and sensitized them further to FLT3.CD28 CAR T cell treatment. However, healthy hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) express FLT3 and were found to be susceptible to elimination following FLT3.CD28 CAR T cell administration. Crenolanib did not increase FLT3 expression in HSCs, but all healthy HSCs were eliminated in vivo upon CAR treatment ( ). The safety of this strategy would require CAR T cell elimination after tumor clearance and re-engraftment of HSCs. HSC transplantation is very common for treating hematological malignancies in the clinic and would not present a significant roadblock to the clinical translation of this combinatorial approach ( ).
Similarly, anaplastic lymphoma kinase 1 (ALK1) has been identified as a promising immunotherapeutic target for neuroblastoma (NB) because it is upregulated on the surface of tumor cells but not on healthy tissues and has oncogenic pathology ( ; ). developed the first human and murine ALK.CD28 CAR T cells in 2023 that effectively recognize and eliminate NB tumors highly expressing ALK. However, ALK.CD28 CAR T cells largely failed to elicit responses in preclinical models of low ALK-expressing cell lines. Previous literature has shown that treatment of NB with ALK inhibitors such as the FDA-approved agent lorlatinib has promising yet limited efficacy as a monotherapy ( ). However, one consequence of lorlatinib exposure is the stabilization of ALK surface expression, presenting a unique opportunity for combinatorial therapy with CAR T cells. In NB cell lines with low ALK expression, combinatorial therapy with lorlatinib and ALK.CD28 CAR T cells significantly extended survival over ALK.CD28 CAR T cell monotherapy in multiple preclinical models ( ). This is a promising strategy for NB because all patients with NB with high or low initial ALK expression could benefit from combinatorial treatment with lorlatinib through surface stabilization of the target antigen and innate antitumor activity of lorlatinib. ALK alterations and overexpression have also been shown in colorectal cancer and metastatic non–small cell lung carcinoma ( ), suggesting this combinatorial approach could be further explored in other cancer types.
A more challenging strategy is to consider inducing expression of a tumor antigen that is not naturally expressed on tumor cells. In a recent example, optimized a dosing regimen with the FDA-approved therapeutic decitabine and saw the expression of the CAR target chondroitin-sulfate proteoglycan 4 (CSPG4) on the surface of ovarian carcinoma cells that were negative before treatment. Treatment with chondroitin-sulfate proteoglycan 4.CD28 CAR T cells was effective only against decitabine-treated ovarian carcinoma cells, representing the first published chemotherapy-induced antigen expression with subsequent antigen-specific targeting. While promising, this approach was not tested in vivo and requires further preclinical optimization before considering clinical implications. Decitabine and structural variant azacitidine have also been shown to upregulate antigen expression of CD70, CD123, and CD19 in various hematological malignancies, highlighting the immense potential of this class of small molecules to modulate antigens in combinatorial CAR T cell therapy ( ; ).

B

## Tumor burden
The next challenge for CAR T cell therapy to overcome is the burden (eg, size and aggressive growth) of target tumors. CAR T cell clinical trials most often enroll only patients who are relapsed or refractory to standard treatment and whose tumors are substantial in size and growth rate. An effective CAR T cell therapy needs to be able to tackle a large and aggressive tumor. While CAR T cells are effective killers, therapy benefits significantly from combinatorial approaches that can de-bulk tumors or slow their growth prior to or during CAR T cell administration. A complete list of compounds that address tumor burden is found in and .
A simple example of this approach would be to treat tumors with chemotherapeutics that have known antitumor efficacy along with CAR T cells so that both therapies are independently yet synergistically working to clear the tumor. A preclinical study by in colorectal cancer models evaluated the efficacy of combinatorial efficacy of the kinase inhibitor regorafenib and epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM)-CAR natural killer (NK) cells. Regorafenib and EpCAM CAR-NKs had antitumor efficacy alone, but the combination significantly reduced the rate of tumor growth over either monotherapy in preclinical models. While not yet published preclinically, 1 phase 1 clinical trial has reported findings from 6 initial patients receiving glypican-3.41BB CAR T cells for the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma ( ). Of the 6, 4 patients received combinatorial treatment with sorafenib, a similar kinase inhibitor, during CAR T cell infusions. The data are not yet suggestive of an added or reduced benefit, but clinical testing of CAR T/kinase inhibitor combinatorial strategies will shed more light on the future viability of this combination.
In another example, chemotherapeutic treatment with the FDA-approved chemotherapy cisplatin is the first line of defense for gastric cancer. While cisplatin very effectively clears away more differentiated tumor cell populations, stem cell tumor populations are resistant to it and readily lead to tumor recurrence and metastasis. A published study has shown that these stem cells are positive for CD133 and that cisplatin treatment increases CD133 expression in stem cells ( ). developed a CD133.CD28 CAR T product that was preclinically tested in combination with cisplatin treatment against gastric cancer. Compared with monotherapy, combination therapy resulted in decreased tumor burden in xenograft models, specifically with reduced stem cell populations in any remaining or relapsed tumor caused by CD133 CAR efficacy. This strategy highlights the ability of CAR T cells and chemotherapy to be mutually beneficial—cisplatin diminishes the tumor size, allowing CAR T cells to have less bulk to clear, and CAR T cells eliminate the tumor cells that are resistant to cisplatin treatment.
Another way to tackle aggressive tumor growth is to sensitize tumor cells to CAR T cell therapy, rendering it more effective. In one example, the pretreatment of leukemia models with indometacin sensitized cancer cells to CD19 CAR T cell therapy ( ; ). Specifically, indometacin treatment increased the surface expression of death receptor 5 (DR5) on tumor cells. Tissue necrosis factor–related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) is an endogenous ligand for DR5 that can be secreted by activated T cells to assist in tumor cell cytotoxicity ( ). In this system, indometacin-induced DR5 expression on tumor cells sensitizes them further to CAR T cell cytotoxicity through both CAR recognition and TRAIL-mediated apoptosis. This strategy could be broadly applied to many cancers because the DR5/TRAIL signaling axis can be activated on all tumor cells.

C

## Chimeric antigen receptor T cell infiltration
Successful trafficking of CAR T cells to tumor sites, especially solid tumors, can be significantly hindered by the physical and physiologic conditions of the tumor ( ). The restrictive nature of solid tumors to infiltrating lymphocytes is due in part to the fibrous, dense, and rigid nature of the extracellular matrix (ECM) ( ; ). Additionally, dysregulated tumor vasculature complicates the penetration and motility of CAR T cells to and through the tumor stroma ( ; ). Furthermore, many tumor types are characterized by a large degree of cellular heterogeneity that complicates successful tumor recognition and infiltration. Therefore, chemical compounds that can modulate tumor or CAR T cell properties to potentiate homing and infiltration are desirous. A complete list of compounds that address CAR T cell infiltration is found in and .
The DNA-damaging chemotherapy carboplatin has shown promising results in mitigating the dense ECM of solid tumors. In a recent study by , the administration of carboplatin increased the frequency of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) in a model of prostate cancer. First, CAFs underwent a proinflammatory shift, encouraging and assisting CAR T cell infiltration. Second, carboplatin-treated CAFs had increased expression of multiple ECM-degrading matrix metalloproteinase genes (Mmp2, Mmp3, Mmp13, Mmp14, and Mmp27). When treated in combination with carboplatin, Lewis Y antigen (Ley).CD28 CAR T cells had greater infiltration, accumulation, and cytotoxic potential against multiple prostate patient-derived xenografts ( ). Other platinum-based therapies have also been shown to increase CAR T cell infiltration. Oxaliplatin was able to increase the infiltration and cytotoxic effects of receptor tyrosine kinase-like orphan receptor 1 (ROR1).41BB CAR T cells in a murine lung adenocarcinoma model. Oxaliplatin mediated immune landscape remodeling by inducing tumor-associated macrophages to express T cell–recruiting chemokines (Cxcl9 and Cxcl10). The resulting increased infiltration of ROR1.41BB CAR T cells served as a positive feedback loop as IFN gamma (IFN-γ) secretion by CAR T cells mediated more production of chemokines by the macrophages ( ).
The hypoxic nature of tumors can further limit CAR T efficacy by diminishing CAR T cell fitness and tumor cell antigen expression, leading to decreased homing and recruitment potential ( ; ; ). A 2020 study by demonstrated that combinatorial therapy of carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX).41BB CAR T cells with sunitinib, an inhibitor of the receptor for tyrosine kinase, resulted in improved infiltration of CAR T cells into tumor tissue in a model of renal carcinoma. This was true under both normoxic and hypoxic conditions and was dose-dependent in relation to sunitinib. Sunitinib ultimately increased CAIX antigen expression on tumor cells, which allowed for better homing of CAR T cells to the tumor site. This showcases another way in which increasing antigen density on tumor cells promotes CAR T cell activity. Interestingly, improved infiltration caused by a CAIX.41BB CAR T cell combination with sunitinib in the renal carcinoma model did not produce a therapeutic benefit. However, there was a combinatorial therapeutic benefit in a metastatic lung model, illustrating heterogeneity in response, and that lack of response in 1 tumor model does not discount the potential utility of the approach in others. Instead, it suggests that infiltration was not the primary hindrance to CAR T cell efficacy in the renal carcinoma model. Of note, combined treatment of CAIX.41BB CAR T cells with sunitinib reduced the amount of immunosuppressive myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) at the tumor site ( ). This is a common theme surrounding many of the compounds that increase the homing and infiltration of CAR T cells: they tend to also alter the tumor immune cell landscape either directly or indirectly.

D

## Hostile tumor microenvironment
The immune system can significantly influence the efficacy of numerous therapies used to treat cancer, including immune and CAR T cell therapies ( ). For CAR T cells, hostility is largely driven by the immunosuppressive cells within the tumor that promote tumor immune escape during oncogenesis. The primary immunosuppressive cells include T regulatory (Treg) cells, MDSCs, and tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) ( ). Tregs suppress T cell effector function and activation through secretion of immunosuppressive cytokines, competition for cytokines CAR T cells need to survive, and downregulation of stimulatory antigens on antigen-presenting cells ( ; ). MDSCs have been shown to specifically inhibit CAR T cell function through a host of mechanisms, including Treg induction and stimulation, nutrient depletion, reactive oxygen species production, and anti-inflammatory cytokine secretion ( ; ; ; ; ). TAMs contribute to immunosuppression by increasing the expression of amino acid–depleting enzymes such as indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO-1), secreting immunosuppressive cytokines, and recruiting Treg cells ( , ; ; ). Of importance, TAMs are often the most abundant tumor-infiltrating immune cells, highlighting their importance in CAR T cell–based immunotherapy ( ; ). Chemotherapies that can mitigate immunosuppression in the context of CAR T cell therapy are extremely beneficial to the field, and many studies have illustrated the ability of chemotherapies to combat this challenge. A complete list of compounds that address the hostile tumor microenvironment is found in and .
A study led by used genomics and transcriptomics to reveal that the epigenetic modulator bromodomain-containing protein 4 mediates immunosuppression-driven resistance of glioblastoma (GBM) cell lines to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR).CD28.41BB CAR T cells. Treatment with the bromodomain and extraterminal motif inhibitor, JQ1, in combination with EGFR.CD28.41BB CAR T cells was able to suppress the induction of immunosuppressive proteins IL-6, IL-8, IDO-1, and programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1). This combination was also able to extend the survival of the mice and prevent metastasis more significantly than either treatment alone ( ). CAR T therapy in GBM has also benefited from combined treatment with the lactate generation inhibitor oxamate to overcome the immunosuppressive microenvironment. Excess lactate production is a byproduct of aberrant glycolytic activity in tumor cells, which contributes to the increased expression of ATP-converting ectonucleotidases CD39 and CD73. CD39 and CD73 scavenge proinflammatory molecules to generate immunosuppressive byproducts. Oxamate treatment was shown to decrease the CD39 expression in TAMs and Treg cells, supporting a less hostile tumor microenvironment that allows for the higher antitumor activity of EGFRvIII.41BB CAR T cells ( ).
Another compound investigated for immune-modulatory roles to enhance the efficacy of CAR T cells is the antineoplastic agent docetaxel. Docetaxel combination therapy was tested in a xenograft model of prostate cancer in combination with prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) CAR T cells. The combination of docetaxel and PSMA.41BB CAR T cells was shown to decrease tumor burden and increase survival probabilities in vivo. Mechanistically, this combination ultimately reduced the ratio of immunosuppressive MDSCs to CAR T cells, providing a less immunosuppressive environment ( ).
As technology advances, there are now novel approaches to administer immune landscape-altering compounds. revealed that nanosheets loaded with the IDO-1 inhibitor, epacadostat, supported antitumor activity CD19.CD28 CAR T cell therapy in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Epacadostat-loaded nanosheets reduced IDO-1 and facilitated production of the immunosuppressive metabolite kynurenine, supporting a more permissive tumor microenvironment for the CAR T cells. In vivo, tissue analysis revealed that mice treated with CD19.CD28 CAR T cells and epacadostat-loaded nanosheets had lower expression of exhaustion markers (PD-1 and T cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain-containing protein 3 [TIM-3]) and increased effector cytokines (IL-2, IFN-γ, and perforin) ( ). In a study, generated nanoparticles loaded with either the phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase inhibitor PI-3065 to regulate Treg cell subsets or 7DW8-5, a stimulatory agonist of effector cells. Using EGFRvIII.CD28 and ROR1.CD28 CAR T cells against breast cancer cell lines, the combination therapy with nanoparticles enhanced cytotoxicity and persistence of CAR T cells, supporting improved survival.
While targeting single populations within the tumor immune microenvironment has been beneficial, it is possible that other immunosuppressive mechanisms might compensate when one is eliminated, ultimately dampening the strength of a combinatorial approach. One unique way to holistically target the immunosuppressive compartment is to consider multiple immune-targeting compounds. A resulting “polypharmacy” approach was tested by in a rhabdomyosarcoma model in combination with fibroblast growth factor receptor CAR T cells. The treatment schema involved fibroblast growth factor receptor CAR T cells along with antagonists to colony-stimulating factor-1 receptor, IDO-1, inducible nitric oxide synthase, tumor growth factor β, and PD-L1. The “polypharmacy” and CAR T cell combinatorial approach successfully controlled tumor burden and increased survival in an orthotopic model of rhabdomyosarcoma ( ). While this is encouraging, the administration of several compounds comes with more potential for unwanted toxicities, and safety evaluation must be performed with extreme diligence.
One final important consideration for chemotherapy and CAR T cell combination therapy and the influence of the immunosuppressive microenvironment is the administration of lymphodepleting agents. Commonly, a combined regimen of cyclophosphamide and fludarabine is used as a lymphodepleting cocktail to promote a stable environment for CAR T cells to establish and persist in hematological malignancies and has been heavily reviewed elsewhere ( ; ; ). Some solid and brain tumor trials are also incorporating lymphodepletion prior to CAR T cell therapy as a way of removing immunosuppressive B and Treg cells from the tumor microenvironment ( ; ). While lymphodepletion is often considered common practice, it is important to understand the interplay between lymphodepleting agents and lymphoid-based (CAR T) cell therapy. A clinical study led by illustrated the importance of determining optimal fludarabine concentrations in patients with B cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia undergoing CD19 CAR T cell therapy. Patients in this cohort treated with a suboptimal concentration of fludarabine had higher risks of relapse ( ). Therefore, because the field of CAR T cell therapy progresses, lymphodepleting schemas must be diligently designed to ensure that CAR T cells have the best conditions to initiate cytotoxic potential. Furthermore, the interactions of any combinatorial chemotherapeutics with lymphodepleting agents must be considered to devise appropriate treatment strategies that provide optimal therapeutic windows.

E

## Chimeric antigen receptor T cell fitness
An additional challenge faced by all CAR T cell therapies is the limitation of antitumor activity caused by the inability of CAR T cells to persist in a functional effector state. Loss of functionality upon antigen exposure is called exhaustion and is marked by an increase in inhibitory receptors on the CAR T cell surface, such as PD-1 and CTLA4. mAb blockade of these signaling axes has been widely employed in the clinic ( ) to reinvigorate the population of CAR T and endogenous T cells that have successfully infiltrated a tumor but have become exhausted ( ; ). Additionally, many secondary CAR T cell genetic alterations aim to improve the overall fitness (persistence, metabolism, effector function, and others) of tumor-infiltrating CAR T cells. To maintain fitness, CAR T cells need to be able to resist exhaustion ( ), metabolically compete for limited nutrients in the tumor microenvironment ( ), and form long-lasting memory subsets that can clear primary tumors and prevent relapse ( ). There are many targetable pathways involved in these processes, as evidenced in and , in which the majority of CAR T cell and chemotherapy combinatorial studies have focused on CAR T cell fitness. Dosing may be accomplished in 2 fundamental ways. First, chemotherapeutics can be added to the CAR T cell manufacturing process to influence the pathways and properties of CAR T cells prior to infusion. Second, chemotherapies can be administered to patients during or after CAR T cell infusion to influence the fitness of CAR T cells within the tumor microenvironment. Here, we reviewed examples of both strategies.
1

## Chemotherapies added during the manufacturing process
Chemotherapies that can positively influence CAR T cells via addition in the manufacturing process are highly desirable because this approach can be broadly applied to any cancer therapy schema. A prime example of adding chemotherapeutics to the manufacturing process is the addition of the Src kinase inhibitor dasatinib. Dasatinib incubation keeps CAR T cells in a rested “off” state that enriches naïve or stem-like phenotypes prior to infusion ( ; , ; ). Evidence suggests that a high proportion of stem-like cells in CAR T cell infusion products may correlate with strong antitumor efficacy. Dasatinib is commonly used in clinical and preclinical CAR T cell manufacturing processes for this reason. Similarly, combination therapy of GD2.CD28.41BB with the insulin-like growth factor receptors/insulin receptor inhibitor linsitinib against diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma improved therapeutic efficacy by maintaining CAR T cells in a more undifferentiated central memory state ( ). This led to improved therapeutic efficacy at lower CAR T cell doses compared with CAR T cell treatment without linsitinib pretreatment. This result is very encouraging because diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomas are highly aggressive pediatric brain tumors that have no cure ( ).
Previously, we discussed that the FDA-approved therapeutic decitabine can induce the surface expression of antigens on cancer cells and may address the CAR T cell antigen dilemma ( ). When added to the CAR T cell manufacturing process, decitabine alters the epigenetic landscape of CAR T cells to improve fitness by favoring memory formation and persistence ( ). CD19.41BB CAR T cells pretreated with decitabine successfully eliminated large tumor burdens in preclinical models of acute lymphoblastic leukemia and prevented tumor growth upon rechallenge. This highlights the multifunctionality of a chemotherapeutic like decitabine: when administered to a tumor it can increase surface antigens, and when administered only to T cells it improves fitness.
CAR T cell fitness is commonly impaired by the metabolic hostility of the tumor microenvironment. Tumor cells and components of the tumor immune microenvironment outcompete CAR T cells for essential nutrients. In 2024, published a study evaluating the impact of pretreating CAR T cells with the FDA-approved chemotherapeutic enasidenib, an isocitrate dehydrogenase 2 inhibitor. They found that isocitrate dehydrogenase 2 genetic ablation or inhibition with enasidenib diverted glucose utilization away from glycolysis toward the pentose phosphate pathway, which improved activity under nutrient-starved conditions. Furthermore, central memory formation was enriched because of the shuttling of citrate into the cytosol for acetyl-CoA conversion, which altered the epigenetic landscape of CAR T cells, similar to that seen by decitabine pretreatment ( ). Ultimately, metabolically reprogrammed (via enasidenib pretreatment) CD19.41BB and GD2.CD28 CAR T cells had superior antitumor activity against acute lymphoblastic leukemia and osteosarcoma preclinical models, respectively. Of importance, antitumor efficacy was further improved by daily oral administration of enasidenib ( ). This showcases that prolonged CAR T cell support may be necessary beyond the manufacturing process for a chemotherapeutic combination strategy to be optimal.

2

## Chemotherapies administered with or post chimeric antigen receptor T cell infusion
In 2016, published a study evaluating CD19.41BB CAR T cells with combinatorial ibrutinib against mantle cell lymphoma. Animals received CAR T cell therapy on day 7 post-tumor engraftment and daily administration of ibrutinib for the duration of the study. Combinatorial treatment resulted in long-term remission that neither monotherapy could achieve. Ibrutinib is known to inhibit T helper 2 polarization (less cytotoxic) of T cells and favor T helper 1 polarization (more cytotoxic), favoring effector function ( ). This study concurrently showed the downregulation of T cell exhaustion markers PD-1 and CTLA4, overall improving the fitness of CAR T cells with combinatorial therapy ( ). Of importance, ibrutinib has also been shown to have a positive impact on CAR T cells in the clinic. published a clinical study examining the functionality of CD19.41BB CAR T cells that were generated from chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) patients who were treated with Bruton's tyrosine kinase inhibitor ibrutinib. CLL is a B cell malignancy that is susceptible to CAR T cell therapy. However, T cells from patients with CLL poorly expand ex vivo and complicate the CAR T cell manufacturing process. In the 2016 report, the authors found that CAR T cells generated from patients with prolonged ibrutinib treatment experienced significantly improved CAR T cell expansion ( ). Improvements in CAR T cell expansion with prolonged ibrutinib treatment correlated with improved patient response to CAR T cell therapy and overall survival ( ). The positive impact ibrutinib had on patient T cells in the clinic emphasizes the immense potential for use in combinatorial treatment strategies to improve fitness.
In another example, combinatorial treatment of CD19 and CD123 CAR T cells with the preclinical bromodomain and extraterminal motif inhibitor JQ1 improved CAR T cell fitness via reduction of CAR T cell exhaustive markers, ultimately increasing AML tumor control in mouse models ( ). The mechanism was twofold: JQ1 treatment prevented or reversed the exhaustive phenotype of CAR T cells marked by PD-1 and TIM-3 expression and diminished the level of PD-L1 expression on AML blasts. The PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitory axis relies on PD-1 on T cells recognizing PD-L1 on tumor cells. Depletion of both sides of the axis reduces the inhibitory signals received by CAR T cells and improves activation and fitness. This study highlights the ability of a chemotherapeutic to have both an activating impact on CAR T cells and simultaneous inhibitory effects on cancer cells that ultimately improve CAR T cell fitness.

F

## Multiple action chemotherapies
So far, we have highlighted chemotherapy combination strategies that are primarily single-acting and modulate only one aspect of either CAR T or tumor biology but also some that have multiple mechanisms of action. For example, in a prostate cancer model using LeY.CD28 CAR T cells, carboplatin induced both ECM remodeling of the tumor and promoted antitumorigenic macrophage polarization, conferring survival benefits for combination-treated mice ( ). We view these multiaction combinations to be highly valuable, especially if they provide a positive benefit to CAR T cells while simultaneously negatively impacting tumor growth and survival.
A commonly used chemotherapeutic for CAR T cell combination therapy both preclinically and clinically is lenalidomide ( ; ; ; ). Lenalidomide has been tested against multiple hematological and some solid malignancies in combination with B cell maturation antigen, CD19, CD20, CD23, CD133, CS1, HER2, NKG2D, and WT-1 targeting CAR T cells ( ). Lenalidomide is standard for multiple myeloma therapy, allowing for direct antitumor activity ( ). In combinatorial treatment with CAR T cells, lenalidomide was found to improve the expansion of CAR T cells in vivo ( ), improve CAR T cell effector functions ( ), and prevent early onset of CAR T cell exhaustion ( ). Lenalidomide has also been cited to increase IFN-γ and IL-2 production, reduce angiogenesis ( ), improve the CAR T cell/tumor cell interaction ( ), and improve CAR T cell tumor infiltration ( ). It is clear that lenalidomide enhances CAR T cell therapy via direct tumor and CAR T cell mechanisms and is promisingly being actively investigated in the clinic.
Another multiaction combinatorial strategy was recently published by targeting sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor 3 (SIPR3) on tumor cells in both breast and colon murine cancer models. High expression of SIPR3 has been heavily associated with poor patient prognosis as well as failure of checkpoint blockade therapy in cancer patients. Murine EpCAM.CD28.41BB cells were combined with TY-52156 or CAY10444 SIPR3 inhibitors in coculture with tumors and showed increased activation upon exposure to antigen (as determined using IFN and granzyme B secretion), increased memory phenotype (as determined using CD44+CD62L+ double expression), and reduced exhaustion (as determined using PD-1, TIM-3, and lymphocyte activation gene 3). The combination was more efficacious in controlling tumors in vivo than either monotherapy alone. This was further attributed to the ability of SIPR3 inhibitors to reprogram the tumor immune microenvironment by polarizing macrophages toward the M1 proinflammatory phenotype ( ). M1 macrophages are not suppressive for CAR T cells and enable them to continue to effectively clear tumor cells ( ). SIPR3 inhibitors are a prime example of chemotherapeutics with multiple mechanisms of action that synergize to improve tumor clearance. Additionally, it is a strategy that could likely be applied to any cancer with high SIPR3 expression.
These multiple-action drugs, in our opinion, should be prioritized as cancer researchers appreciate and try to combat the immense complexities of cancer. Targeting different cancer-associated phenotypes with a single compound may minimize disease burden and treatment-related cytotoxicity and support an environment that allows for the highest cytotoxic potential of CAR T cells.

IV

## Chimeric antigen receptor T cells that address chemotherapeutic limitations
The tumor-targeting capability of CAR T cells presents a unique opportunity to further overcome some limitations of chemotherapeutics. Engineering CAR T cells to behave like nanoparticles would allow for the local administration of a secondary therapeutic alongside CAR T cell cytotoxicity. To date, this has been most explored in the context of CAR T cells that locally deliver monoclonal checkpoint blockade therapies, which are antibodies that block inhibitory signaling axes between tumor cells and CAR T cells (eg, PD-1/PD-L1, CTLA4/CD80) ( ). CAR T cells have also been designed to secrete enzymes to modulate the tumor microenvironment. In one study, GD2.CD28.OX40 CAR T cells that secrete heparinase induced ECM degradation and improved infiltration of CAR T cells into solid tumors ( ).
 moved this concept into the field of chemotherapeutics and developed synthetic enzyme-armed killer (“SEAKER”) CAR T cells in 2021 that secrete enzymes capable of cleaving inactive prodrugs into their active counterparts, inducing combinatorial therapy only at the site of CAR T cell localization. Specifically, SEAKER cells deploy enzymes derived from bacteria (carboxypeptidase G2 and β-lactamase) that would be active only on the prodrug containing the enzymatic recognition site and be innocuous to healthy tissues. The secretable enzyme sequence was cotransduced with a CD19.41BB CAR. SEAKER cells effectively activated the chemotherapeutics 5′-O-sulfamoyladenosine, the nitrogen mustard ZD2767, and 7-O-aminopropyl-7-O-des(morpholinopropyl)gefitinib when masked with either glutamate (cleaved by carboxypeptidase G2) or cephalosporin (cleaved by β-lactamase). Combinatorial treatment with SEAKER cells and respective prodrugs reduced tumor burden and extended survival against hematological and solid malignancies. Notably, SEAKER cells were able to eliminate antigen-negative cancer cells in vitro in the presence of an appropriate prodrug, whereas CAR T cells alone could not because of the low-level secretion of enzymes that are not antigen-dependent. This strategy therefore also addresses some antigen dilemma/heterogeneity challenges when local activation of potent chemotherapeutics can eliminate any tumor cells that CAR T cells cannot target because of low or absent antigen expression.
The modularity of SEAKER technology is exciting for the development of the next waves of combinatorial treatment options for CAR T cells and chemotherapeutics. Prodrugs are desirable for their ability to be specifically activated at the tumor site, limiting off-tumor toxicities ( ; ). Prodrugs can be designed with hypoxia or acid-sensitive caps, as well as enzyme-cleavable moieties ( ). The appeal of the SEAKER cell technology is the incorporation of bacterial-derived enzyme cleavage linkers that cannot be cleaved unless SEAKER cells are present. This provides the possibility of conjugating cytotoxic drugs with tumor-targeting moieties or blood-brain penetrant moieties ( ) that can shuttle drugs to the tumor, where they will be activated by SEAKER cells. This may drastically expand the number of drugs that could be considered for brain cancer therapy that are currently limited by low blood-brain barrier penetrance.

V

## Identifying chemotherapy and chimeric antigen receptor T combinations with high-throughput screening
As exemplified throughout this review, combining CAR T cell therapy with chemotherapies can be highly beneficial. Many investigators have prioritized compounds based on their known mechanisms of action that either impinge on tumor cell maintenance or positively regulate CAR T cell effector functionality. However, identifying candidates can be laborious and time-consuming, delaying potential clinical translation. High-throughput drug screening is an essential technique that can be optimized to streamline the drug identification process. Some successful preclinical CAR T cell and drug combinations reviewed herein have been identified using screening technology. Screens spanned small-molecule inhibitors, epigenetic modulators, proapoptotic molecules, kinase inhibitors, and mitochondrial targeting compounds ( ; ; ; ; ). These drug screens identified compounds that could either modulate the immune landscape, support CAR T cell effector function and fitness, increase tumor debulking, increase targeted antigen expression, or promote a more permissive environment for CAR T cells. Collectively, these screens took a broad-scale approach to enhancing CAR T cell therapy that more rapidly identified promising candidates to be used in downstream validation.
For example, one study performed by identified insulin-like growth factor receptors/insulin receptors as a targetable vulnerability for diffuse midline gliomas (DMGs) through a selective kinase drug screen. This screening approach was performed by pretreating DMG cells with a singular concentration (1 μM) of 42 kinase inhibitors for an hour prior to the addition of either GD2.CD28.41BB or nontransduced CAR T cells. The tumor and T cells were cocultured in the presence or absence of the drug for 24 hours, at which point relative viability was determined using live cell imaging and metabolism-based assays. From the drug screen, linsitinib and BMS-754807 were identified as compounds that could inhibit tumor cell viability while sparing CAR T cells individually. Further validation confirmed a therapeutic benefit in the combination of linsitinib and GD2.CD28.41BB CAR T cells contributed to greater antitumor activity in both in vitro and in vivo DMG models ( ).
A more recent example of a successful compound screen was performed by , which used a small-molecule compound library that identified JK-184, a hedgehog signaling pathway inhibitor, to complement B7-H3.CD28 CAR T cells against breast cancer cell lines. Uniquely, this study used 3 distinct approaches to conduct the screen, in which (1) tumor cells were pretreated with candidate compounds for 48 hours and then CAR T cells were added, (2) tumor cells were incubated with compounds for 48 hours in the absence of CAR T cells, or (3) CAR T cells were incubated with the candidate compounds for 24 hours in the absence of tumor cells. This multipronged approach allowed for specific characterization of drug-induced effects on each cell type individually while also being able to determine a combinatorial benefit. Following identification, tumor cells and CAR T cells treated with candidate compounds were subjected to RNA sequencing and gene pathway enrichment analysis to identify differentially expressed genes that may be mechanistically contributing to the observed benefit. Later experiments confirmed that JK184 enhanced B7-H3.CD28 infiltration and reshaped the tumor milieu by inhibiting immunosuppressive myeloid populations ( ).
A main consideration for performing a drug screen is the vast heterogeneity of cancer types that drive the deficiencies of CAR T cell therapy. For instance, many CAR T cell therapies targeting blood cancers fail to prevent relapse because of antigen downregulation or loss on the surface of cancer cells ( ). This is not often a challenge with solid and brain cancers, but poor infiltration and quick progression of exhaustion are ( ). Knowing the primary challenges CAR T cells will face against a given tumor type is crucial. Then, targeted drug screens with appropriate readouts should be performed to identify candidates for combinatorial therapy. Ideally, because more screens are performed, drug candidates will surface that are effective in combination with CAR T cells regardless of CAR construction against multiple cancers. However, because the field enters further into investigations of this nature, it is imperative to perform unique screens for each tumor type and different CAR targets and structures. Screens should additionally be designed in a way that the impact of a chemotherapeutic on both the tumor and CAR T cells can be assessed.

VI

## Critical considerations for chemotherapy and chimeric antigen receptor T cell combination therapy
Herein, we have shown the vast number of mechanisms by which combinatorial chemotherapy can overcome challenges faced by CAR T cell therapy. Chemotherapeutics can increase surface levels of targetable surface antigens; assist cytotoxic CAR T cells via tumor debulking; improve CAR T cell homing and penetrance into solid tumor masses; rewire CAR T cell transcription, epigenetic, and metabolic programs to improve fitness and persistence; and combat other cells in the tumor immune microenvironment that are hostile toward CAR T cells. In some cases, a single chemotherapeutic agent will address multiple CAR T cell deficiencies with the ability to target programs in tumor cells or tumor-associated immune cells that are deleterious and in the CAR T cells that are beneficial. Additionally, here are many instances of CAR T cell and chemotherapy combination strategies in the clinic ( ). As more combination strategies are being investigated, there are many different aspects that must be considered and addressed in the preclinical stage for successful implementation in the clinic.
A

## Thorough preclinical efficacy and safety testing
Thorough preclinical evaluation of combinatorial CAR T and chemotherapy combination strategies is imperative for successful translation into the clinic. For many CAR T cell preclinical studies, human tumors are orthotopically implanted into immunocompromised mice prior to treatment with human CAR T cells. Immunodeficiency of mice ensures that human tumors and CAR T cells will not be rejected by the murine immune system. While this methodology confirms that human CAR T cells successfully target human tumors in a living system, true safety testing is not possible in this setting. Some CAR targets highly expressed on tumor cells can be expressed on healthy tissues (eg, GD2 and Epha2), which may pose on-target off-tumor health risks ( ; ). Additionally, immunocompromised mice lack the full tumor immune microenvironment that may significantly change the outcome of CAR T cell therapy ( ). Similarly, chemotherapeutics must undergo rigorous safety testing to ensure that the benefit of the therapy outweighs the possible risks. Even if both therapies are proved to be safe separately, safety testing of combination therapy must still be performed because of possible alterations of safety profiles of either the chemotherapeutic agents or CAR T cells. It is imperative to perform preclinical safety and efficacy studies of combinatorial strategies in syngeneic models with murine tumors that mimic human pathology and CAR T cells derived from murine T lymphocytes so that the safety of both chemotherapeutic agents and CAR T cells can be evaluated in the presence of the endogenous immune system.

B

## Optimizing delivery approach
An additional challenge for chemotherapy and CAR T cell combinatorial approaches is identifying an appropriate dosing timeline. In the most traditional sense of a combinatory strategy, 2 different therapies can be administered simultaneously to a patient ( A). This strategy may be ideal when considering a combinatorial strategy that will most profoundly impact CAR T cells within the tumor microenvironment or for chemotherapeutics that act on both CAR T cells and a component of the tumor. However, we have discussed in this review that there is also a benefit to either priming tumors ( B) or CAR T cells ( C) with chemotherapeutics prior to infusion, depending on the mechanism of the chemotherapeutic agents. 
For chemotherapeutics that exclusively target the tumor, pretreatment of patients with chemotherapeutics prior to CAR T cell administration is a viable option. For example, chemotherapeutics that debulk tumors or increase surface antigen levels are likely to be most beneficial if administered sometime before CAR T cell treatment. However, it is crucial to consider the impact this will have on the health of patient T cells. A 2019 study by studied the naïve populations of T cells collected from the periphery of patients at the beginning of cancer diagnosis and throughout rounds of standard chemotherapy for multiple cancers. The naïve phenotype was singled out as a proportion of naïve cells in CAR T cell infusion products that have been shown to correlate to treatment efficacy. A total of 195 pediatric patients with cancer across 10 different diagnoses (including hematological and solid malignancies) were enrolled in the study. CAR T cells were generated from peripheral blood mononuclear cells, surface phenotyping was performed to identify the proportion of naïve cells and ex vivo expansion was used as the primary benchmark for assessing CAR T cell functionality/health. Generally, regardless of cancer type, CAR T cell health was superior at diagnosis as compared with following any amount of chemotherapy and was dependent on the initial proportion of naïve/central memory CAR T cells. These data highlight that the timing of blood collection for the generation of CAR T cells for patients who might receive CAR T cell therapy following standard chemotherapy needs to be carefully considered to optimize efficacy. Potential combinatorial strategies should also consider whether chemotherapy might have a negative impact on overall T cell health if administered first.
For chemotherapeutics that exclusively act on CAR T cells, adding the agent to the manufacturing process is readily approved, as discussed in the “ ” section above. However, it is possible that for some inhibitors acting on CAR T cells, like enasidenib, the maximum therapeutic benefit is achieved with pretreatment in the manufacturing process and continued administration following CAR T cell infusion ( ). Investigations into each possibility and combinations thereof are necessary to optimize the strategy.

C

## Optimizing dosing amounts
Another consideration for appropriate dosing strategy is the overall amount of both chemotherapeutic agent and CAR T cell administration that is optimal for efficacy. If truly synergistic, it is hopeful that the doses of both agents can be minimized to avoid off-tumor toxicities. It is well established that chemotherapies have intense systemic toxicities that lead to sickness while on chemotherapeutic regimens as well as long-lasting effects, including an increased risk of developing other cancers ( ; ). When CAR T cells are activated by antigen recognition, they secrete cytokines that elicit inflammatory responses. When tumors are large and CAR T cells are working effectively, this can cause patients to experience symptoms of sickness that fall on a grading scale of cytokine release syndrome and immune effector cell-associated neurotoxicity syndrome ( ). Most symptoms are readily managed through treatment with tocilizumab and/or steroids, and the chemical drug ruxolitinib has also been shown to mitigate cytokine release syndromes when refractory to steroids ( ). Optimal synergistic combinatorial therapies of chemotherapeutics and CAR T cells may reduce the dose required of both agents, resulting in maximum efficacy with minimal side effects.
Another crucial consideration for combinatorial strategies is whether a given chemotherapeutic agent will impair the ability of CAR T cells to successfully engraft and proliferate in response to antigens. A prominent consideration for this is when combining CAR T cells with standard-of-care therapy. Dexamethasone is commonly used in GBM treatment schema. As such, it makes sense to combine dexamethasone and CAR T cell therapies. However, dexamethasone has been shown to critically reduce CAR T cell efficacy at high doses but remain relatively inert at lower doses ( ). This highlights the importance of optimizing both timing and dosing strategies when combining CAR T cells and chemotherapeutics.

VII

## Summary and conclusions
Overall, combinatorial CAR T cell and chemotherapeutic treatment strategies are promising for overcoming both CAR T cell and chemotherapeutic deficiencies. These possibilities are largely unexplored for many cancer types and CAR designs, representing an open field for further investigation. While there are many aspects to optimize, such as CAR structure, chemotherapeutic target, and dosing strategy, combinatorial therapies are showing early preclinical success for overcoming limitations in CAR T cell therapies to ultimately improve survival outcomes for patients. Finally, implementing a combinatorial treatment approach in the clinic has the potential to be faster and cheaper, especially if both therapeutics have been FDA-approved.

## Conflict of interest
No author has an actual or perceived conflict of interest with the contents of this article.

 

## Supplemental material

## Supplementary Table 1

## Financial support
This work was supported by the 10.13039/100000985Assisi Foundation of Memphis, the 10.13039/100012524American Lebanese Syrian Associated Charities (ALSAC), R01NS122859, R01NS121249, U01CA281823 to G.K., T32CA272387 to M.W., and 10.13039/100001445Alex's Lemonade Stand Foundation Young Investigator Award to M.W.

## Data availability
This review article contains no datasets generated or analyzed during the current study.

## Authorship contributions
Wrote or contributed to the writing of the manuscript: Ward, Jones, Krenciute.

M.B.W. and A.B.J. contributed equally to this work.
This article has supplemental material available at pharmrev.aspetjournals.org.