pmcFundam ResFundam Res4600fundresFundamental Research2096-94572667-3258The Science Foundation of China Publication Department, The National Natural Science Foundation of ChinaPMC13247514PMC13247514.113247514132475144227252410.1016/j.fmre.2024.12.021S2667-3258(25)00007-X1ReviewCrosstalk between bone and vasculature within bone
XiaWenyu WangWei QinYi DingYayun LiWenhao GeGaoran LiWenming ZhangWei YangHuilinsuzhouspine@163.com WangLiangliangm18862238837@163.com BaiJiaxiangjxbai1995@ustc.edu.cn GengDechunszgengdc@suda.edu.cn aDepartment of Orthopedics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, ChinabDepartment of Orthopedics, Centre for Leading Medicine and Advanced Technologies of IHM, The First Affiliated Hospital of USTC, Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230022, ChinacDepartment of Orthopedics, The Affiliated Changzhou No 2 People's Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Changzhou 213000, China⁎Corresponding authors. suzhouspine@163.comm18862238837@163.comjxbai1995@ustc.edu.cnszgengdc@suda.edu.cn1These authors contributed equally to this work.
5202610120256351526619131926116202461120249122024100120251006202611062026© 2025 The Authors. Publishing Services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd.2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Bone is a highly vascularized connective tissue, and its physiological and pathological processes are closely linked to the vascular system. The vasculature system should include the blood vessel system and the lymphatic system, while the majority of previous reviews only discuss the relationship between bone and blood vessels. Vascular vessels travel through the bone and constitute the bone microenvironment together with the bone structure. The paracrine function of the vasculature is essential for bone development, homeostasis, regeneration, modeling, and remodeling. Osteolineage cells also regulate the physiologic activity of the vascular system. Complex signaling crosstalk exists between the vascular system and bone and together coordinate the dynamic processes of bone formation and bone resorption. In addition, targeting based on the skeletal-vasculature axis also provides new strategies for the therapy of related diseases.

## Keywords
VasculatureBone remodelingAngiogenesisBlood vesselsLymphatic Vesselspmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND1

## Introduction
The human body contains two distinct vascular networks: blood vessels and lymphatic vessels. Blood vessels transport oxygen, nutrients, growth factors, and immune cells throughout the body, while lymphatic vessels collect leaked immune cells and fluids from tissues and drain them through the lymphatic network to eventually enter the venous circulation [ ]. The embryonic vein differentiates into these two complementary functional vascular networks during development, which together maintain the essential physiological process of body fluid circulation. Bones are highly vascularized organs and skeletal homeostasis is inextricably linked to the regulation of the vasculature system. The vasculature exhibits organ heterogeneity and spatiotemporal heterogeneity, and abnormal changes in the vasculature can be detected during the progression of skeletal diseases.
Recently, increasing numbers of studies have highlighted the importance of bone as an endocrine organ, suggesting that bone-derived factors regulate bone vasculature microenvironment. Secretory factors produced by osteolineage cells (osteoblasts, osteoclasts, osteocytes and chondrocytes) during dynamic skeletal microenvironment modulate the peripheral vasculature. During bone modeling, bone formation and bone resorption are two relatively independent processes, and bone modeling allows the bone to adapt to various changes by adding scarce bone and removing excess bone. In bone remodeling, formation and resorption are coupled processes [ ]. The vasculature provides niche for the dynamic remodeling of the skeleton, and builds the bridge that connects the bone marrow microenvironment to the circulatory system. Skeletal development is mediated by two different mechanisms: endochondral osteogenesis and intramembranous osteogenesis. Intramembranous ossification (flat bones) is characterized by mesenchymal cells differentiating into capillaries that work together with osteoblasts to build new bone. While during endochondral osteogenesis (long bones), blood vessels are located in the perichondrium, where they deliver osteoblasts to the cartilage margins to remodel cartilage into bone and subsequently deliver osteoclasts to new pores to construct the medullary cavity. Despite these differences, angiogenesis and osteogenesis usually exhibit coupled patterns called “angiogenesis-osteogenesis coupling” [ , , ] ( ). The endocrine function of the vasculature is largely based on endothelial cells, and these biologically active substances regulate various physiological processes of skeletal-vasculature interactions through paracrine secretion. Vascular secretory factors promote the process of osteogenesis through multiple pathways and are the cornerstone of bone homeostasis. Skeletal dysfunction and vascular abnormalities are initiated when the crosstalk between bone and vasculature shows abnormalities. Further investigations searching for cues for therapeutic application in the context of intraosseous vasculature and skeletal crosstalk might contribute to the development of approaches for clinical cases involving skeletal disorders. 
Lymphatic vessels have the same origin as blood vessels in the embryo, but they are difficult to recognize in bone. Recent studies have mainly focused on the inter-regulation and molecular communication between the vasculature localized in the skeleton and osteolineage cells, while studies of the extraosseous vasculature have remained at systemic overall dysfunction. Therefore, the use of single-cell sequencing and lineage tracing technologies is important for intersystem regulation. General skeletal diseases may be caused by the skeletal vasculature, whereas the effects of aging are mainly systemic. Skeletal microenvironmental changes, triggered by systemic vascular abnormalities, are also often included in the discussion based on a circulatory perspective. In order to avoid confusion or misunderstanding in reading, the vascular systems (blood vessels and lymphatics) that we have not specifically referred to in this review are localized in the skeleton. Many previous reviews have evaluated the blood vessel system in terms of the vasculature system, but actually, the vasculature system should include the lymphatic vessel system. For the first time, we present a systematic review of the crosstalk between bone vasculature and bone. In this review, we summarize the anatomy of the vasculature and the effect of molecular signaling on the skeleton. By tracing skeletal-specific endothelial cell phenotypes via single-cell sequencing of intraosseous blood vessel endothelial cells, several subtypes were found to regulate skeletal homeostasis directly or indirectly. Complex signaling between endothelial cells and osteolineage cells underpins skeletal vascular homeostasis. We review the old and new roles of intraosseous lymphatic vessels. From vascular-skeletal regulation to skeletal/vasculature system disorders, we review the corresponding vascular abnormalities and imbalances in skeletal homeostasis that occur in these disorders. Based on these studies, new therapeutic avenues for skeletal diseases are highlighted and future research directions are discussed.

2

## Blood vessel system: The indispensable role of bone metabolism
Blood vessels constitute a highly pervasive network of endothelial tubule structures that intricately permeate all tissues, except for cartilage and the crystalline lens. Notably, as the largest organ in the body, the skeleton is heavily dependent on the critical functions of blood vessels for proper bone development, homeostasis, and immune responses to inflammation and diseases [ , ]. The skeletal system accounts for 10% to 15% of resting-state cardiac output. The anatomical structure and physiological mechanisms of intraosseous vessels have still not been fully characterized, and the bone marrow is a highly vascularized structure within long bones. In addition to the underlying arterial and venous structures, recent studies have identified trans-cortical vessels (TCVs) that originate from the bone marrow and cross the bone cortex in the direction of the vertical bone axis to enter the periosteal circulation [ ]. TCVs are intimately involved in bone remodeling and are one of the basic structures that maintain the skeletal microenvironment. Blood vessel endocrine function is largely dependent on endothelial cells (ECs), and specific subtypes of ECs in bone play positive roles in bone remodeling. Recent research has highlighted the indispensable role of blood vessel factors in modulating this complex interplay between angiogenesis and osteogenesis [ , ]. In this section, we describe the regulation of bone by the bone blood vessels in terms of blood vessel secretion, blood vessel networks and physical properties of the blood vessels. The physiological processes of angiogenesis and osteogenesis are intricately intertwined and closely coupled ( ). 
2.1

## Functional and spatial heterogeneity of bone marrow endothelial cells
The specific network structure of blood vessels also precisely regulates bone remodeling. The following specific capillary subtypes are classified by their endothelial surface markers: CD31 (platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1, PECAM-1/CD31) and EMCN (sialoglycoprotein endomucin). Depending on the relative expression degree of the markers, four different capillaries have been identified: Type H vessels (CD31hiEMCNhi), Type L vessels (CD31loEMCNlo) [ ], Type E vessels (CD31hiEMCNlo) [ ] and Type S vessels (secondary ossification) [ ]. These four blood vessel subtypes have different morphological characteristics and physiological functions, but most of their functions are dependent on ECs. Different EC subtypes have different temporal and spatial distribution characteristics. The specific secreted angiocrine factors of these cells have been discussed previously; in this study, we explored the influence of the vascular network on mainly bone remodeling or osteolineage cells ( ). 
2.1.1

## Type H vessels
Type H vessels exhibit high expression of CD31 and EMCN, which play important roles in the coupling of angiogenesis-osteogenesis and are able to regulate the metabolic and molecular microenvironment. Type H vessels are mainly found in the growth plate epiphysis, periosteum and endosteal surface [ ]. Its morphology in bone mainly manifests as a distally connected straight column vascular network structure. Type H blood vessels are surrounded by Osterix+ osteoprogenitors, which effectively differentiate into osteoblasts and osteocytes to promote bone formation [ ]. The majority of Runx2+ early osteoprogenitors and collagen 1α osteoblastic cells similarly accumulate near type H vessels. Mesenchymal cells expressing platelet-derived growth factor receptor β (PDGFRβ) also preferred type H vessel endothelial cells in the epiphysis and endosteum. There was an age-dependent decrease in the number of type H vessels, while the total number of bone ECs did not change significantly. The proliferation rate of type H ECs was significantly higher in young rats than in adult rats [ ]. The transcript levels of osteogenesis-related mRNAs (Pdgfa, Pdgfb, Tgbf1, Tgfb3 and Fgf1) were significantly higher in type H ECs than in type L ECs, further demonstrating the critical role of type H vessels in bone remodeling. High expression of Notch in type H ECs also showed specificity in bone blood vessels, which may be related to the increased migration and vascularization of type H vessels [ , ]. Notch signaling promotes high expression of the Noggin protein in type H ECs and promotes chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation [ ]. MMP-9 released from H-type ECs regulates resorbed cartilage to guide longitudinal bone growth [ ]. HIF-1α promotes the proliferation of type H ECs by mediating the increase in VEGF [ , ]. During bone repair, the invasion of neovascularization is a critical component of bone regeneration and bone remodeling. Type H vessels have a greater ability to differentiate into arteries than type L vessels. The neoartery is the primary foundation of the bone remodeling compartment [ ]. A decreased abundance of type H vessels can be found during osteoporosis, and the application of Harmine in mice effectively elevates bone marrow PDGF-BB levels and the amount of type H vessels [ ].
Recent studies have shown that osteoblasts secrete SLIT3, while pre-osteoclasts secrete PDGF-BB, both of which promote the formation of type H vessels and facilitate the coupling of angiogenesis and osteogenesis [ ]. The close connection between osteogenesis and angiogenesis also demonstrates a potential mechanism for molecular communication [ ]. It has been proved that type H blood vessels play an important role in the occurrence and development of a variety of diseases. In addition, blocking type H vessels can even delay the development of OA. A significantly reduced number of type H vessels can be found under pathological skeletal conditions. Targeted therapies to type H ECs has also shown promising therapeutic potential in skeletal diseases. Recently, the classical hypoglycemic drug metformin (Glucophage) was shown to promote type H vessel generation during fracture healing by inhibiting YAP1/TAZ and increasing HIF-1α expression. Therefore, further exploration of the molecular communication between various vascular subtypes and bone is highly important for providing clinical guidance.

2.1.2

## Type L vessels
In contrast, type L vessels exhibit low expression of CD31 and EMCN and are predominantly present in the bone marrow lumen of the backbone. Type L vessels form a dense, widely branched sinusoidal capillary network in the bone, but there are no osteoprogenitors or osteoblasts surrounding them. However, two main types of perivascular cells are present around type L vessels: cytokine chemokine ligand 12 (CXCL12)-abundant reticular (CAR) cells and leptin receptor (LEPR)-positive stromal cells expressing platelet-derived growth factor receptor-α (PDGFR-α) [ , ]. This finding suggested that it plays an important role in the trafficking of hematopoietic cells and in providing a blood vessel niche. Unlike that of type H vessels, the rate of proliferation of type L ECs does not differ significantly from that in younger age [ , ]. Oxygen-rich blood first exits the arteries and distal small arteries, then connects directly to the type H vessels, transitions into the type L sinusoidal network at the epiphyseal and diaphyseal junctions, and finally converges to the central vein. The percentage of type L ECs continues to increase with age, and becomes the predominant subtype of ECs. Type L ECs are considered to be functionally relatively quiescent. Dentin matrix protein 1 (DMP1) inhibits VEGF signaling at the ossification front and converts type H vessels to type L vessels, a mechanism by which DMP1 protects articular cartilage from vascular invasion [ ]. Much less research has focused on type L vessels than on type H vessels, which may be more functionally oriented to be relatively static due to their sinusoidal vessel shape, which may be more related to normal bone homeostasis. The impact of type L ECs on the hematological system via the bone marrow microenvironment warrants further debate and investigation.

2.1.3

## Type E vessels
Type E vessels are known for their abundance in long bones during embryonic and early postnatal development. Additionally, short-term existence type E ECs with strong osteoprogenitor associations and high expression of CD31 and EMCN (higher than type L vessels but lower than type H vessels) were highly discovered in embryonic and early postnatal long bones. Type E ECs exhibit particularly high expression of angiogenic and pro-osteogenic genes and induce osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal cells [ ]. Type E ECs can be converted to type H or L ECs and are therefore considered upstream and have the same potential to differentiate into arteries [ ]. Both type E and H ECs have the potential to transform into arterial ECs, and type H ECs can also transform into type L ECs. Although the blood in type L vessels is thought to be less oxygenated, there is no evidence that type L ECs can transform into venous ECs [ ]. There are also differences in blood velocity and blood oxygen content among these three morphologically and functionally distinct vessels, which may be related to their reactive oxygen species (ROS) responsiveness and bone marrow function. Type E vessels are currently difficult to characterize because of their short dominance period and rapid transition to type H ECs, but their role in bone development and growth cannot be ignored. Bone modeling is more apparent in growth and development than in adult skeletons and may be regulated by type E vessels. Type E vessels may also serve as precursors to type H vessels in certain bone environments. However, they are difficult to identify because of their similar expression of CD31/EMCN.

2.1.4

## Type S vessels
In a recent study, the team of Takahito Iga discovered a new subtype of capillary named type S ECs (secondary ossification) [ ]. Researchers analyzed the subpopulation of ECs from different segments of the mouse femur by single-cell RNA sequencing and identified a new nonsinusoidal EC subpopulation. This new subpopulation of ECs has been termed type S ECs because they are present only with secondary ossification centers at epiphyseal sites. Ly6a and Ly6c1 were highly expressed in type S ECs, consistent with the findings in arterial ECs and type H ECs. Vegfr1, which is barely expressed in type S ECs, is highly expressed in type H ECs. Col1a1 and Col1a2, which encode collagen I in osteoblasts/bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells, are also highly expressed in type S ECs. Severe impairment of angiogenesis and bone formation in the epiphysis was observed in endothelial-specific knockout Vegfr2 mice [ ], and impaired vascularization and osteogenesis were also found in Dll4 endothelial-specific knockout mice. Dll4 deletion could overcome the antiangiogenic effect mediated by Vegfr2 deletion. Type S ECs do not express classical osteogenic factors such as BMPs and FGFs but preferentially express Col1a1 to promote collagen I to compensate for the insufficient secretion of MSCs to support epiphyseal osteogenesis [ ]. Type S ECs are expected to alleviate bone diseases such as osteoporosis and osteonecrosis by maintaining joint stability through the epiphysis.
ECs subpopulations flow is another hallmark of dynamic skeletal remodeling. Type E vessels represent an important marker of nascent bone during developmental stages, with other subtypes being relatively scarce. Thereafter, the increasing type H vessels on age symbolize the predominance of bone formation, which gradually declines in adulthood and old age. The type L ECs, which are relatively consistent with the blood sinus capillaries, represent the relatively stable skeletal microenvironment with consistently high levels of abundance. Although this process of change does not usually occur consecutively, a trend toward conversion of type E ECs to type H ECs and of type H ECs to type L ECs is evident. The dynamics of blood vessel subpopulations is a reliable microscopic view of bone homeostasis and skeletal disease states. Recently discovered type S ECs are not currently found to phenotypically switch with other ECs subtypes, located only with secondary ossification centers at epiphyseal sites. Tracing the spatiotemporal localization of different ECs by single-cell technology can better demonstrate the progression of skeletal diseases. The phenotypes, blood oxygenation characteristics and metabolic states of different ECs all contribute to further deepening the recognition of skeletal-vascular coupling. Blood vessel ECs heterogeneity is also showing its potential as a therapeutic target in skeletal diseases (aging or osteoarthritis).

2.2

## Other vascular basic cells
ECs are the most prominent implementers of vascular function, and research on the regulation of skeletal function by other vascular basic cells is scarce. We briefly describe the crosstalk between pericytes or vascular smooth muscle cells and bone. The vasculature is progressively recognized at the level of the whole organ, the entry points for clinical disease treatment are gradually diversifying.
Pericytes located within the vascular basement membrane can directly communicate with ECs in a number of ways. Pericytes can support vascular function through TGF-β or Ang1 signaling, and pericytes play an important regulatory role in angiogenesis. Pericytes exhibit reparative effects on bone due to its potential of stem cells. Research has demonstrated that pericytes have the capacity to differentiate into osteoblasts, chondrocytes and adipocytes, similar to MSCs. Osteoblast differentiation stemness is also considered as a significant causative factor for vascular calcification, and pericytes can promote spinal cord injury and bone repair probably also due to different proportion of subtype cell populations (NG2, CD146, and PDGFRβ-positive et.al) [ ]. Probing the function of pericytes will help develop new therapeutic targets and indicate new directions for the treatment of skeletal diseases.
Vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) are the predominant cells in the arterial medial layer. When VSMCs differentiate into osteoblasts, the characteristic smooth muscle markers are lost and osteoblast-like characteristics develop, which represent critical events responsible for vascular calcification. Various familiar skeletal-vascular coupling regulation factors (BMPs, RANKL et.al) exacerbate VSMC calcification. However, no direct research has demonstrated that factors of bone origins promote this disease process, and also little is known about the effects of VSMC on skeleton. Fernandes et al. demonstrated that exosomes released by VSMC promote osteoblast-to-osteocyte transition by up-regulating Wnt/β-catenin signaling [ ]. This provides new research directions for the skeletal-vascular axis.

3

## Lymphatic vasculature: A new dimension in the bone
The lymphatic vasculature plays an essential role in maintaining fluid homeostasis, immune response and lipid absorption in the body [ , , ]. The lymphatic vasculature can be divided into two categories: the lymphatic capillaries that absorb interstitial fluid and the collecting vessels that transport lymph to the lymph nodes and circulation. Although there has been much discussion about the role of the lymphatic system in bone and bone metabolism, until recently, it has been confirmed that lymphatic vessels (LVs) exist in bone and hematopoietic regeneration [ ]. It has certainly overturned many previous studies have suggested that LVs invade bone only under pathological conditions. LVs identified earlier in the cerebrospinal fluid and spinal column were in the vertebral canal and spinal meninges [ , , ] and were not clearly identified in the bone.
3.1

## Abnormal lymphatic vessels in bone
Previously, the majority of related research considered LVs found in bone to constitute pathological states of extraosseous LVs invading the bone. Lymphatic malformation is a localized or multifocal lesion of lymphatic vessels that triggers an imbalance in humoral homeostasis and abnormal immune function [ ]. Lymphatic malformations include common lymphatic malformations and complex lymphatic anomalies (CLAs). A number of lymphatic malformations can cause skeletal or spinal abnormalities (e.g., CLOVES syndrome), and CLAs often destroy bone trabeculae and cause bone loss. CLAs include four types based on their different clinical and pathological features: Gorham-Stout Disease (GSD), General Lymphatic Anomaly (GLA), Kaposiform Lymphangiomatosis (KLA), and Central Conducting Lymphatic Anomaly (CCLA) [ ]. CLAs are characterized by abnormal LVs invading the bone, leading to bone loss through an unspecified mechanism. Trabecular bone is almost always affected, whereas the loss of cortical bone is only associated with GSD. Abnormal LVs in CLAs can invade any bone throughout the body, and different subtypes of CLAs tend to invade different bones.
Gorham Stout disease (GSD) is characterized by progressive invasion of lymphatic vessels into the bone, inducing progressive loss of cortical bone and bone trabeculae [ , ]. In pathological situations the extraosseous origin of the LV penetrates the periosteum and enters the bone to alter bone homeostasis. GSD patients present with bone symptoms mostly manifested as bone pain and skeletal deformity, with an increase in infiltrating soft tissue clearly observed in the lesioned bones. Osteolysis-induced spinal instability can lead to death in severe cases [ ]. GLA is characterized by diffuse lymphoid infiltration and LV expansion mainly invades the axial skeleton (spine and ribs). KLA is a subtype of GLA that presents with highly aggressive and distinctive spindle endothelial cells [ ]. The CCLA mostly presents with dilated central conduction lymphatic channels, and the lesioned bone shows a more permeable appearance due to LV expansion [ ].
Lymphatic endothelial cells (LECs) originate from different cell types, and bone LEC labeling in GSD mice confirmed that the lymphatics in bone originate from pre-existing lymphatics (mainly PROX1-positive cells) [ ]. By comparing GSD mice with normal mice, the periosteum may play a protective role in the invasion of the bone by the LV. The periosteum may produce protective factors to prevent LV from penetrating the periosteum, and the progenitor cells that differentiate into osteoblasts within the periosteum [ ] may repair bone during this process. LECs also do not possess the ability to dissolve the bone matrix; therefore, Hominick et al. hypothesized that osteoclasts may open the invasion gap for LVs [ , ]. LECs can secrete M-CSF to promote osteoclast proliferation and differentiation, while osteoclasts can secrete VEGF-C to promote lymphatic development and suppress the expression of osteogenic differentiation marker genes [ , ].
Only GSD disrupts the bone cortex, while other types of CLA do not show direct evidence of extraosseous lymphatic connections to the bone. Solorzano et al. hypothesized that bone containing LVs is formed by abnormal migration of LECs during development [ ]. Recent studies have confirmed the presence of bone LVs (bLVs), suggesting that the disruption of trabeculae may be due to the homeostatic imbalance of bLVs affected by CLA. Previously, owing to technical limitations, visualization of bLVs was incomplete. It was previously recognized that LVs and bone interact mainly in inflammatory conditions, CLAs and disease conditions [ , ]. This difference may be associated with an imbalance in bone remodeling induced by cytokines or growth factors secreted by extraosseous LECs. However, after the anatomical location of bLVs was determined [ ], the argument that all LECs in the bones of CLA patients have an extraosseous origin needs to be re-examined. The collapse of trabecular bone is presumably due to the CLAs affecting cytokines, which in turn affect the metabolism of bLVs and enhance their interaction with osteoclasts. This hypothesis needs to be supported by subsequent studies, and a portion of the normal physiological function of bLVs may have been previously considered the pathological condition of CLAs.
In previous studies, LVs were considered absent in most bone tumors (primary malignant bone tumors confined to bone), while exogenous lymphatic vessels could be found in bone tumors that metastasized lymphatically and in osteosarcomas that invade the extracellular space of the bone compartment. Moreover, isolated lymphangiomas confined to bone are not associated with lymphangiomas covering soft tissues [ ]. Therefore, we hypothesize that bLVs are likely located in a highly isolated environment because they are surrounded by dense bone and relatively independent of extraosseous lymph. This isolation is disrupted in pathological situations (e.g., CLAs and lymphangiomas), which may explain why LVs were previously more easily observed in pathological situations.
Before the discovery of bLVs under physiological conditions, researchers speculated about the mechanism by which bone drains fluid and removes macromolecular markers. After the injection of tracers or macromolecular markers (ferritin and horseradish peroxidase) into the bone marrow cavity, the tracers can reach the periosteal surface through unidentified channels [ , , ]. Edward's team previously suggested that the gaps between the pseudopodial synapses of endothelial cells in bone sinusoids are large enough to allow macromolecules to migrate freely [ ]. However, whether this drainage process is mediated by bLVs still needs to be experimentally demonstrated.

3.2

## Normal bone lymphatic vessels: Overturning previous beliefs
Lincoln Biswas et al. used a novel tissue transparency technique with 3D imaging to reveal LVs in bone for the first time, opening the door to the exploration of bone metabolism and LVs. By using the following lymphatic endothelial cell (LEC) markers: lymphatic vessel endothelial hyaluronan receptor 1 (LYVE1), prospero-related homeobox 1 (PROX1) and podoplanin (Pdpn), revealed LVs penetration throughout the whole bones. LVs are more abundant in cortical regions than in the bone marrow cavity. After respectively applying radiation, myeloablation and 5-fluorouracil to the treated mice, and LV expansion was observed in the bone tissue. After application of an LV production inhibitor (VEGF-C inhibitor), LV expansion was not observed, and the number of bone marrow cells was reduced. In addition, LV in irradiated mice promoted the expansion of Myh11-positive pericytes in bone, and LEC promoted the differentiation of Myh11-positive cells into perivascular osteoblasts in bone through the expression of CXCL12. However, the ability of LECs to maintain LV expansion and secretory signaling is diminished in aging mice, and injecting LECs from young mice into the bone marrow cavity of aged mice results in a strengthened ability of the bone to respond to genotoxicity. Lineage analysis of Lyve1 EGFP Cre X R26-td Tomato mice revealed that type H vessels in bone have a lymphatic origin during development. Among the reactive proliferations of type H vessels undergoing radiation, some LECs were also shown to be of type H vessel origin [ ]. This finding demonstrated that bone blood vessels and bLVs are interconverted under the regulation of unexplored mechanisms. Bone LVs conversion to type H vessels can effectively promote bone remodeling and regeneration.
It is generally believed that LECs proliferate in the early stages of inflammation and that LVs begin to decline after the peak of inflammation [ ]. LVs regulate tissue healing during inflammation and play an important role in the pathological progression of many bone diseases. However, under some inflammatory conditions, LVs do not disappear as inflammation decreases [ ], and Tong's study demonstrated that LVs play an active role in the healing of rotator cuff injuries. The neonatal LVs maintain lymphatic drainage at the injury site and promote healing of the tendon interface [ ]. The relationship between some orthopedic diseases and LVs will be introduced in later section. Innovative techniques for imaging LVs in bone have opened up a whole new field for revisiting the relationship between LVs and bone metabolism ( ). 
The majority of previous studies on lymphatic vessels and bone disease have concluded that under normal conditions peri‑skeletal lymphatic vessels help to maintain lymphatic clearance and dissolve inflammatory factors during injury. A positive correlation between lymphatic vessels and bone resorption is easily observed within the skeleton. With the application of new imaging techniques, imaging of skeletal lymphatic vessels has revealed that normal lymphatic vessels are present in bone. The lymphatic vascular secretion factor CXCL12 influences bone formation and also reveals secretory signaling crosstalk between bone and lymphatic vessels. Intraosseous LVs are subverting the role of destroyers, and the complement of the vasculature provides new therapeutic directions for skeletal homeostasis and diseases.

4

## Signaling crosstalk between bone and vasculature
Both blood vessels and bones are highly active endocrine organs that regulate adjacent (paracrine) or distant (teleocrine) cells by secreting large amounts of functional molecules. ECs are the source of molecular signals secreted by blood vessels. As important paracrine cells, ECs regulate the behavior of various cells. Endothelial cell secretion is also called angiocrine, and this process results in organ heterogeneity [ , ]. Endothelial cells can provide protection and niche for multiple stem cells, and deficiency of angiocrine factors can disrupt stem cell homeostasis [ ]. Angiocrine signals include growth factors, extracellular matrix components, secreted signaling molecules (cytokines and chemokines), and various gaseous, physical, or cell‒cell communications through cell surface molecules [ ]. Bone remodeling occurs in a highly vascularized, enclosed space: the bone remodeling compartment [ ]. The endocrine and paracrine functions of bone are gradually being recognized [ ]. Angiocrine signals indirectly or directly regulate skeletal dynamics, and osteolineage cells also secrete vascular regulatory factors to modulate bone marrow niche function in the vasculature. To maintain bone homeostasis and during regeneration, osteogenesis and angiogenesis are coupled in an intimate spatiotemporal and interdependent manner: osteogenic cells secrete angiogenic factors to promote the growth of vessels and instruct their functions, while endothelial cells release angiocrine signals to regulate skeletal remodeling and repair. Several signaling pathways and key factors, such as VEGF/PI3K/Akt, Dll4/Notch/Noggin, PDGF-BB, SLIT3, BMPs, MMPs, Wnt/β-catenin, RANK/RANKL/OPG and others, play a role in the process of angiogenesis-osteogenesis coupling [ , , , , , ]. Many of these factors are secreted by not only ECs or osteolineage cells and their signaling modulates both sides ( ). Hence, several factors can be categorized as angiocrine factors, skeletal secretory factors or factors secreted by other organs (e.g., skeletal and cardiac muscle); moreover, vasculature-skeletal regulatory factors are more accurate [ , ]. In this section, we introduce the molecular communication between bone and bone vasculature by centering on the main signaling pathways and describing how these key factors regulate communication. Major research of the effects of bone on the vasculature have been at the level of molecular signaling regulation, and it remains unknown whether the factors originate from ECs or osteolineage cells. Many secretory factors are involved in bidirectional intercellular signaling. Their regulatory targeting cells and modulation of skeletal-vascular coupling remain to be urgently investigated. 
4.1

## Vasculature-skeletal regulatory factors and signaling pathways
4.1.1

## Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is an endothelial cell-specific mitogen that was found in vitro and an angiogenic inducer in a variety of in vivo models. VEGF is expressed in both ECs and osteolineage cells, and the VEGF family includes multiple subtypes and corresponding receptors. VEGF-A is an EC-specific mitogen and an important regulator of the angiogenic cascade response. VEGF-A is secreted mainly by osteoblasts, osteoclasts and hypertrophic chondrocytes, and the VEGF receptor is expressed in both osteoblasts and ECs. There are three main isoforms of VEGF-A: mouse VEGF120, VEGF164 and VEGF188 (mouse VEGF164/188 is equivalent to human VEGF165/189). The tyrosine kinases Flt-1 (VEGFR-1) and Flk-1/KDR (VEGFR-2) are high-affinity VEGF receptors, and VEGFR-2 expressed by ECs and osteoblasts can respond strongly to VEGF signaling. VEGF164 is most important for normal vascularization and bone formation, increasing bone angiogenesis and bone formation by activating the PI3K/AKT pathway to induce β-catenin. Overexpression of VEGF164 in osteoblasts also induces Wnt secretion, which enhances bone angiogenesis and bone formation via β-catenin. VEGF can be induced by various cytokines and transcription factors, such as Noggin [ ], PDGF-BB [ ], HIF-1α [ ] and Runx2 [ ]. The coordination of PDGF-BB and VEGF-A is essential for vascular maturation. Persistent high concentrations of VEGFA can bind to Pdgrfb, downregulate the PDGF-BB signaling pathway, and inhibit the perivascular coverage of neovascularization. Bone formation is strongly affected by the massive death of osteoprogenitor cells around type H ECs. Mesenchymal stromal progenitor cells require intracellular VEGF signaling, and exogenous VEGF cannot rescue the attenuation of osteoblast differentiation triggered by VEGF deficiency [ ]. Osteoblasts also express VEGF receptors, so VEGF can also directly regulate osteoblasts during bone remodeling [ ]. High doses of VEGF inhibit osteoblast function and activate osteoclast activity [ ]. VEGF is a downstream target of hypoxia inducible factor (HIF), and in hypoxic conditions VEGF accumulation is impaired and type H vessels are significantly reduced. Hypoxia has been shown to be a major inducer of VEGF gene transcription. HIF is a classical transcription factor that mediates the oxygen response and regulates angiogenesis. HIF is composed of three α subunits and one β subunit. HIF-1α is regulated mainly by hypoxia, and the high metabolism of osteoblasts results in high oxygen consumption. Relative hypoxia during bone formation upregulates HIF-1α expression in osteoblasts and ECs. HIF-1α increases VEGF expression and regulates bone remodeling. HIF-1α in ECs promotes an increase in type H vessels and enhances intracartilage angiogenesis and bone formation. The continued ability of HIF-1α overexpression to enhance angiogenesis and osteogenesis also demonstrates its role in bone remodeling [ ].

4.1.2

## BMP
Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) is a member of the classical transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β) family. BMP-2 is ubiquitous in the vascular system. VEGF promotes BMP-2 expression and directly regulates bone remodeling. BMP-induced osteogenesis is mediated by the upregulation of osteogenesis-related genes (Runx2, Osx and Cola1). BMP has multiple antagonists: Noggin, Gremlin, Chordin, Follistatin, Smad7 and Sclerostin. BMP-binding EC precursor-derived regulator (BMPER) accelerates osteogenesis via BMP-2 signaling. BMPER deletion leads to impaired angiogenesis-osteogenesis coupling, whereas BMP-9/10 can counteract angiogenesis [ ]. BMP can also promote the development and maturation of LVs. In addition to the typical Smad signaling pathway, both Wnt and Notch cascades are regulated by BMP [ ].

4.1.3

## Dll4/Notch/Noggin signaling
Endothelial Notch signaling can inhibit vascular growth (e.g., embryonic and tumor growth). Delta-like 4 (Dll4) is an important Notch ligand in bone ECs, and Dll4-Notch binding triggers ECs to regulate vascular secretion of Noggin [ ]. In skeletal ECs, active Notch signaling does not inhibit angiogenesis, and type H vessel formation is reduced by inactivation of Dll4 or Rbpj (recombination signal binding protein Jκ). Hyperactivation of Notch significantly increases type H vessel abundance. Noggin acts as an antagonist of BMP, participating in the regulation of recruitment and differentiation of osteoprogenitor cells and promoting bone formation and chondrocyte maturation [ ].

4.1.4

## Slit homolog 3 protein (SLIT3)
SLIT3 is a ligand for SLIT and can be secreted by osteoblasts. SLIT3 increases the number of ECs and promotes bone formation by binding to Robo receptors. SLIT3 activates ERK mitogen-activated protein kinase and the Hippo signaling pathway to stimulate ECs migration and canal formation. SLIT3 also coordinates osteoclasts and osteoblasts to regulate bone coupling. Unexpectedly, the SLIT/Robo signaling pathway can inhibit angiogenesis through certain receptors such as SLIT2/Robo1 [ ] and SLIT2/Robo4 [ , ] which can inhibit tumor angiogenesis. However, whether SLIT2 acts as a negative regulator of angiogenesis-osteogenesis coupling has not been reported.

4.1.5

## Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs)
MMPs belong to the zinc-metalloprotein family of specific enzymes. MMPs induce the hydrolysis of structural proteins in the extracellular matrix, triggering matrix remodeling, a process that is thought to occur continuously during the initial stages of angiogenesis. MMPs dissolve the extracellular matrix and release other factors such as FGF and VEGF, further promoting angiogenesis [ ]. Osteoclasts secrete MMP-2/9/13, which regulates angiogenesis, and the mobile environment created by the dissolution of the matrix by MMPs creates the conditions for the migration and tube formation of ECs [ , , ]. Osteoprotegerin (OPG) and parathyroid hormone related protein (PTHrP) are required to stimulate angiogenesis and bone remodeling via MMP-9. Similarly, osteoclast precursors and osteoblasts require MMP-9 to support migration and thus access ossification centers. The association of MMPs with the bone microenvironment during myeloma progression has not been reported in specific studies. There is functional overlap between MMPs [ ], and future studies should pay more attention to the changes in MMPs in relevant bone blood vessel diseases.

4.1.6

## Platelet-derived growth factor type BB (PDGF-BB)
PDGF family are serum factors that stimulate smooth muscle cell migration and proliferation and play important roles in angiogenesis. PDGF-BB binds to the receptor PDGFR-β to activate signaling pathways for neoangiogenesis [ ]. PDGF-BB is mainly released by preosteoclasts and induces type H blood vessel formation during bone modeling and remodeling [ ]. PDGF-BB promotes angiogenesis and couples with the osteogenic process by recruiting endothelial progenitor cells and mesenchymal stem cells. These new blood vessels are generated mainly during bone remodeling. An increase in mature osteoclasts can reduce the secretion of PDGF-BB and thus exacerbate bone loss. Selective cathepsin K (Ctsk) inhibitors can inhibit osteoclast activity by blocking bone matrix protein degradation. In the Ctsk inhibitor treated model, PDGF-BB levels were significantly elevated. Excessive secretion of PDGF-BB can also lead to atherosclerosis and thus bone loss, and PDGF-BB secretion exacerbates the pathological process of osteoarthritis [ ]. The molecular mechanism of PDGF-BB in osteolineage cells and angiogenesis still has many enigmas, and the role of PDGF-BB in bone remodeling, as one of the key molecules in osteogenesis-angiogenesis coupling, needs further investigation [ ].

4.1.7

## Angiogenin (ANG)
ANG is a ribonuclease with pro-angiogenic activity secreted by osteoclasts that protects adventitial blood vessel cells against senescence. ANG can maintain the proliferative activity of ECs through plexin-B2 (Plxnb2, a functional transmembrane ANG receptor). Significant vascular endothelial cell senescence in the long bone epiphysis was observed upon the application of glucocorticoids to young mice, during which angiogenesis–osteogenesis coupling was inhibited. The ANG/Plxnb2-ribosomal biogenesis signaling pathway maintains the coupling of epiphyseal osteogenesis to type H vessels in the growing skeleton [ ]. Glucocorticoid (GC)-induced osteoporosis in children requires extra vigilance especially when it leads to a slowing of bone growth and an increased risk of fracture. GC prevents vascular invasion of the epiphyseal and growth plate junction during the growth phase in children and interferes with osteogenesis in cartilage. GC inhibits osteoclast formation during bone growth and reduces ANG secretion to block angiogenesis, affecting bone remodeling and bone formation. Recombinant human ANG can antagonize GC-induced cellular senescence and restore the growth capacity of bones to some extent. ANG can regulate the function of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells, and ANG expression may be growth stage dependent in terms of the cell lineage in which it is expressed [ , , ].

4.2

## Anti-angiogenic factors
In addition to pro-angiogenic factors, osteolineage cells also secrete anti-angiogenic factors such as Chm-1, PEDF, SPARC and CCN2/CTGF. Abnormal bone structure triggered by excessive angiogenesis is considered to be a pathological process. These negative regulators, together with the preceding angiogenic-osteogenic coupling positive factors, maintain the normal process of osteogenesis.
4.2.1

## Chm-1
Articular cartilage contains high levels of chondromodulin 1 (Chm-1), which strongly inhibits angiogenesis. Chm-1 also contributes to the absence of blood vessels in cartilage [ ]. Chm-1 strongly prevents chondrocyte hypertrophy and intrachondral osteogenesis, thereby preventing cartilage from being replaced by bone. Chm-1 inhibits the STAT signaling pathway and reduces the expression of alkaline phosphatase and type X collagen. In rat models of osteoarthritis, decreased Chm-1 levels resulted in cartilage hypertrophy and vascular invasion [ , ]. However, experimental evidence is needed to determine whether Chm-1 inhibits angiogenesis during bone remodeling.

4.2.2

## PEDF
Pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF) is a secreted glycoprotein of the serine protease inhibitor (serpin) superfamily and is expressed in bone mainly by osteoblasts [ ]. PEDF promotes neuronal proliferation and differentiation but strongly inhibits blood vessel function. PEDF inhibits the migration and proliferation of ECs and induces their apoptosis. In neonatal mice, PEDF is significantly expressed at the site of cartilage transformation, and PEDF plays a regulatory role in osteogenesis and bone remodeling within cartilage. PDEF and VEGF exhibit opposing expression patterns in epiphyseal cartilage and together regulate vascular invasion into cartilage. PDEF is likely to induce apoptosis in terminally differentiated chondrocytes. PEDF deficiency results in defective matrix mineralization, leading to incomplete bone formation. PEDF inactivates GSK-3β by activating the Erk signaling pathway in osteoblasts, leading to stable translocation of β-catenin into the nucleus. PEDF binds to LPR5/6 in some cases, inhibiting Wnt signaling and reducing bone formation. However, the mechanisms of PEDF in bone remodeling still need to be further explored. A lack of PEDF also promotes the proliferation of type H ECs, suggesting that PEDF is involved in bone vascularization during bone remodeling. PEDF can also stimulate osteogenic differentiation to some extent and counteract TGF-β to regulate angiogenesis [ ]. PEDF promotes LVs production in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, but the effect of PEDF on lymphatic vessels in bone has not been determined.

4.2.3

## SPARC
SPARC is a cysteine-rich acidic secreted protein, also known as osteonectin and is the major bone matrix non-collagenous protein. SPARC exhibits bidirectional regulation of blood vessels, mostly anti-angiogenic but under some conditions it can promote angiogenesis. Both osteoblasts and ECs can express SPARC, which can bind to a variety of growth factors or proteins involved in bone remodeling, mediating in vitro mineralization of type I collagen and binding to hydroxyapatite. However, this process is bidirectional, with reduced osteoblast numbers and inhibition of both bone formation and bone resorption. SPARC has been widely used in a variety of bio-composites and may be an effective therapeutic tool for bone grafting [ ].

4.2.4

## CCN2/CTGF
CCN Family 2/Connective Tissue Growth Factor (CCN2/CTGF) is a member of the CCN protein family and is expressed mainly in the prehypertrophic region of the bone growth plate. CCN2 promotes the proliferation and differentiation of osteoblasts and chondrocytes in vitro and maintains articular chondrocyte and tissue integrity in vivo. In addition, CCN2 promotes the differentiation, migration and tube formation of vascular ECs and promotes angiogenesis in vivo. CCN2 upregulates HIF-1α-induced VEGF expression in ECs and co-regulates bone remodeling via BMP-2 [ , ]. CCN2 can be secreted by osteoclasts, and upregulation of dendritic cell-specific transmembrane protein (DC-STAMP) expression promotes an increase in TRACP+ cells. CCN1 and CCN3 inhibit osteoclasts, when osteoblasts overexpress CCN2, they antagonize BMP, Wnt and IGF-1 and reduce bone formation. CCN2 is sometimes a potent inducer of angiogenesis but, at some points, interacts with VEGF-A to block its signaling, attenuating angiogenesis via VEGF [ ]. However, CCN2 synergizes with SLIT3 to promote angiogenesis through coordinated pro- and anti-angiogenic processes. Moreover, CCN2 mutants can down-regulate angiogenic signaling by binding to angiogenic factors.

4.3

## Mechanical signals flowing in skeleton and blood vessels
Blood flow and hemodynamics in the vasculature modulate the skeleton, and the response of the skeleton to mechanical loading signals are both mechanical signals converted into chemical signals through molecular signaling (bone-derived endocrine factors and angiocrine factors).
4.3.1

## Blood flow and hydrodynamics influence bone homeostasis
Mechanical signaling receptors have been identified in both vascular endothelial cells and osteolineage cells, and identifying the signal transduction mechanisms mediated through physical signals is a new investigative concept for exploring the regulation of bone reconstruction by the osteochondral vasculature. In 1963, Brookes demonstrated that the flow of blood through the bone cortex is centrifugal, with blood returning through the nutrient arteries in the bone marrow cavity to the periosteal veins [ ]. However, in certain disease conditions, the direction of blood flow changes to centripetal. Blood perfusion to bone decreases with increasing age, and a significant proportion of aseptic osteonecrosis in elderly patients is associated with a lack of vascular nutrition to bone. In some fracture sites, healing process is often delayed due to disruption of blood vessels, which ultimately leads to delayed union or nonunion of the fracture. The navicular bone, tibia-fibula and femoral neck are common sites of osteonecrosis due to inadequate blood supply or complete vascular blockage. Periosteal vessels and bone vessels influence bone formation and bone regeneration synergistically with callus through blood vessel remodeling during the pathological process [ ]. The important role of hemodynamics in bone metabolism is gradually being revealed. Blood vessel cells regulate the bone microenvironment by mechanically state-sensing cells in response to altered mechanical stimulation. Saravana K. Ramasamy's team identified blood flow as critical for type H vessel formation and bone angiogenic growth through sequential research. Disruption of blood flow downregulates Notch signaling in the bone endothelium. Blood flow rates change significantly after passing through different vascular networks. Blood will flow at a significantly higher rate in type H vessels than in type L vessels. The transcript levels of the flow-regulated genes Pecam1, NOS3, Icam1 and Cdh5 also differed among ECs. Bisphosphonates are common drugs used to treat osteoporosis, and by administering alendronate to newborn mice, a significant increase in blood flow in bone blood vessels can be observed. This also suggested that blood flow is an important factor in controlling bone quality.
Hemodynamics and bone metabolism have also received much attention, and the bone-vascular axis has long been discussed extensively in metabolic diseases such as vascular calcification, diabetes, atherosclerosis, and chronic kidney disease [ ]. In osteoporosis and osteoarthritis, a reduction in bone blood flow has been shown to be associated with bone loss and cartilage degeneration. Both hypertension and reduced blood flow to the lower extremity appear to trigger bone loss in the lower extremity, but there are no studies specifically exploring the association between blood flow changes in hypertension and bone remodeling. Fatigue loading of bone to induce microdamage results in pooling of interstitial fluid, and vascular endothelial signaling may be an important regulator of this mechanism. The blood perfusion volume also changes during this process. Osteocytes are recognized as the starting point for monitoring and responding to bone mechanical stimuli and can coordinate osteoblast and osteoclast functions. Osteocytes are likely to be under the influence of mechanical loading with blood flow triggered by unknown mechanisms affecting the initiation of bone remodeling [ ]. In osteoarthritis, excessive mechanical loading exacerbates OA progression through Gremlin-1 activation of NF-κB signaling, accompanied by upregulation of the Rac1-ROS axis [ ].

4.3.2

## Mechanical loading of bone stimulates bone vasculature
Skeletal loading affects bone homeostasis by promoting bone formation, and all forms of loading facilitate osteogenesis. Dynamic mechanical stimulation favors bone formation and can significantly increase the number of osteoblasts in the matrix deposition phase. Mechanical forces play an integral regulatory role in vascular injury and repair by activating mechanosensory molecules. Mechanical stimulation can be observed to exert different modulatory effects on the vasculature during the different phases of fracture repair. During the inflammatory phase, mechanical loading promotes the formation of blood vessels, thus reducing vascular connectivity and volume and delaying the progression of healing [ ]. Conversely, during the healing phase, loading promotes cell proliferation and differentiation to connect the bone scab. This functional change is demarcated by the matrix deposition phase, where appropriate mechanical loading promotes angiogenic–osteogenic coupling. Previous studies have demonstrated that mechanical loading can directly affect type H vessels [ ]. Both mechanical loading and blood hemodynamics are activated by physical stimulation of mechanoreceptor cells to enable the body to respond to external changes. MiRNA-214–3p levels are elevated in elderly fracture patients and can inhibit generation of osteoblasts to reduce bone formation. MiR-214 delays fracture healing in mice by inhibiting the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway, and skeletal damage is observed in mice. Knee loading was shown to downregulate exosomal miR-214–3p to stimulate type H vessel formation. In addition, knee loading also elevated VEGF levels. Knee loading enhances type H vessel formation of BMMSC-Exos (bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes), and exosomal miR-214–3p is a likely target for bone remodeling interventions in skeletal diseases.
To date, different types of physical stimulations, such as hydrostatic pressure, fluid shear stress, Low-intensity ultrasound stimulation, pulsed electromagnetic fields, and longitudinal substrate stretching have been applied to elucidate the mechanosensitive processes in cells resident in the musculoskeletal system. The process by which osteolineage cells convert mechanical stimuli into cellular signaling induction via focal adhesion, plasma membrane receptors and mechanosensitive ion channels is known as mechanotransduction.
Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) and Pleiotrophin (PTN) are regulatory factors that can promote angiogenesis-osteogenesis coupling in response to mechanical loading stimuli. S1P is a bioactive lipid molecule expressed by osteoblasts and osteoclast precursors that regulates osteolineage cell production and inflammatory responses. S1P receptor 1 (S1Pr1) can be expressed in bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells, osteoblasts and pre-osteoclast. S1Pr1 activation promotes osteoblast proliferation, and S1P/S1Pr1 upregulates the RANKL pathway during bone remodeling, promoting osteoclast maturation. Yang et al. reported that mechanical loading increased S1Pr1 expression in type H ECs in the bone defect area. S1Pr1 did not alter the osteogenic differentiation of bone progenitor cells, and type H ECs exhibited a more sensitive S1P response. The type H vessel volume was significantly increased, and the number of perivascular osteoprogenitor cells was also increased. The mechanosensitive protein S1Pr1 regulates skeletal angiogenesis in YAP-dependent manner [ ]. PTN is present mainly in human intervertebral disc tissue and affects angiogenesis during disc degeneration. The intervertebral disc is particularly affected by mechanical loading, and vascular invasion can be observed during disc degeneration. PTN can bind to VEGF and inhibit its-induced angiogenesis. Mechanical loading can promote PTN expression and thus affect angiogenesis in intervertebral disc degeneration [ ].

4.4

## Bone regulates lymphatic vessels
RANKL induces osteoclasts to express the lymphatic growth factor VEGF-C, and osteoclasts themselves express the receptor VEGFR3. Osteoclasts can increase bone resorption through autocrine mechanisms. VEGF-C is an LEC growth factor that promotes the growth of bone marrow lymphatic vessels [ ]. VEGF-C suppresses osteogenic differentiation marker genes and regulates bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells [ ]. However, whether lymphatic channels are involved in the bone remodeling process is currently unknown. Other members of the VEGF family also play important roles in the development of the vasculature [ , ]. BMP-9/ALK1 is a well-recognized signaling pathway that regulates angiogenesis. Impaired lymphatic function can be observed in BMP-9 knockout mice, in which the local environment is altered by affecting the formation and maturation of lymphatic valves [ ]. Impaired lymphopoiesis triggered by impaired osteoblast differentiation and lymphocytopenia can be observed in microRNA-9–1 (miR-9–1)-deficient mice. MiR-9–1-deficient MSCs were unable to differentiate into osteoblasts, and miR-9 also suppressed B-cell lymphopoiesis by inhibiting BMP/Smad signaling through targeting Fst. However, the discovery of bone LVs has only just begun to expose the molecular signaling exchanges between bone and bone LVs, and many vascular regulatory factors are required to make new collisions with bone LVs.

5

## Dysfunction of bone blood vessels in skeletal system diseases
Alterations in molecular communication between the skeletal and vascular systems underlie multiple pathological conditions, including osteoarthrosis, osteoporosis, and nonunion or delayed union. In the previous sections, we briefly described some of the diseases in which vascular anomalies affect bone. In this section, we will discuss in detail the complex connection between the vascular system and bone in disease ( ). 
5.1

## Osteoarthritis (OA)
OA is a common degenerative joint disease that usually causes joint pain and functional impairment. Its pathology is highly characteristic, with subchondral bone and cartilage gradually being replaced by hyperplastic bone and the diseased joint losing its original mobility [ ]. Abnormal bone remodeling and neovascularization invasion are the first processes to involve subchondral bone, at which point angiogenesis–osteogenesis coupling exacerbates the progression of OA. In the early stages of OA, despite the progressive destruction of the joint, self-regulation of the articular cartilage reduces the loading level. Abnormal mechanical loading activates sensors that affect downstream pathways. An increased RANKL/OPG ratio enhances osteoclast bone resorption activity [ ]. The rapamycin complex (mTOC) was also affected by loading, elevating VEGF concentrations to stimulate type H vessel formation. In late OA, osteoblasts regulate osteoblast mineralization by increasing Wnt protein expression and decreasing SOST protein secretion. RANKL and VEGF secreted by subchondral bone osteoblasts also trigger osteoclast chemotaxis via the ERK1/2 pathway. All of these processes exacerbate subchondral bone remodeling. By inhibiting type H vessel formation, the progression of OA can be alleviated, also demonstrating that bone remodeling is an important therapeutic target. LVs were originally present in the synovial membrane, but their quantity changes in OA. The number of capillary lymphatics in the joints is increased in mild arthritis and decreased in late OA. The role of LVs in joint fluid homeostasis is poorly understood, and delayed drainage of joint fluid may influence the progression of OA [ , ].

5.2

## Osteoporosis
Osteoporosis is a common chronic bone disease that manifests as a reduction in bone mass, decreased bone quality and increased risk of fragility fractures. Osteoporosis is triggered by an imbalance between bone formation and bone resorption during bone remodeling. In the classical ovariectomized mouse model of induced osteoporosis, a reduction in type H vessels can be observed. Glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis reduces type H ECs through NF-κB-mediated inhibition of PDGF-BB secretion by osteoclast precursors. Restoration of type H vessel abundance by the application of pro-angiogenic factors is expected to be an effective therapeutic measure [ , ]. Blood vessels during bone remodeling should receive increased attention in related diseases [ ]. Elevated levels of adipose tissue in bone can be observed during the progression of osteoporosis, and the vasculature is receiving increased attention because of the modulation of adipose tissue secretion and adipose stem cells against the inflammatory microenvironment. Currently, nobody has focused on the effect of lymphatics on osteoporosis, and blood flow in the lumbar spine does not seem to be affected by osteoporosis, while blood flow changes are apparent in the lower extremity bones [ ].

5.3

## Fracture and bone repair
Nonunion or delayed union of fractures is a common fracture complication in clinical practice. An inadequate blood supply is usually the primary suspect factor. In the presence of extensive vascular impairment, the signaling crosstalk between bone repair sites and blood vessels is blocked, resulting in failure to achieve proper fracture reduction despite neobone formation [ ]. During fracture healing, normal angiogenesis is integral to the generation and modeling of callus. An increase in H-type vessel abundance induced by recombinant SLIT3 effectively promoted fracture healing [ ]. Proangiogenic treatments such as VEGF and FGF are also effective at accelerating bone repair and regeneration [ ]. Severe compound fractures resulting in lymphatic vessel rupture increase the risk of chronic lymphedema. Promoting angiogenesis-osteogenesis coupling during the bone repair has been a popular research direction in recent years. Achieving desired bone regeneration by promoting angiogenesis has been shown to be effective.

5.4

## Heterotopic ossification (HO)
Heterotopic ossification (HO), also known as ossifying myositis, manifests as ossification of skeletal muscle. Abnormal blood vessel formation in HO is coupled with ossification, which is similar to the pattern of osteogenesis-angiogenesis coupling. TGF-β hyperactivation during HO progression is accompanied by type H vessel formation. BMP can induce progenitor/endothelial cells to commit to osteoblasts in the HO region. The osteogenesis-promoting role of TGF-β in the bone remodeling microenvironment exacerbates disease progression in the pathological process. Normal Achilles tendons have no lymphatic structure, but lymphatic vessels can be observed in the musculo-tendineal transition zone. In a rat model of tendon injury, lymphatic vessels can be detected in the rear-ranged Achilles tendon [ ]. FGFR3 is expressed in LECs and regulates lymphoid differentiation. Excessive BMP2 signaling can inhibit LECs formation, and activation of FGFR3 via FGF9 can increase the number of lymphatic vessels in tendons. Lymphatic vessels are closely associated with post-traumatic HO and are likely to promote bone formation, exacerbating disease progression [ , ].

5.5

## Osteonecrosis of the femoral head (ONFN)
ONFN is classically known as osteonecrosis associated with bone vascular dysfunction due to disruption of the bone blood supply. Factors such as hormone abuse, excessive alcohol consumption and microangiopathy can increase susceptibility to ischemic osteonecrosis. ECs are damaged during osteonecrosis, and blood flow is progressively stalled by reduced neovascularization [ , ]. Despite elevated levels of BMP-2, BMP-7 and Runx2 gene expression, increased osteocalcin immunoreactivity and osteoblast/osteoclast counts were also observed in the femoral neck and femoral head of patients with advanced ONFN. This finding demonstrated that bone remodeling plays an important role in disease progression.

5.6

## Bone tumors and metastatic bone tumors
Although the relative incidence of skeletal tumors is low, they are highly malignant and have a poor prognosis. Bone provides a supportive microenvironment for hematopoietic and mesenchymal stem cells, and a complex network of vasculature provides protection for cancer cells. The low blood flow velocity of type L vessels may provide conditions for the colonization of tumor cells [ ]. Type H vessels provide a vascular ecological niche for disseminated tumor cells by expressing high levels of PDGF-BB, enabling tumor cells to survive. Multiple circRNAs play a role in bone tumor metastasis by regulating bone remodeling and angiogenesis. Many cytokines also open the path to tumor invasion by regulating osteolineage cells and ECs. Most of the current studies focus on the process of lymphoma invasion into the bone, and the role of lymphatics in bone tumors needs to be explored in new dimensions.

5.7

## Arterial calcification
The vasculature system is the second largest calcified structure after bone, and vascular calcification acts as an adaptive regulation of the microenvironment. However, arterial calcification leads to a decrease in cardiac output aggravating the cardiac load ultimately triggering harm. In about 15% of arterial calcifications, ectopic osteogenesis containing bone marrow evolves, which may be caused by calciotropic hormones (PTH), osteogenesis-related molecular signaling (BMP-2, etc.), and metabolic abnormalities (lipid oxidation). Arterial calcification affects essential vascular perfusion, increasing the risk of mobility impairment and amputation. In addition, FGF23 secreted by osteoblasts affects renal phosphate metabolism and increases cardiac load [ ]. Cellular and endocrine signals from the bone marrow have influence on blood vessel physiology and function, and changes in blood vessel signaling from inflammation or stress affect bone health. Crosstalk in the bone-vascular axis offers new horizons for the treatment of skeletal and vascular disease patients [ ].

6

## Alterations of the skeletal microenvironment diseases
In this review, we also explore the changes that occur in the bone environment in the context of a number of diseases of the vascular system involving the bone vasculature, and their regression in disease. The impact of hematologic disorders caused by alterations in the hematopoietic niche, atherosclerosis characterized by the internal microenvironment of the blood vessels, and hypertension accompanied by elevated blood flow pressure on the skeletal health has gradually received increasing attention. However, these diseases are essentially initiated by abnormal endothelial signaling, and the majority in current research is focused on this aspect. Skeletal diseases initiated by bone vascular dysfunction are still poorly investigated. In this section we present some relatively intuitive vascular dysfunctions influence on the skeletal-vascular coupling.
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a hematologic neoplasm that manifests as a disorder of maturation and differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells. Malignant hematopoietic cells promote vascular and leukemic progression through the production of angiogenic factors. Blood tumor cells ensure their own proliferation and survival by modifying the bone microenvironment [ ]. The most discussed bone microenvironment in leukemia is the AML microenvironment, which involves niche reprogramming of osteoblasts and osteoclasts [ , , ]. In chronic lymphocytic leukemia, bone reconstruction gradually favors bone resorption, and the bone marrow niche enhances osteoclast differentiation and inhibits osteogenic differentiation [ ]. Myeloma cells can secrete IL-3 to promote osteoclast production and inhibit bone formation through the chemokine CCL-3 [ , ]. AML secrete lymphangiogenic factors to promote lymphatic vessel growth to influence leukemia progression [ ]. In the case of leukemia, reprogramming occurs in the osteolineage cells that dominate the ecological niche of the internal surface of the inner bone. Osteoblasts secrete G-CSF, hepatocyte growth factor, and OPN to maintain the CD34+ progenitor cell population. Osteoblasts also mediate hematopoietic stem cell migration through the CXCL12/CXR4 and VCAM-1/VLA-4 axes. Constitutive activation of β-catenin in the osteoblast lineage can trigger a variety of hematopoietic dysfunctions, such as mononucleosis, lymphopenia, and AML. Osteolineage cells play an auxiliary role in the skeletal niche and support leukocyte mobilization. Dysfunction of osteolineage cells also impairs hematopoiesis. Recently, Tsc-1-deficient osteoclasts were found to release IL-34, which stimulates AML cell differentiation by inhibiting ERK1/2 signaling through triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2) activation of Ras/Rasal3 [ ]. In AML patients, TREM2 expression is significantly reduced, which indicates poor prognosis. This difference could be related to the impaired damage perception function of TREM2.
Atherosclerosis is a dangerous vascular disease. Cardiovascular tissue usually overshadows bone vascular atherosclerosis due to its high risk. Cardiovascular studies of the “bone-vascular axis” usually focus on the effects of cytokines on the vasculature [ ]. The effects of bone vascular atherosclerosis on bone homeostasis are also worth exploring. In a significant proportion of cardiovascular diseases such as hypertension, atherosclerosis, and myocardial infarction, circulatory effects or pathologic processes triggered by lesions originating in other blood vessels can have an impact on the bone marrow vasculature. Common cardiovascular diseases such as hypertension and atherosclerosis are accompanied by the release of circulating inflammatory factors or altered blood concentrations of metabolic factors. The alteration of the bone marrow ecological niche by this process has been demonstrated [ ], but its impact on the bone marrow vascular pathologic environment on the skeleton has not yet been specified. Alterations in the bone marrow vasculature are now typically characterized by leukocytosis, which progressively triggers chronic inflammatory signals or affects HSPCs [ ].

7

## Conclusion and perspectives
The bone vasculature plays a crucial role in bone metabolism due to its physiological functional positioning. The bone blood vessel system has long been extensively explored for its close association with osteogenesis. In contrast, the role of lymphatic vessels as disruptors in pathological processes is unclear. Recent studies confirming the presence of lymphatic vessels within bone have added another piece to the puzzle of the vasculature. Blood vessels play an integral role in bone modeling and bone remodeling, and angiogenesis-osteogenesis coupling is particularly important for physiological function. In addition to classical vascular factors and specific subtypes of ECs, both blood vessels (blood flow and hemodynamics) and bone (mechanical loading) acutely respond to the stimulation of mechanical signals and coordinate with the skeletal microenvironment. Differences in the oxygen content of different blood vessels in the skeleton constitute a new strategy for studying the regulation of bone energy metabolism. Many hypotheses about bone LVs are possible due to the textbook-defying findings. Fluid may enter the skeletal lymphatic circulation after blood enters the skeletal blood vessels, as opposed to the previous fluid circulation. Lymphatics will enrich the complex crosstalk of the skeletal-vascular axis. Further determination of the dynamics of lymphatic vessels in bone and their functional significance is needed to provide new therapeutic directions for clinical applications. Utilizing technologies such as single-cell sequencing and lineage tracing allows dynamic observation of key cell subpopulations and molecular features. The complex crosstalk of vasculature-skeletal regulation is a novel entry point for revealing skeletal homeostasis, and further studies based on this context can help to address skeletal clinical diseases.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare no that they have no conflicts of interest in this work.

 Xia Wenyu received his B.Sc. degree in Clinical Medicine from Yangzhou University in 2022. Currently, he is in the Key Laboratory of Bone Metabolism in the Institute of Orthopaedics at Soochow University and pursuing his master's degree. His research focuses on (1) signaling pathways in bone metabolism and targeted therapeutic strategies; (2) the endocrine function of bone cells.
Bai Jiaxiang(BRID: 02932.00.50502) received his B.Sc. in Clinical Medicine from Bengbu Medical College in 2017. He obtained his Ph.D. in Surgery from Soochow University in 2022. He then joined Department of Orthopedics, the First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University. His current research interests focus on (1) research into the pathogenesis and treatment of degenerative diseases such as osteoporosis; and (2) the prevention and treatment of implant-associated infections.
Geng Dechun(BRID: 09881.00.60878) received Ph.D. degree from Soochow University in 2016 and joined Soochow University. Currently, Dr. Geng is the group leader of Key Laboratory of Bone Metabolism in the Institute of Orthopaedics at Soochow University, and H-index: 38. He won the second prize of The State Scientific and Technological Progress Award in 2017, and presided over 10 various topics including the National Natural Science Foundation of China and Distinguished Youth Foundation of Jiangsu Scientific Committee. His research focuses on (1) signaling pathways in bone metabolism and targeted therapeutic strategies; (2) bone immune regulation in bone metabolic diseases; (3) implants and osseointegration.

## Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Postdoctoral Program for Innovative Talents (BX20230350), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (82002321, 82072425, 82272567, 82402780, and 82072498), Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK2021650, BE2021650 and BE2020666), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2024M753130), Jiangsu Medical Research Project (ZD2022014), National and Local Engineering Laboratory of New Functional Polymer Materials (SDGC2205), the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD), Research Funds of Centre for Leading Medicine and Advanced Technologies of IHM (2023IHM02007), the Suzhou Science and Technology Project (SKJY2021067), Orthopaedic Medical Innovation Center of Jiangsu (CXZX202209), Key Laboratory of Orthopaedics of Suzhou (SZS2022017), Foundation of National Center for Translational Medicine (Shanghai) SHU Branch (SUITM-202403), National Key R&D Program of China, MOST (2023YFC2509900), Program of Suzhou Health Commission (GSWS2022002), the Project of MOE Key Laboratory of Geriatric Diseases and Immunology (KJS2502).

## Additional information
Figures: The figures in this work were partially drawn using www.biorender.com.

Peer review under the responsibility of Editorial Board of Fundamental Research.