349plospathPLOS PathogensPLoS PathogPLOSPMC1256192512561925125619254111840910.1371/journal.ppat.1013263Eph receptor tyrosine kinases are functional entry receptors for murine gammaherpesvirus 68
GroßkopfAnna KConceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing TobiassonVictorFormal analysis, Investigation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing KrugLaurie TConceptualization, Funding acquisition, Project administration, Resources, Supervision, Writing – review & editing KayeKenneth MEditor 1HIV and AIDS Malignancy Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America2Computational Biology Branch, National Library of Medicine, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America3Harvard University, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA✉* E-mail: anna.grosskopf@nih.gov
The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.
211020252110e1013263e101326329102025This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.Previous version available: This article is based on a previously available preprint posted on bioRxiv on June 5, 2025: "Eph Receptor Tyrosine Kinases Are Functional Entry Receptors for Murine Gammaherpesvirus 68".

## Abstract
Interactions between viral glycoproteins and cellular receptors determine virus tropism and represent promising targets for vaccines. Eph receptor tyrosine kinases are conserved receptors for the human oncogenic gammaherpesviruses, Kaposi sarcoma herpesvirus (KSHV) and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), and mediate entry into target cells by interaction with the viral gH/gL glycoprotein complex. To evaluate the use of murine gammaherpesvirus 68 (MHV68), a natural pathogen of rodents, as an in vivo model system for early events in gammaherpesvirus infection, we characterized the interaction of the MHV68 gH/gL complex with Eph receptors. We demonstrate a direct interaction of MHV68 gH/gL with EphA4 and EphB3, that is conserved between human and murine receptors. Pre-incubation of MHV68 inocula with soluble decoy receptors decreased infection of permissive fibroblasts. Ectopic expression of EphA4 and EphB3 enabled MHV68 to infect otherwise non-permissive human B cells, demonstrating EphA4 and EphB3 receptor function. Targeted mutations informed by protein structure predictions demonstrate that the MHV68 gH/gL-Eph interaction is determined by domain I (D-I) and follows structural motifs previously described in the KSHV gH/gL-EphA2 complex. The importance of gH D-I is further highlighted by the analysis of gH-targeting neutralizing antibodies. Antibody adsorption via the full gH ectodomain or gH D-I led to comparable reductions in neutralization capacity of serum from WT infected mice, indicating the Eph-binding domain is a major target for gH/gL-directed neutralizing antibodies. Our study characterizes Eph receptors as novel interaction partners and entry receptors for MHV68. Conservation of entry mechanisms provides the basis for future in vivo analyses of the contribution of Eph receptors to cell-type dependent MHV68 infection, as well as targeted strategies to prevent transmission and diseases associated with chronic infection.

## Author summary
Virus-specific intervention and prevention is needed to fight cancers and morbidity caused by the oncoviruses Kaposi sarcoma herpesvirus (KSHV) and Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV). The targeted design of such strategies requires a detailed knowledge of early events in the viral life cycle and the contribution of cellular receptors to infection and spread in vivo. Here, we characterize the role of Eph receptors in murine gammaherpesvirus 68 (MHV68) infection, a well-established mouse model for gammaherpesvirus (GHV) pathogenesis and preclinical therapeutic evaluations. As described for human GHVs, the interaction of Eph receptors with the gH/gL complex is mediated by a conserved motif comprised of the N-terminal domain of glycoprotein gH co-folded with gL and contributes to variable levels to infection of different target cells. We demonstrate that antibodies directed against the N-terminal domain of the gH/gL glycoprotein complex are generated upon MHV68 infection in mice and neutralize MHV68 infection in cell culture. Our data enables the analysis of the contribution of Eph receptor engagement to GHV infection in vivo and provides a promising target for subunit vaccination approaches.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 Jun 3; Accepted 2025 Oct 6; Collection date 2025 Oct.

## Introduction
Despite improved outcomes under anti-retroviral therapies, the risk of cancers is still significantly higher in people living with HIV (PWH) worldwide [ , ]. Major contributors to this elevated risk are oncogenic viruses, specifically the gammaherpesviruses (GHV) Kaposi sarcoma herpesvirus (KSHV, human herpesvirus 8 or Rhadinovirus humangamma8) and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV, human herpesvirus 4 or Lymphocryptovirus humangamma4) [ , ]. KSHV is the etiological agent of Kaposi sarcoma, a highly vascularized tumor of the skin and mucosal surfaces that is a leading cause of death for PWH in areas of endemic KSHV infection [ , ]. KSHV also drives lymphoproliferative diseases including primary effusion lymphoma (PEL) and a variant of multicentric Castleman disease [ , ]. EBV is linked to a wide range of lymphoproliferative diseases, including Burkitt lymphoma, Hodgkin lymphoma and diffuse large B cell lymphomas [ – ], in addition to epithelial cell tumors including nasopharyngeal carcinoma and gastric carcinoma [ , , ]. Primary infection with EBV in adolescents and young adults may present as infectious mononucleosis [ ] and an etiological association of EBV infection with multiple sclerosis is established [ – ]. Given the substantial global health impact, strategies that prevent infection or reduce viral burden are critical to prevent GHV-associated diseases and cancers.
The wide range of malignancies associated with GHVs derives from their broad cell tropism and reservoirs of infection [ ], presenting a key challenge for the development of KSHV and EBV vaccines. Herpesvirus entry into host cells is a multi-step process initiated by attachment to the cell surface, followed by virus uptake. Multiple GHV glycoproteins engage attachment factors in a manner that is largely independent of target cell type, helping to concentrate the virus on the cell surface. In contrast, subsequent interactions with specific entry receptors, that may vary with cell type, trigger viral uptake and fusion [ , ]. Decoding virus-host interactions that enable entry followed by productive replication or quiescent latency in multiple cellular reservoirs in vivo is critical for developing targeted vaccination approaches.
In addition to virus-specific glycoproteins, EBV and KSHV encode envelope glycoproteins that are broadly conserved among herpesviruses, namely the core herpesviral fusion machinery consisting of glycoprotein B (gB) and the gH/gL complex, as well as the gM/gN complex. The GHV gH/gL complex is essential for GHV infection of a broad range of target cells, with a role in both attachment and entry and represents a major target for neutralizing antibody responses in humans and mice [ – ]. On B cells, EBV entry is mediated by the interaction of HLA class II with a heterotrimer consistent of the gH/gL and gp42 [ , ], followed by gB-mediated fusion of viral and host membranes. On the other hand, entry of EBV into epithelial cells is a gp42-independent process facilitated by the interaction of gH/gL heterodimer with non-muscle myosin-IIA (NMHC-IIA) and Eph receptor tyrosine kinase A2 (EphA2) [ – ].
In contrast to the cell type-specific use of different gH/gL complexes exhibited by EBV, KSHV uptake is mediated by the gH/gL heterodimeric complex in all instances analyzed thus far. Initially, EphA2 was described as a high affinity KSHV entry receptor, with additional A-type Eph receptors EphA4, EphA5 and EphA7 providing compensatory functions in the absence of EphA2 expression [ , , – ]. Eph-dependent entry via EphB3 and EphA7 has been demonstrated for the rhesus macaque rhadinovirus (RRV), a closely related non-human primate (NHP) pathogen model system [ , ]. In addition, EphA2 has recently been identified as an entry receptor for human cytomegalovirus, a betaherpesvirus [ ], indicating broader conservation within the Family Orthoherpesviridae.
Ephs represent the largest family of receptor tyrosine kinases, with 14 members in the human genome, classified as either A- or B-type based on their binding affinity to the five GPI-linked ephrin-A ligands or the three transmembrane ephrin-B ligands [ ]. While EphA and EphB subtypes preferentially engage ligands of their respective class, EphA4 and EphB2 represent exceptions and exhibit a broader interaction pattern that encompassed both A- and B-type ephrins [ , ]. The Eph-ephrin systems play crucial roles in cellular positioning and organization. This is reflected in their physiological role in tissue patterning, and compartmentalization, for example in neural development, but dysregulation of this finely tuned system impacts cancer development, progression, and metastasis [ , ]. In concordance with the complexity of receptor and ligand expression and subsequent signaling events, multiple Eph receptors can have pro- or anti-tumorigenic roles dependent on the type of cancer, somatic mutations, co-factors as well as expression levels of receptors and ligands [ – ].
Animal models are critical to inform key virus-host interactions as targets for effective blockade of host colonization and viral disease. Murine gammaherpesvirus 68 (MHV68, murid herpesvirus 4 or Rhadinovirus muridgamma4) is a natural GHV of rodents that serves as a model pathogen to study GHV infection and pathogenesis in vivo [ , ]. MHV68 shares biological features with both human GHVs including tropism for B cells, macrophages, epithelial and endothelial cells, and an association with lymphoproliferative disease in immunocompromised animals. MHV68 is most closely related to KSHV, as evidenced by genome colinearity and direct homologs of 69 of the 82 KSHV genes [ ]. We recently reported that a replication dead viral mutant of MHV68 elicits protection against WT challenge in immune competent mice and protection of Ifnar1−/− mice from virus-driven lethality [ ]. Vaccine-induced protection involves both neutralizing antibody responses and virus-specific CD8 T cell-mediated immunity [ ]. The GHV gH/gL complex is a major target of neutralizing antibody (nAb) responses [ – ]. While gL is not essential for MHV68 infection and latency establishment in vivo [ ], MHV68 gH adopts a gL-dependent conformation that influences viral attachment and entry in a cell type-dependent manner [ , , – ]. However, specific cellular receptors used by MHV68 glycoprotein complexes to gain entry have not been characterized.
Here, we evaluated if MHV68 gH/gL interacts with Eph receptors to mediate cell entry. We demonstrate a direct interaction of EphA4 and EphB3, receptors for KSHV and RRV, respectively, with the MHV68 gH/gL complex. Using a combination of in silico modeling, cell culture and in vivo experiments, we reveal that MHV68 interactions with Eph receptors parallel those seen in human pathogenic GHV infections. Our findings support MHV68 as a relevant system for investigating the in vivo relevance of Eph receptors during GHV infection. Understanding this interaction is crucial for evaluating how vaccine-induced antibodies targeting this conserved virus-host entry pathway affect infection dynamics in specific cell types.

## Results

## MHV68 gH/gL interaction profile with human and murine Eph receptors
EBV and KSHV gH/gL structures demonstrate co-folding of gH D-I and gL that provides the basis for gH/gL-Eph interactions [ , ]. To evaluate if this gL-dependent conformation is conserved in MHV68, we modelled the MHV68 gH ectodomain (gHecto) in complex with gL using alphafold2 multimer ( ). The predicted MHV68 gH/gL structures were found to be similar to experimental structures of gH/gL from orthologous herpesviruses [ – ]. Based on the EBV gH domain structure, MHV68 gHecto was divided into four domains: D-I (V25-P86), D-II (L87-S369), D-III (N370-L552), and D-IV (P553-Q702). The Eph binding interface of KSHV and EBV was mapped to a co-folded region comprised of the N-terminal D-I of gH and gL, which is conserved in the MHV68 gH/gL model.
 To analyze if the conserved fold of the MHV68 gH/gL complex is predictive of interactions with Eph family receptors, we performed pairwise co-precipitation analysis of MHV68 gHecto in the absence or presence of full-length MHV68 gL with each of the 14 full-length human Eph receptors expressed in 293T cells. MHV68 gHecto/gL interacted most efficiently with human (h) EphA4, with less pronounced binding to hEphB3 and hEphA6 ( ). We also observed weak signal for hEphA8, hEphA10 and hEphB1. However, this signal was consistent in the absence of MHV68 gL ( ), and observed with an Fc control ( ), indicative of non-specific binding. Among herpesviruses that interact with members of the Eph receptor family [ , , – ], KSHV exhibits the closest sequence similarity to both MHV68 gH and gL, based on sequence coverage and identity ( ). We therefore compared the interaction of hEphA4, a KSHV receptor and gH/gL interaction partner [ , ], with MHV68 and KSHV gH/gL. Precipitation of gHecto/gL from MHV68 or KSHV confirmed binding of both MHV68 gH/gL and KSHV gH/gL to hEphA4. On the other hand, MHV68 gH/gL did not interact with hEphA2, a KSHV-interacting Eph receptor ( ), in line with a previous report that did not observe an effect of hEphA2 on MHV68 fusion [ ]. Eph receptors are an evolutionary conserved class of receptor tyrosine kinases and exhibit high amino acid identity between human and mouse homologs ( , D). To analyze if this high inter-species conservation is reflected in observed MHV68 gH/gL-Eph interactions, we examined co-precipitation of MHV68 gH in the presence ( ) or absence ( ) of MHV68 gL with a subset of murine (m) Eph receptors. We observed a binding pattern recapitulating observations with human Eph receptors, identifying mEphA4 and mEphB3 as the most prominent interaction partners. This evolutionary conservation is likewise apparent in the interaction of KSHV gH/gL with mEphA2 and mEphA4 ( ). This is in line with mEphA2 receptor function shown for KSHV infection of murine pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells [ ].
MHV68 genome annotations predict two coding sequences for MHV68 gL, starting from two alternative start codons. To determine potential differences in expression, gH complex formation and Eph interaction, we compared plasmids encoding the putative 173-amino-acid-protein (GenBank accession no. U97553) and 137-amino-acid-protein (containing a predicted 20 amino acid signal peptide) (GenBank accession no. AF105037) ( ). We did not observe differences in apparent molecular weights of expressed proteins, indicating cleavage after the signal peptide for generation of mature gL. In concordance, we did not see differences in gH/gL complex incorporation or EphA4 binding. These results agree with a previous report that identified expression of transcripts that align with AF105037 [ ]. Subsequent gL amino acid positions are determined based on the 137-amino-acid-protein ( ).
To quantify binding of candidate Eph receptors to gH/gL and evaluate the requirement for additional cellular factors we analyzed the binding of purified murine Eph proteins to an immobilized MHV68 gL-gH fusion protein by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) ( ). We determined an EC50 of 3.6 nM and 2.3 nM for mEphA4 and mEphB3, respectively, consistent with previously observed nanomolar binding affinities of KSHV gH/gL to EphA2 [ , ].
These co-precipitations and ELISAs reveal a direct interaction of MHV68 gH/gL with multiple Eph receptors, with strongest binding to EphA4, followed by EphB3. EphA4 and EphB3 are receptors for KSHV and RRV, respectively, demonstrating an overlapping binding profile with both human and NHP GHV pathogens.

## Receptor function of MHV68 gH/gL-interacting Eph receptors
We next analyzed the biological and functional relevance of this interaction for the entry process and infection of MHV68. First, we employed a loss-of-function approach, using soluble murine Eph receptors as decoys to test their inhibitory potential on infection of permissive target cells with a GFP-expressing MHV68 reporter virus (MHV68 ORF59-GFP [ ]) ( ). ORF59, an essential early gene, encodes the viral DNA polymerase processivity factor (vPPF), leading to expression of a vPPF::GFP fusion protein at early time points post de-novo infection [ , ]. NIH 3T3 murine fibroblasts, a highly susceptible cell type for MHV68 infection, exhibits broad Eph receptor expression, including Epha4 and Ephb3 ( ) in a published high throughput sequencing dataset [ ]. To analyze the impact of competition with soluble Eph receptors, MHV68 ORF59-GFP inocula were incubated with a concentration series of soluble mEphA4, mEphA6 and mEphB3 prior to infection of NIH 3T3 cells. PBS, and soluble mEphA2 were used as controls ( , ). In line with MHV68 gH/gL-Eph-interaction patterns observed in precipitation or ELISA, pre-incubation with soluble mEphA4 and mEphB3 reduced MHV68 infection of NIH 3T3 cells in a dose-dependent manner, while pre-treatment with mEphA2 and mEphA6 did not block infection ( ).
 While both mEphA4 and mEphB3 inhibited MHV68 infection of NIH 3T3 cells, we observed differences between Eph receptors and murine ( , ) and human cell types ( , ). Pre-incubation of MHV68 virions with 100 nM homodimerized mEphA4 resulted in a near complete abrogation (~93%) of MHV68 infection on NIH 3T3 murine fibroblasts ( , A), whereas infection of human fibroblasts (HFF) and endothelial cells (TIME) was inhibited by approximately 50–60% ( , , C, D). Soluble mEphA4 exhibited the lowest blocking efficiency on the murine endothelial cell line SVEC4–10 with an approximate 25% reduction of MHV68 infection ( , B). Pre-incubation with soluble mEphB3 demonstrated a similar pattern to mEphA4, leading to an approximate 40% reduction of infection on murine NIH 3T3 fibroblasts ( , ), while inhibition on human fibroblasts and endothelial cells only reached approximately 30% ( , ). EphB3 pre-treatment had no effect on MHV68 infection of SVEC4–10 cells ( ). In concordance with interaction assays, we observed no inhibition of MHV68 infection after pre-incubation with mEphA2 on any of the tested cell lines.
In an orthogonal approach, we performed entry experiments using ectopic Eph overexpression in a non-permissive cell type ( ). Raji cells, an EBV-positive, human B lymphoblast cell line, support only low level MHV68 infection (<0.5% GFP+ cells at MOI 30, titrated on NIH 3T12), in agreement with low to absent mRNA expression of all 14 human Eph receptors ( ). To analyze contributions of single Eph receptors to MHV68 infection, Raji cells were transduced with lentiviruses encoding TwinStrep-tagged Eph receptors including human and murine EphA4 and EphB3 which bind MHV68 gH/gL ( ) and inhibit infection on permissive cell lines ( ). Empty vector, as well as human and murine EphA2 were used as negative controls. Immunoblot analysis of transduced and selected Raji cells confirmed expression of all analyzed Eph receptors, with lower levels of both human and mouse EphA4 observed compared to EphB3 and EphA2 ( ).
 Ectopic expression of EphB3 of human and mouse origin exhibited the strongest enhancement of MHV68 ORF59-GFP infection, leading to an ~ 20-fold increase in GFP+ cells.Expression of EphA4 had a comparably less pronounced effect on MHV68 infection of ~8-fold enhancement compared to empty vector. This might be reflective of consistently lower expression levels of EphA4 constructs compared to EphB3. Nevertheless, overexpression of EphA4 led to an equivalent species-independent increase in MHV68 ORF59-GFP infection ( , ). In summary, orthogonal soluble blockade and single receptor entry assays demonstrate that EphA4 and EphB3 act as functional entry receptors for MHV68.

## The MHV68 gH/gL-Eph interaction is mediated by a conserved gammaherpesviral Eph-interaction motif
The gH/gL-Eph interaction is dependent on a structural motif formed by D-I of gH and gL that contacts residues of Eph receptors that mediate binding of the GH loop in ephrin ligands [ , , , ]. Structure predictions of the MHV68 gH/gL heterodimer in complex with either the murine EphA4 or EphB3 ligand binding domain (LBD) were performed using alphafold2 multimer, refined using Rosetta and aligned with the previously published structure of the KSHV gH/gL-EphA2 complex (PBDid 7B7N) ( – ). MHV68 gH/gL exhibited an Eph binding interface reminiscent of EBV and KSHV gH/gL-EphA2 complexes, with contacts observed throughout the N-terminal region of gL. As gL is co-folded with gH D-I and separated from D-II by a linker helix we sought to analyze if a complex consisting of gH D-I and full-length gL is sufficient to mediate the gH/gL-Eph interaction. We performed co-precipitation analyses of the constructs encoding the MHV68 gH ectodomain (gHecto) or MHV68 gH D-I and the D-I/D-II linker sequence (gHD-I) in the absence or presence of full-length MHV68 gL with murine EphA4. MHV68 gHD-I efficiently incorporated gL to higher levels than gHecto and bound EphA4 ( ). The predicted conservation of intermolecular hydrogen bonds between MHV68 gH and EphA4/ EphB3 indicated the aspartic acid at position 52 (D52MHV68 gH) as a key interacting residue contacting arginine 106 on both mEphA4 and mEphB3 (R106EphA4/ EphB3) ( , ). R103EphA2, the conserved arginine in the ephrin binding channel of EphA2, has been reported as single contact site for KSHV gH, forming a salt bridge with glutamic acid 52 (E52KSHV gH) [ ], the positional equivalent of D52MHV68 gH ( ). Analysis of hydrogen bonds formed between MHV68 gH and gL, identified Y50MHV68 gH as a potential stabilizing residue for the gH-gL interaction and K24MHV68 gL as a potential contact residue for Eph receptors ( , ). We next evaluated the impact of these residues on gH/gL-Eph complex formation. Single amino acids in the putative interaction interface were mutated to alanine and subjected to co-precipitation of wt and mutant combinations with murine EphA4 ( , ). Single point mutations of predicted interaction residues Y50MHV68 gH, D52MHV68 gH and K24MHV68 gL led to comparable levels of gH expression and gL incorporation. In contrast to KSHV, in which a single point mutation in E52MHV68 gH leads to complete abrogation of EphA2 interaction, single point mutations in MHV gH and gL only led to a moderate reduction in EphA4 binding in our assays. However, the combination of mutations Y50AMHV68 gH, E52AMHV68 gH and K24AMHV68 gL reduced EphA4 binding to background levels ( ). The double point mutation in Y50-D52MHV68 gH led to decreased incorporation of the low molecular weight gL. Taken together our data indicates that the MHV68 gH/gL-Eph interaction is shaped by the interaction of D52MHV68 gH and R106EphA4/ EphB3 and a larger gL-Eph interaction interface.
 

## MHV68 infected mice generate neutralizing antibodies targeting D-I of gH
The gH/gL complex has been identified as a major target for GHV neutralizing antibodies in vivo [ – ]. To analyze the effect of depletion of gH/gL-directed antibodies on serum neutralization capacity, we inoculated C57BL/6 mice with 1000 PFU wild-type (WT) MHV68 by the restrictive intranasal route of infection that models oropharyngeal GHV infection of people ( ). At 28 dpi, serum was collected from two independent groups of WT infected mice and analyzed by ELISA using plates coated with purified gL-gH fusion protein. WT infection elicited robust gH/gL-targeting antibody responses ( ). We next evaluated the serum neutralizing capacity on MHV68 infection of NIH 3T3 fibroblasts by analyzing reduction in GFP+ cells after pre-incubation of MHV68 ORF59-GFP with pooled, heat-inactivated sera ( ). We observed similar neutralizing capacity of serum from both MHV68 WT infected groups when compared to pre-incubation with serum from naïve mice. To evaluate the relative contribution of gH/gL-targeting nAbs to MHV68 neutralization, we depleted gH/gL-specific antibodies from serum of naïve or MHV68 WT infected mice using three rounds of depletion with either gHecto/gL or gHD–I/gL complexes pre-coupled to magnetic beads. Adsorption using gHecto/gL or gHD–I/gL decreased gH/gL-specific antibodies as measured by ELISA, but we observed slightly higher residual antibody levels in gHD–I/gL-depleted samples ( ). To measure the neutralizing capacity of sera following adsorption, serum samples were pre-incubated with MHV68 ORF59-GFP prior to infection of NIH 3T3 cells. Depletion of gH/gL-targeting antibodies reduced neutralizing activity by approx. 50% with no pronounced differences between gHecto/gL or gHD-I/gL ( , , B). These findings indicate that the gH/gL interface is a primary target for gH/gL nAbs.
 

## Discussion
In this study, we demonstrate that Eph receptors are functional entry receptors for MHV68, indicating strong evolutionary conservation with other human and primate herpesviruses. We identify EphA4 and EphB3 as direct interaction partners of the MHV68 gH/gL complex that facilitated MHV68 infection in different cell types from humans and mice. Mice infected with MHV68 mounted neutralizing antibody responses that target the receptor binding domain comprised of gH D-I and gL.
EphA4 and EphB3 are known GHV entry receptors. The gH/gL complexes of both KSHV and RRV bind EphA4 [ , , ]. EphB3, has been identified as high affinity receptor for RRV, a rhadinovirus of rhesus macaques but so far, no interaction with human herpesviruses has been observed [ ]. The role of EphA4 in KSHV infection seems to be complex since EphA4 expression enhances KSHV infection and gH/gL-dependent cell fusion [ ], but knock-down in permissive SLK cells similarly increased KSHV infection [ ]. Unlike a previous study that reported a modest enhancement of MHV68 fusion by murine EphA2 [ ], neither human nor murine EphA2 bound to MHV68 gH/gL or influenced MHV68 infection in our assays.
While the Eph-binding profiles of herpesviruses do not exhibit a complete overlap, the mechanism of binding via a binding domain comprised of gH D-I and gL that contacts the ephrin ligand binding pocket on Eph receptors appears conserved across gH/gL complexes [ , , ]. Our data demonstrates that D-I of MHV68 gH in complex with gL is likewise sufficient to mediate the gH/gL interaction. The interaction between R103EphA2 and E52KSHV gH, which is essential for the nanomolar affinity binding of KSHV to EphA2, is conserved in structural models of MHV68 gH/gL interactions with EphA4 and EphB3. The similarities between the structural predictions of MHV68 gH/gL-EphA4 and experimental models of KSHV gH/gL-EphA2 are consistent with the nanomolar binding affinities observed for MHV68 gH/gL interactions with mEphA4 and mEphB3 in ELISA.
Structural and binding analyses identify D52MHV68 gH as a key point of contact with Eph receptors even though co-precipitation analysis indicated a higher residual binding of single D52MHV68 gH point mutants than observed in studies using E52KSHV gH point mutants. Mutation of Y50MHV68 gH and K24MHV68 gL similarly resulted in a reduced EphA4 interaction. While K24MHV68 gL was predicted to directly interact with Eph receptors in our structural models, the contact of Y50MHV68 gH with MHV68 gL potentially stabilizes the N-terminal region of gL that is predicted to form a large Eph interaction interface. Combination of all three identified interaction sites abrogated EphA4 interaction but led to a reduced incorporation of gL. This reduced gL incorporation might be indicative of a destabilization of the gH/gL complex and could in turn affect EphA4 interaction. Alternatively, Eph interaction could lead to a secondary stabilization of the gH/gL complex, with loss of Eph binding leading to decreased gH/gL stability. In summary, our data supports a conserved role of the structurally conserved D52MHV68 gH as a key contact with Eph receptors that is supported by additional gL-Eph contact sites as described in KSHV and EBV [ , ]. Future investigations will determine how differences in binding interfaces and affinity affect Eph receptor targeting and GHV infection.
Disruption of the Eph-gH/gL association impacts GHV infection and tropism in cell culture [ , , – , ]. Our data demonstrates that soluble mEphA4 and mEphB3 inhibit MHV68 infection in both endothelial cells and fibroblasts, with mEphA4 generally showing greater blocking efficiency. We observed a slight but consistent increase in infection upon sEphA2 treatment, which did not reach significance. In the future, a more detailed analysis of Eph and ephrin expression in different target cell types used, along with complementary blocking experiments, may help clarify the technical or biological relevance of this finding. Observed inhibitory effects did not exhibit a clear cell type-dependent pattern. While human HFF fibroblasts and TIME endothelial cells exhibited a comparable Eph-dependency, murine NIH 3T3 fibroblasts and SVEC4–10 endothelial cells exhibited the most and least pronounced responses, respectively. These differences are reminiscent of previous studies that pointed to variable receptor usage for different B cell lines in cell culture [ , , ] highlighting the challenges of studying virus-host interactions in immortalized cell lines or donor-specific primary cells and support the need for in vivo analyses. The role of Eph-gH/gL interactions in cell culture systems [ , , – ] only partially recapitulate in vivo observations. For example, RRV and MHV68 gL-negative mutant viruses exhibited strong entry defects in cell culture systems but were able to establish latency in vivo at levels comparable to WT virus [ , ]. Nevertheless, gL is conserved across GHV and certainly provides a competitive advantage in vivo. MHV68 gL influences infection and latency establishment in a route-dependent manner [ ]. As receptor interactions are known to shape GHV tropism, these different roles might stem from the multiple target cell types encountered as the virus transverses restrictive mucosal barriers and disseminates to sites of latency in secondary lymphoid tissues [ , ]. MHV68 infection of mice thus offers a genetically tractable model to assess the in vivo relevance of Eph receptors in primary infection via different routes of dissemination and latency establishment. This study lays the groundwork for combinatorial approaches using viral mutants disrupted in the Eph interaction motif or gL incorporation, and lineage-specific knock-outs of Eph receptors.
The Eph-ephrin system exhibits a complex pattern of spatial and temporal expression in vivo, which is functionally refined by the bidirectional signaling induced upon receptor-ligand interactions. Receptor activation leads to recruitment of homotypic as well as heterotypic Eph receptors to form higher order signaling clusters [ ]. Accordingly, overall Eph expression profiles might more accurately predict functional outcomes of receptor engagement than expression of any given singular receptor. To reduce the complexity of the Eph/ephrin system and analyze the contribution of individual Eph receptors to MHV68 infection we employed ectopic overexpression of Eph receptors on Raji B cells, that possess low endogenous Eph levels. Interestingly, differences in apparent saturation binding of EphA4 and EphB3 observed in co-precipitation and ELISA experiments did not correlate with augmentation of MHV68 infection of Raji cells. Given the slightly higher EC50 alongside a higher maximum OD for mEphA4 binding compared to mEphB3 in gL-gH ELISAs, this might be reflective of differences in binding affinity and complex stability. While EC50 reflects apparent binding affinity, maximum OD represents saturation binding, suggesting that mEphB3 may exhibit higher initial affinity, whereas mEphA4 achieves greater total binding at steady state. Alternatively, these differences could be attributed to consistently lower expression levels of EphA4 when compared to EphB3 or EphA2, potentially hinting at an intrinsic difference in obtainable EphA4 levels in Raji B cells. Eph/ephrin crosstalk has been implicated in the maintenance of the hemopoietic stem cell (HSC) niche, with higher Eph expression levels in undifferentiated cells. Of note, EphA4 does not follow this pattern since transcripts were detected in human B cell progenitor cells as well as mature B cells [ , ]. Nevertheless, established B cell lines exhibit low EphA4 expression compared to other cell types, such as endothelial cells and fibroblasts. Interestingly, EBV LMP1 is a known regulator of EphA4 expression, and an inverse correlation of EBV infection and EphA4 expression was observed in EBV+ and EBV− diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and EBV− tonsils compared to EBV+ posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder. Functionally, low EphA4 levels were linked to sustained proliferation of lymphoblastoid cell lines and poor prognosis in DLBCL patients [ ]. Similarly, ring finger protein 5 (RNF5), a pro-oncogenic factor in multiple malignancies [ – ] has been reported to downregulate EphA3 and EphA4 expression in PEL cell lines associated with higher ERK and Akt activation [ ]. Eph receptor engagement by ephrin ligands is often associated with receptor internalization and subsequent proteosomal degradation [ ]. It remains to be determined if gH/gL-dependent MHV68 infection similarly triggers a decrease in EphA4 expression, in addition to possible effects on the proliferation and survival of MHV68 infected B cells.
The gH/gL complex has been identified as a key target for neutralizing humoral responses in EBV+ or KSHV+ patients [ – , ] and animal models [ , ]. Our study corroborates the efficient generation of gH/gL-directed antibodies upon MHV68 WT infection, which contribute to in vitro MHV68 neutralization capacity. These results are in line with previous studies that mapped the gH/gL-directed neutralizing capacity to the full gH/gL complex but not gH alone [ ]. We are the first to show that adsorption with gH/gL complexes encompassing the complete ectodomain or restricted to gH D-I led to comparable loss in MHV68 neutralization. As D-I mediates the gH/gL-Eph receptor interaction, a disruption of Eph receptor interactions as mechanistic target of gH/gL-directed nAbs is likely. Similarly, analyses of monoclonal nAbs that target the EBV gH/gL complex point to gH D-I as one site of vulnerability targeted by multiple human antibodies isolated from healthy, EBV+ donors [ ]. Curiously, we did not observe a complete depletion of gH/gL-directed antibodies from sera of infected mice, reminiscent of a recent study that demonstrated complete absorption from a patient in KS remission, with residual anti-gH/gL antibodies in the serum of an asymptomatic patient [ ]. Incomplete antibody depletion may reflect limitations in antigen presentation on beads or the presence of low-affinity antibodies. Further investigation is needed to determine whether these antibodies recognize distinct epitopes or might constitute low affinity binders unable to engage under depletion conditions. In addition, the lack of complete neutralization by gH/gL-directed antibodies may be attributed to other glycoprotein/ receptor interactions yet to be defined.
While aspects of KSHV/ EBV entry in cell culture systems and GHV infection in vivo have been analyzed independently, highly analogous animal model pathogens provide powerful systems to analyze virus-receptor interactions, the role of entry receptor in cell tropism, and the impact of targeted disruption of these interactions on the establishment and maintenance of chronic, life-long infection in vivo. Our study is the first to characterize a conserved function of Eph receptors in MHV68 infection. The biological significance of this interaction was demonstrated by the key finding that neutralizing antibodies which target the Eph-interaction domain inhibit MHV68 infection. This further validates and expands the utility of MHV68 infection of mice as a model system for GHV infection and vaccine development. Future studies on the protection offered by MHV68 gH/gL-targeting antibodies in vivo and rationally designed vaccines targeting receptor-virus interaction domains will inform optimized vaccination strategies against human pathogenic GHVs.

## Materials and methods

## Ethics statement
All animal procedures reported in this study that were performed by NCI-CCR affiliated staff were approved by the NCI Animal Care and Use Committee (ACUC) and in accordance with federal regulatory requirements and standards (internal protocol number HAMB-002, approved 10/03/2022). All components of the intramural NIH ACUC program are accredited by AAALAC International.

## Animal studies
Female C57BL/6 mice were purchased from Charles River Laboratories (Wilmington, MA). Seven-week-old mice were anesthetized using 1–4% isoflurane and inoculated intranasally (IN) with 1,000 PFU WT MHV68 diluted in 20 μl Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM), high glucose (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA; Corning, Corning, NY) supplemented with 10% FBS (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN), 100 U/mL penicillin, 100 µg/mL streptomycin (Corning), and 2 mM L-glutamine (Corning) (D10). On day 28 post-infection, blood was collected following humane euthanasia using isoflurane by post-mortem cardiac puncture, transferred to serum separator tubes (BD, Franklin Lakes, NJ) and centrifuged (21,100 × g, 20 min). Serum was carefully collected, aliquoted and stored at -80°C.

## Cell culture
Human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293T cells (RRID:CVCL_0063), human foreskin fibroblasts (HFF) (RRID:CVCL_XB54) and SVEC4–10 (RRID:CVCL_4393) murine endothelial cells were cultured in D10. NIH 3T3 (RRID:CVCL_0594) and NIH 3T12 (ATCC CCL-164, Manassas, VA) murine fibroblasts were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 8% FCS, 100 IU/mL penicillin, 100 µg/mL streptomycin, and 2 mM L-glutamine (D8). TIME (RRID:CVCL_0047) human telomerase-immortalized human microvascular endothelial cells were cultured in Vascular Cell Basal Medium (ATCC PCS-100–030) supplemented with Microvascular Endothelial Cell Growth Kit-VEGF (ATCC PCS-110–041) and blasticidin (Invivogen, San Diego, CA) at 12.5 μg/ml. Raji cells (RRID:CVCL_0511) were cultured in RPMI (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Corning) supplemented with 10% FCS, 100 U/mL penicillin, 100 µg/mL streptomycin, and 2 mM L-glutamine (R10). All cells were cultured at 37°C in 5% CO2.

## Plasmids and recombinant proteins
pcDNA4 vectors expressing full-length human Eph constructs were previously described [ ]. pCMV3-C-Myc vectors containing full-length constructs for murine EphA2, EphA4, EphA6, EphA7, EphB1 and EphB3 were purchased from Sino Biological ( for accession numbers). Sequence similarity with orthologs was determined using the BLAST algorithm [ ]. The expression construct for the soluble, ectodomain of MHV68 gH (gHecto), endcoded by orf22 fused to the Fc fragment of human IgG (gH-FcStrep) contains the codon-optimized sequence (see ) coding for the predicted extracellular domain of MHV68 gH (amino acids 25–702, as predicted by DeepTMHMM) (analogously to [ , ]) fused to the carboxy terminus of the 21-amino-acid murine immunoglobulin G kappa subunit ([IgG(κ)] signal peptide (PIR locus KVMS32) and the amino terminus of the Fc part from human IgG1 (GenBank accession no. S72664, amino acids 146–374) followed by a Twin-Strep-tag and 6xHis-tag. MHV68 gH ectodomain single point mutants and a truncated construct encoding D-I and the D-I/D-II linker sequence (gHD-I, amino acids 25–106) were generated using site-directed mutagenesis. The expression construct for MHV68 gL, encoded by orf47 contains the codon-optimized sequence coding for full-length MHV68 gL (NP_044884.3, see ) followed by a single C-terminal Flag tag. An N-terminally truncated MHV68 gL expression construct lacking the first 36 amino acids (gL∆N36) and single point mutants were generated using site-directed mutagenesis. Mutations were verified by Sanger Sequencing of the targeted region. See for a complete list of primers.
Recombinant soluble Eph receptors were purchased as Fc fusion proteins from R&D Systems (#639-A2, #641-A4, #607-A6, #432-B3). Cloning, protein expression and purification of the MHV68 gL-gH fusion protein was performed at the CCR Protein Expression Laboratory (PEL). Synthesized DNA, gene-optimized for mammalian expression, was used to create Entry clones containing the DNA sequences for gL-Linker-gH-Linker-His6. An Entry clone containing the CMV51 promoter sequence was created by PCR using pDest-720 (Sabine Geisse, Novartis) as template DNA and pDonr-233 (Esposito lab) as backbone vector via Gateway recombination [ ]. Final Expression clones were created by assembling promoter and gene sequence Entry clones by Gateway multisite reactions as described before [ ] using pDest-303 (Addgene #159678) as destination vector. Expi293F (Thermo Fisher Scientific) culture supernatant was harvested 96 h after transfection and stored at -80oC prior to protein purification. The culture supernatant was thawed, dialyzed against 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 300 mM NaCl (Buffer A) and filtered through a bottle top 0.45 μm filter. Imidazole was added to a final concentration of 25 mM. All purification steps were performed on a Bio-Rad NGC chromatography system at room temperature. A 2 x 1-ml HisTrap FF column (Cytiva, Marlborough, MA) was equilibrated in 10 column volumes (CV) 98% Buffer A and 2% Buffer B (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 300 mM NaCl, 500 mM imidazole). Filtered culture supernatant was loaded onto the column followed by 10 CV wash in 2% Buffer B. Protein was eluted from the column with bump to 100% Buffer B. Fractions were collected across the gradient and analyzed by SDS-PAGE/Coomassie Blue staining. Elution fractions containing target protein were pooled.

## Virus stock production and titration
Viruses utilized in this study include WT MHV68 (WUMS strain) for infection of C57BL/6 mice and bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC)-derived MHV68 ORF59-GFP. The MHV68 DsRed bacmid carrying a C-terminal GFP fusion to vPPF (ORF59) was previously described [ ]. Virus passage and titer determination on NIH 3T12 fibroblasts were performed as previously described [ ]. In short, 3T12 cells were infected at low MOI conditions (MOI 0.01 – 0.05) for virus stock production. Cells were harvested 8 dpi and homogenized using dounce homogenizers on ice. Supernatant was clarified by two sequential centrifugation steps at 1,600 rpm for 7 min and 4,000 x g for 15 min. Virus was concentrated from clarified supernatant by high-speed centrifugation (14,000 x g, 2 h) and resuspended in 1:80 of original cell culture volume. Aliquots were stored at -80°C. Titers were determined by quantification of plaque formation on NIH 3T12 cells. NIH 3T12 cells were plated at a density of 1 x 105 cells per ml. One day after plating, cells were incubated with serial dilutions of viral inocula for 1 hr at 37°C, with rocking every 15 min, followed by an overlay of 1.5% (w/v) methylcellulose (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO) in DMEM supplemented with 5% FCS, 100 IU/mL penicillin, 100 µg/mL streptomycin. After 7–8 d incubation at 37°C, cells were fixed with 100% methanol (Sigma- Aldrich), stained with 0.1% crystal violet (Sigma- Aldrich) in 20% methanol, and plaques were scored.

## Lentivirus production and transduction
For production of lentiviral particles, 10 cm cell culture grade petri dishes of approximately 80% confluent 293T cells were transfected with 3 μg each of pLP1 (HIV-1 gag and pol), pLP2 (HIV-1 rev), pLP/VSVG (VSV G glycoprotein (VSV-G)) and lentiviral expression constructs (pLenti CMV Blast DEST (706–1), pLenti-CMV-Blast-hEphA2-Strep, pLenti-CMV-Blast-hEphA4-Strep, pLenti-CMV-Blast-hEphB3-Strep, pLenti-CMV-Blast-mEphA2-Strep, pLenti-CMV-Blast-mEphA4-Strep, pLenti-CMV-Blast-mEphB3-Strep) using Transporter 5 Transfection Reagent (Polysciences, Warrington, PA) as per manufacturer instructions. The supernatant containing the pseudo-typed lentiviral particles was harvested 2–3 d after transfection and filtered through 0.45 μm membranes (Merck Millipore, Burlington, MA). For transduction, lentivirus stocks were added at a 1:5 dilution in the presence of 8 μg/ml polybrene, followed by centrifugation (1,500 x g, 1 h, RT). After 48 h, the selection antibiotic blasticidin (Invivogen) was added to a final concentration of 10 μg/ml.

## Immunoprecipitation and immunoblot analysis
For interaction analysis of gH/gL complexes with Eph receptors, 293T cells were transfected using Transporter 5 Transfection Reagent (Polysciences), per manufacturer instructions. Lysates of 293T cells transfected with expression constructs for human or mouse Eph receptors were prepared 2 days after transfections in NP40 lysis buffer (1% Nonidet P40 Substitute (Sigma-Aldrich), 150 mM NaCl (Quality Biological, Gaithersburg, MD), 50 mM HEPES (Quality Biological), 1 mM EDTA (Crystalgen) with freshly added cOmplete Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche, Indianapolis, IN) and PhosSTOP Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche). For input immunoblot, 2 μl of each lysate was denatured in 1x NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 70°C for 10 min, separated by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) using 8–16% Tris-Glycine polyacrylamide gradient gels (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Tris-Glycine SDS running buffer (25 mM Tris, 192 mM glycine, 0.1% SDS) and transferred to Polyvinylidendifluorid (PVDF) membranes (iBlot2). The membranes were blocked in 1x Fluorescent blocking buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 1 h, at room temperature, washed once in TBS-T and incubated with the respective antibodies for 2 h at room temperature or overnight at 4°C. After three washes with TBS-T, the membranes were incubated with the respective HRP-conjugated secondary antibody in TBS-T for 1 h at room temperature, washed three times in TBS-T, and imaged on an iBright Imaging system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using Immobilon Forte Western HRP substrate (Merck Millipore). Recombinant FcStrep, gH-FcStrep or gH-FcStrep/gL-Flag complexes were precipitated from the supernatant of 293T cells transfected with the respective expression constructs. Supernatant was collected 2 d after transfection, filtered through 0.45 μm membranes (Millipore) and incubated with magnetic StrepTactinXT beads (IBA Lifesciences, Saint Louis, MO) overnight at 4°C with agitation. After three washes in NP40 lysis buffer, StrepTactinXT beads with pre-coupled FcStrep, gH-FcStrep or gH-FcStrep/gL-Flag complexes were incubated overnight at 4°C with agitation with myc-tagged Eph receptor containing lysates normalized for Eph receptor expression levels as determined by immunoblot. Volumes were adjusted with lysate of untransfected 293T cells. After overnight incubation, magnetic StrepTactinXT beads were washed three times in NP40 lysis buffer on Dynamag magnetic racks. Precipitates were heated in 1x LDS sample buffer (70°C, 10 min) and immunoblot was performed as described above (see for a complete list of antibodies).

## Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
To measure binding of soluble Eph proteins or MHV68 gH/gL-specific antibodies in mouse serum, clear flat-bottom 96-well Maxisorp plates (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #439454) were coated with recombinant MHV68 gL-gH fusion protein at 2.5 μg/ml in PBS overnight at room temperature. After three washes in 0.05% Tween20 in PBS (PBS-T), wells were blocked with 1% BSA in PBS (R&D Systems #DY995) for 1 h at room temperature. Incubation with soluble Eph proteins at the indicated concentration or serum at the indicated dilutions was performed for 2 h at room temperature in 1% BSA in PBS. After three washes in PBS-T, bound protein was detected using horseradish peroxidase-conjugated ProteinG (Merck Milipore #18–161) at 12.5 ng/ml (soluble Eph proteins) or goat-anti-mouse IgG (Invitrogen #31430) (serum) at 10 ng/ml in in 1% BSA in PBS. After three washes, a 1:1 mixture of Color Reagent A (H2O2) and Color Reagent B (Tetramethylbenzidine) (R&D Systems) was added. The reaction was stopped by adding 2 N H2SO (R&D Systems). Absorbance at 450 nm and 540 nm (reference wavelength) was read on a Biotek Synergy 2 plate reader (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA). Correction for non-specific absorbance was per performed by subtracting absorbance at 540 nm and blank controls from absorbance at 450 nm.

## Infection assays and flow cytometry
For infection assays of adherent cell lines, cells were plated at 12,500 cells per well in 96 well plates. One day after plating, cells were infected with the indicated amounts of virus. Block of MHV68 infection with soluble decoy receptor was assayed by infection with MHV68 ORF59-GFP inocula that were pre-incubated with the indicated concentrations of soluble mEphA2-Fc, mEphA4-Fc, mEphA6-Fc or mEphB3-Fc at room temperature for 30 min. 16 h post infection (hpi) cells were harvested by brief trypsinization, followed by addition of 5% FCS in PBS to inhibit trypsin activity, spun down (1,500 rpm, 5 min), washed once with PBS, re-pelleted, fixed in PBS supplemented with 2% formaldehyde (ThermoFisher Scientific) and analyzed for GFP expression on a Cytoflex flow cytometer (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA). Transduced Raji cells were plated at 25,000 cells per well in 96 well plates, virus was added at MOI 10–30, followed by centrifugation (1,500 × g, 1 h, RT). Micrographs of GFP+ Raji cells were taken at 24 hpi and cells were harvested for flow cytometry. Data analysis was performed in FlowJo (v10). Raw data was log-transformed and normalized to controls prior to statistical analysis and back transformed for visualization.

## MHV68 neutralization and antibody depletion assays
For neutralization assays, murine serum was serially diluted and incubated with MHV68 ORF59-GFP for 30 min at room temperature. Subsequently, serum/virus inocula were added to cells plated at 12,500 cells in 96 well plates one day prior to infection. 16 h post infection cells were harvested by brief trypsinization, followed by addition of 5% FCS in PBS to inhibit trypsin activity, spun down (1,500 rpm, 5 min), washed once with PBS, re-pelleted and fixed in PBS supplemented with 2% formaldehyde and analyzed for GFP expression on a Cytoflex flow cytometer. Data was analyzed using FlowJo (v10). For depletion of MHV68 gH/gL-specific antibodies, recombinant FcStrep, gHecto-FcStrep/gL-Flag or gHD-I-FcStrep/gL-Flag complexes were pre-coupled to magnetic StrepTactinXT beads overnight at 4°C with rotation as described above. After three washes in PBS/ 1% FCS/ 2 mM EDTA on a Dynamag magnetic rack StrepTactinXT beads with pre-coupled FcStrep, gHecto-FcStrep/gL-Flag or gHD-I-FcStrep/gL-Flag complexes were incubated with murine serum to adsorp gH/gL-binding antibodies for at least 5 h at 4°C with rotation. A total of three adsorption steps were performed. Serum pre- and post-depletion was stored at -80°C. Evaluation of MHV68 neutralizing potential of depleted sera was performed as described above.

## Structure prediction and analysis
The MHV68 gH ectodomain (NP_044860, V25-Q702) was predicted in complex with MHV68 gL (AAF19311, C21-W137) using ColabFold v1.5.5, followed by relaxing of the top ranked structure using amber force fields (pLDDT = 84.1 pTM = 0.865 ipTM = 0.912) [ ]. N- and C-terminal residues with pLDDT < 70 were excluded in the visualization. Truncated chains for MHV68 gH (NP_044860.1, residues 1–95) and gL (NP_044884, residues 1–137) were predicted in complex with either murine EphA4 (NP_031962) or murine EphB3 (NP_034273) using ColabFold (NP_031962: mean pLDDT = 60.9, median pLDDT = 61.5; NP_044884: mean pLDDT = 73.3, median pLDDT = 84.6). The resulting models were aligned against known structures (PDBIDs 3PHF, 7CZE, 7B7N, 7CZF) and closest matching MHV68 gH/gL-mEphA4 model (PBDid 7B7N, rmsd = 1.1 Å, DALI Z = 25.5) was refined using one round of Rosetta fast_relax to minimize steric clashes and improve the hydrogen bonding network [ ]. Further analysis and visualization was performed in ChimeraX [ ].

## Mathematical and statistical analysis
Curve fitting of binding of Eph receptors and gH/gL-directed antibodies from mouse serum to gL-gH fusion protein was performed using a built-in A 4-parameter logistic (4PL) curve in GraphPad Prism version 10 (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA). Statistical analysis of multiple groups was performed using ordinary one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Holm-Šídák’s multiple comparisons test ( – , ) or ordinary two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test ( , ). All Statistical analyses were performed with GraphPad Prism version 10. For all statistics, *: p-value < 0.05, **: p-value < 0.01, ***: p-value < 0.001, ****: p-value < 0.0001.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## The MHV68 gH/gL complex binds human and murine Eph receptors.
(A) Pairwise precipitation of soluble recombinant FcStrep with individual human Eph proteins. Precipitates were analyzed by immunoblot with indicated antibodies. Asterisks indicate known KSHV, EBV or RRV gH/gL interaction partners. (B) Input immunoblot for individual human Eph proteins. (C) Schematic representation of alternative open reading frames of MHV68 gL. Alternative start codons are indicated by arrowheads, SP: predicted signal peptide. Pairwise precipitation of soluble recombinant MHV68 gH ectodomain in complex with expression constructs for full-length MHV68 gL (gH/gL) or MHV68 gLΔN36 (37–173) (based on NP_044884.3) with murine EphA4. MHV68 gH alone was used as control. Precipitates were analyzed by immunoblot with indicated antibodies. (D) Protein accession numbers and percentage of identical amino acids in aligned regions of human and murine Eph proteins as determined by BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool). (E) Pairwise precipitation of soluble recombinant gH-FcStrep with individual murine Eph proteins. Precipitates were analyzed by immunoblot with indicated antibodies. For A, B, C, E, molecular weight is indicated in kDa.
(TIF)
S2 Fig

## Soluble murine EphA4 and EphB3 inhibit MHV68 infection of endothelial cells and fibroblasts.
(A-D) Cell type-dependent inhibition of MHV68 infection by soluble murine Eph proteins at 100 nM homodimerized protein. EphA2-Fc and PBS were used as controls. GFP expression as indicator of infection was measured by flow cytometry. Infection is shown as percentage of GFP+ cells. Symbols representing individual experiments are shown; lines connect values from the same experiment.
(TIF)
S3 Fig

## Multiple residues on gH and gL mediate the MVH68 gH/gL Eph interaction.
(A) Multiple sequence alignment of gH D-I of human (KSHV [QFU18817], EBV [AIM62235]), rhesus macaque (RRV 26–95 [AAF60000]) and murine (MHV68 [NP044860]) GHVs. Numbers according to MHV68 gH. Arrowhead indicates R106EphA4/EphB3 interacting residue D52MHV68 gH. (B) Single amino acids in the putative Eph interacting region in MHV68 gH were mutated to alanine. MHV68 gHecto mutants in complex with MHV68 gL were precipitated with murine EphA4. MHV68 gH-FcStrep was used as control. Precipitates were analyzed by immunoblot with indicated antibodies. (C) Putative Eph-interacting residues in MHV68 gL were mutated to alanine. MHV68 gHecto in complex with MHV68 gL mutants was precipitation with murine EphA4. MHV68 gH-FcStrep was used as control. Precipitates were analyzed by immunoblot with indicated antibodies. For B, C, molecular weight is indicated in kDa.
(TIF)
S4 Fig

## Neutralizing antibodies in MHV68 infected mice target the MHV68 gH/gL complex.
(A) Antibodies to gHecto/gL or gHD-I/gL were depleted using soluble complexes pre-coupled to magnetic beads. Fc was used as control. gH/gL-specific IgG from naïve or MHV68-infected C57BL/6 before and after adsorption was measured by MHV68 gL-gH ELISA. Background corrected optical density at 450 nm is shown. Mean and symbols representing individual experiments are shown. (B) Correlation of mean neutralization and optic density from three independent experiments. (C) Serum neutralization of MHV68 ORF59-GFP infection on NIH 3T3 cells is mediated by gH/gL-targeting antibodies. Antibodies to gHecto/gL or gHD-I/gL were depleted using soluble complexes pre-coupled to magnetic beads. Fc was used as control. Micrographs were taken at 16 hpi. Statistical significance was evaluated by ordinary two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. ***: p-value < 0.001, ****: p-value < 0.0001.
(TIF)
S1 Table

## List of primers and antibodies used in the study.
(XLSX)
S2 Table

## Primary infection data for , and .
(XLSX)

## Acknowledgments
We thank Morgan Pagonis, Nick Wright, Britney Erickson, Ashley Mitchell, Kayla Russell, Vanessa Wall, and Jane Jones from the Protein Expression Laboratory at the Frederick National Laboratory for cloning and protein expression support. We thank Alexander Hahn for the generous sharing of plasmids. We also thank Amber Zeng for technical support and members of the Krug laboratory for helpful discussion.

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the manuscript and its Supporting information files.

## Funding Statement
This research was supported [in part] by the Intramural Research Program of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the National Cancer Institute (NCI) ZIA BC 011953 (L.T.K.). A.K.G. was supported by an Intramural AIDS Research Fellowship funded by the NIH Office of AIDS Research and administered by the NIH Office of Intramural Training and Education. The contributions of the NIH author(s) are considered Works of the United States Government. The findings and conclusions presented in this paper are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the NIH or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

## References
 

PLOS PathogensPLoS Pathog10.1371/journal.ppat.1013263.r001Decision Letter 0
KalejtaRobertSection Editor© 2025 Robert KalejtaThis is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.
10 Jul 2025

PPATHOGENS-D-25-01356
Eph Receptor Tyrosine Kinases Are Functional Entry Receptors for Murine Gammaherpesvirus 68
PLOS Pathogens
Dear Dr. Großkopf,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS Pathogens. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS Pathogens's publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript within 30 days Sep 08 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plospathogens@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/ppathogens/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
* A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'. This file does not need to include responses to any formatting updates and technical items listed in the 'Journal Requirements' section below.
* A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
* An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, competing interests statement, or data availability statement, please make these updates within the submission form at the time of resubmission. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Kenneth M Kaye
Academic Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Robert Kalejta
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Sumita Bhaduri-McIntosh
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0003-2946-9497
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064

Additional Editor Comments:

Three reviewers have reviewed your manuscript and all were very enthusiastic about the findings and presentation. However, there are a few minor issues that were raised that should be addressed.

Journal Requirements:

1) Please ensure that the CRediT author contributions listed for every co-author are completed accurately and in full.
At this stage, the following Authors/Authors require contributions: Anna Katharina Großkopf, Victor Tobiasson, and Laurie T. Krug. Please ensure that the full contributions of each author are acknowledged in the "Add/Edit/Remove Authors" section of our submission form.
The list of CRediT author contributions may be found here: https://journals.plos.org/plospathogens/s/authorship#loc-author-contributions
2) We notice that your supplementary Figures are included in the manuscript file. Please remove them and upload them with the file type 'Supporting Information'. Please ensure that each Supporting Information file has a legend listed in the manuscript after the references list.
3) Some material included in your submission may be copyrighted. According to PLOSu2019s copyright policy, authors who use figures or other material (e.g., graphics, clipart, maps) from another author or copyright holder must demonstrate or obtain permission to publish this material under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) License used by PLOS journals. Please closely review the details of PLOSu2019s copyright requirements here: PLOS Licenses and Copyright. If you need to request permissions from a copyright holder, you may use PLOS's Copyright Content Permission form.
Please respond directly to this email and provide any known details concerning your material's license terms and permissions required for reuse, even if you have not yet obtained copyright permissions or are unsure of your material's copyright compatibility. Once you have responded and addressed all other outstanding technical requirements, you may resubmit your manuscript within Editorial Manager. 
Potential Copyright Issues:
- Figure 5A. Please confirm whether you drew the images / clip-art within the figure panels by hand. If you did not draw the images, please provide (a) a link to the source of the images or icons and their license / terms of use; or (b) written permission from the copyright holder to publish the images or icons under our CC BY 4.0 license. Alternatively, you may replace the images with open source alternatives. See these open source resources you may use to replace images / clip-art:
- https://commons.wikimedia.org
- https://openclipart.org/.
4) Please ensure that the funders and grant numbers match between the Financial Disclosure field and the Funding Information tab in your submission form. Note that the funders must be provided in the same order in both places as well.
State what role the funders took in the study. If the funders had no role in your study, please state: "The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.".
If you did not receive any funding for this study, please simply state: u201cThe authors received no specific funding for this work.u201d

Reviewers' Comments:

Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Part I - Summary

Please use this section to discuss strengths/weaknesses of study, novelty/significance, general execution and scholarship.
Reviewer #1: Grosskopf et al report here that the Eph receptor tyrosine kinases function as receptors for murine gammaherpevirus 68. The EphR TKs were previously shown to serve as receptors for EBV, KSHV and RRV through binding the conserved gH/gL glycoproteins, findings that underpin the significance of this new report. Vaccination and immune protection from gammaherpesvirus infection and subsequent diseases is an important goal, and therefore demonstration that the mouse model system displays remarkable conservation of the critical entry interaction is very important to the field and to future studies.
This report is thorough and straightforward, making use of in silico comparative studies, screening of multiple EphR family members, use of purified viral glycoprotein complexes, analysis of MHV68 infection and neutralization with purified complexes and domains, and demonstration of the sufficiency of the EphR A4 and B3 for infection of human cells. The conclusions of this report are fully supported, and indicate the utility of the conserved MHV68 infection entry system for modeling and testing gammaherpesvirus entry.
Reviewer #2: Prior research has identified Eph receptors as key entry receptors engaged by the gH/gL complex of human gammaherpesviruses. This study by Grosskopf et al. is the first to demonstrate Eph receptors, specifically EphA4 and EphB3, as functional entry receptors for murine gammaherpesvirus 68 (MHV68). The manuscript presents multiple lines of evidence supporting their conclusion: interactions of MHV68 gH/gL with EphA4 and EphB3, inhibition of infection in permissive cell types by soluble EphA4 and B3, and the ability of ectopically expressed EphA4 and B3 to render otherwise non-permissive human Raji B cells susceptible to MHV68 infection. These experiments include another Eph receptor, EphA2 as a negative control for specificity. Guided by modeling and alignment with the existing structure of KSHV gH/gL-EphA2 complex, the authors experimentally demonstrated that the interaction between MHV68 gH/gL and EphA4 involves specific residues at domain I of MHV68 gH. This confirms evolutionary conservation of entry mechanisms. Overall, this study represents a significant advancement in gammaherpesvirus research and establishes a strong foundation for using MHV68 as an in vivo model system for pathogenesis and vaccine development. The manuscript is well written, clearly presented with solid experimental data, and easy to follow. Only a few clarifications are needed to further enhance the clarify of the study.
Reviewer #3: Although entry receptors for EBV and KSHV, including Eph family members, have been well-described, entry receptors for the related murine virus MHV68 have not been previously determined. Work in this manuscript directly tests the ability Eph family members to interact with MHV68 glycoproteins and serve as entry receptors. Through a series of beautiful experiments, the authors identify EphA4 and EphB3 as direct interaction partners of the MHV68 gH/gL complex, and further demonstrate that expression of EphA4 and B3 facilitates infection of multiple cell types from both humans and mice. This is outstanding, well-written report with carefully controlled experiments and clear conclusions. These exciting results provide a large step forward for the field and provide important additional evidence for the evolutionary conservation of MHV68 with other human and primate herpesviruses.
**********

Part II – Major Issues: Key Experiments Required for Acceptance

Please use this section to detail the key new experiments or modifications of existing experiments that should be absolutely required to validate study conclusions.
Generally, there should be no more than 3 such required experiments or major modifications for a "Major Revision" recommendation. If more than 3 experiments are necessary to validate the study conclusions, then you are encouraged to recommend "Reject".
Reviewer #1: no major issues
Reviewer #2: None
Reviewer #3: NONE
**********

Part III – Minor Issues: Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications

Please use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity.
Reviewer #1: Minor issues that could be discussed:
1) In figure 2, it appears that soluble EphA2 trends toward enhancement of infection. It would be informative to learn whether this is considered to be technical or specific.
2) As shown in figure 5, antisera depletion of gH/gL specific antibodies does decrease neutralization of infection, but only to approximately 50% as the authors point out. Is this due to the capacity for herpesviruses to use multiple means of entry, incomplete depletion of gH/gL antibodies specific to epitopes not shared with the purified gH/gL reagent, other? Some discussion of this is useful in thoughtful consideration of focusing on neutralizing gH/gL in gammaherpesvirus vaccination.
Reviewer #2: 1. Fig. 2. Are all cell types equally susceptible to MHV68 infection? In other words, what are the percentage of GFP+ cells in the PBS controls? This information should be included.
2. LINE 180: Typically, lower EC50 values indicates higher affinity. Therefore, the higher EC50 observed for mEphA4 is somewhat counterintuitive. The authors should clarify the interpretation of EC50 and maximum OD values in the context of receptor and gH/gL interactions.
3. Fig. 3D. Only fold change is displayed. The authors should indicate what a >20-fold increases correspond to regarding the percentage of GFP+ cells.
4. Fig. 5B. The authors should indicate whether undiluted or diluted serum was used. If diluted serum was used for ELISA, include the dilution factor.
5. Does KSHV gH/gL complex interact with murine EpHA2 and A4?
Reviewer #3: MINOR
1. Fig 2C – 2G. Figures indicate percent GFP relative to control, but give no indication of total GFP+ cells (ie, percent cells infected). This should be stated clearly (or raw data included), perhaps as a supplementary figure or table.
2. MHV68 ORF59-GFP should be described in slightly more detail in the main text to indicate the nature of the GFP expression and the role of ORF59.
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]

Figure resubmission:

While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step. If there are other versions of figure files still present in your submission file inventory at resubmission, please replace them with the PACE-processed versions.

Reproducibility:

To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that authors of applicable studies deposit laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
PLOS PathogensPLoS Pathog10.1371/journal.ppat.1013263.r002Author response to Decision Letter 1
211020252110e1013263e1013263Collection date 2025 Oct.

16 Sep 2025

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response_to_Reviewers_AG_2025.docx
PLOS PathogensPLoS Pathog10.1371/journal.ppat.1013263.r003Decision Letter 1
KalejtaRobertSection Editor© 2025 Robert KalejtaThis is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.
6 Oct 2025

Dear Dr. Großkopf,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'Eph Receptor Tyrosine Kinases Are Functional Entry Receptors for Murine Gammaherpesvirus 68' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us now if you or your institution is planning to press release the article. All press must be co-ordinated with PLOS.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens.
Best regards,
Kenneth M Kaye
Academic Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Robert Kalejta
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Sumita Bhaduri-McIntosh
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0003-2946-9497
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064
***********************************************************
Reviewer Comments (if any, and for reference):
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Part I - Summary

Please use this section to discuss strengths/weaknesses of study, novelty/significance, general execution and scholarship.
Reviewer #1: Grosskopf et al report here that the Eph receptor tyrosine kinases function as receptors for murine gammaherpevirus 68. The EphR TKs were previously shown to serve as receptors for EBV, KSHV and RRV through binding the conserved gH/gL glycoproteins, findings that underpin the significance of this new report. Vaccination and immune protection from gammaherpesvirus infection and subsequent diseases is an important goal, and therefore demonstration that the mouse model system displays remarkable conservation of the critical entry interaction is very important to the field and to future studies.
This report is thorough and straightforward, making use of in silico comparative studies, screening of multiple EphR family members, use of purified viral glycoprotein complexes, analysis of MHV68 infection and neutralization with purified complexes and domains, and demonstration of the sufficiency of the EphR A4 and B3 for infection of human cells. The conclusions of this report are fully supported, and indicate the utility of the conserved MHV68 infection entry system for modeling and testing gammaherpesvirus entry.
Reviewer #2: The authors have thoughtfully addressed the comments raised by the reviewers. I have no further concerns. Overall, this is a well-executed study.
Reviewer #3: Reviewers have appropriately addressed all concerns.
**********

Part II – Major Issues: Key Experiments Required for Acceptance

Please use this section to detail the key new experiments or modifications of existing experiments that should be absolutely required to validate study conclusions.
Generally, there should be no more than 3 such required experiments or major modifications for a "Major Revision" recommendation. If more than 3 experiments are necessary to validate the study conclusions, then you are encouraged to recommend "Reject".
Reviewer #1: none
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********

Part III – Minor Issues: Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications

Please use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity.
Reviewer #1: Inclusion of the raw counts for %GFP+ cells is appreciated. While looking closely at the raw data makes it clear why the authors chose to display as fold-increase vs PBS, and those insights are supported by the raw data, it may be more transparent to actually name the variability in the raw data. The raw data baselines are highly variable, and for readers who would replicate findings, it would be helpful to make it clear that the %GFP cells across experiments has wide variability. This does not diminish the results, but would enhance transparency.
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
PLOS PathogensPLoS Pathog10.1371/journal.ppat.1013263.r004Acceptance letter
KalejtaRobertSection Editor© 2025 Robert KalejtaThis is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.Dear Dr. Großkopf,
We are delighted to inform you that your manuscript, "Eph Receptor Tyrosine Kinases Are Functional Entry Receptors for Murine Gammaherpesvirus 68," has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
We have now passed your article onto the PLOS Production Department who will complete the rest of the pre-publication process. All authors will receive a confirmation email upon publication.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any scientific or type-setting errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. Note: Proofs for Front Matter articles (Pearls, Reviews, Opinions, etc...) are generated on a different schedule and may not be made available as quickly.
Soon after your final files are uploaded, the early version of your manuscript, if you opted to have an early version of your article, will be published online. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
For Research Articles, you will receive an invoice from PLOS for your publication fee after your manuscript has reached the completed accept phase. If you receive an email requesting payment before acceptance or for any other service, this may be a phishing scheme. Learn how to identify phishing emails and protect your accounts at https://explore.plos.org/phishing.
Thank you again for supporting open-access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens.
Best regards,
Sumita Bhaduri-McIntosh
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0003-2946-9497
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064
Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
S1 Fig

## The MHV68 gH/gL complex binds human and murine Eph receptors.
(A) Pairwise precipitation of soluble recombinant FcStrep with individual human Eph proteins. Precipitates were analyzed by immunoblot with indicated antibodies. Asterisks indicate known KSHV, EBV or RRV gH/gL interaction partners. (B) Input immunoblot for individual human Eph proteins. (C) Schematic representation of alternative open reading frames of MHV68 gL. Alternative start codons are indicated by arrowheads, SP: predicted signal peptide. Pairwise precipitation of soluble recombinant MHV68 gH ectodomain in complex with expression constructs for full-length MHV68 gL (gH/gL) or MHV68 gLΔN36 (37–173) (based on NP_044884.3) with murine EphA4. MHV68 gH alone was used as control. Precipitates were analyzed by immunoblot with indicated antibodies. (D) Protein accession numbers and percentage of identical amino acids in aligned regions of human and murine Eph proteins as determined by BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool). (E) Pairwise precipitation of soluble recombinant gH-FcStrep with individual murine Eph proteins. Precipitates were analyzed by immunoblot with indicated antibodies. For A, B, C, E, molecular weight is indicated in kDa.
(TIF)
S2 Fig

## Soluble murine EphA4 and EphB3 inhibit MHV68 infection of endothelial cells and fibroblasts.
(A-D) Cell type-dependent inhibition of MHV68 infection by soluble murine Eph proteins at 100 nM homodimerized protein. EphA2-Fc and PBS were used as controls. GFP expression as indicator of infection was measured by flow cytometry. Infection is shown as percentage of GFP+ cells. Symbols representing individual experiments are shown; lines connect values from the same experiment.
(TIF)
S3 Fig

## Multiple residues on gH and gL mediate the MVH68 gH/gL Eph interaction.
(A) Multiple sequence alignment of gH D-I of human (KSHV [QFU18817], EBV [AIM62235]), rhesus macaque (RRV 26–95 [AAF60000]) and murine (MHV68 [NP044860]) GHVs. Numbers according to MHV68 gH. Arrowhead indicates R106EphA4/EphB3 interacting residue D52MHV68 gH. (B) Single amino acids in the putative Eph interacting region in MHV68 gH were mutated to alanine. MHV68 gHecto mutants in complex with MHV68 gL were precipitated with murine EphA4. MHV68 gH-FcStrep was used as control. Precipitates were analyzed by immunoblot with indicated antibodies. (C) Putative Eph-interacting residues in MHV68 gL were mutated to alanine. MHV68 gHecto in complex with MHV68 gL mutants was precipitation with murine EphA4. MHV68 gH-FcStrep was used as control. Precipitates were analyzed by immunoblot with indicated antibodies. For B, C, molecular weight is indicated in kDa.
(TIF)
S4 Fig

## Neutralizing antibodies in MHV68 infected mice target the MHV68 gH/gL complex.
(A) Antibodies to gHecto/gL or gHD-I/gL were depleted using soluble complexes pre-coupled to magnetic beads. Fc was used as control. gH/gL-specific IgG from naïve or MHV68-infected C57BL/6 before and after adsorption was measured by MHV68 gL-gH ELISA. Background corrected optical density at 450 nm is shown. Mean and symbols representing individual experiments are shown. (B) Correlation of mean neutralization and optic density from three independent experiments. (C) Serum neutralization of MHV68 ORF59-GFP infection on NIH 3T3 cells is mediated by gH/gL-targeting antibodies. Antibodies to gHecto/gL or gHD-I/gL were depleted using soluble complexes pre-coupled to magnetic beads. Fc was used as control. Micrographs were taken at 16 hpi. Statistical significance was evaluated by ordinary two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. ***: p-value < 0.001, ****: p-value < 0.0001.
(TIF)
S1 Table

## List of primers and antibodies used in the study.
(XLSX)
S2 Table

## Primary infection data for , and .
(XLSX)
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response_to_Reviewers_AG_2025.docx

## Data Availability Statement
All relevant data are within the manuscript and its Supporting information files.