3413bioactmatBioactive MaterialsBioact MaterKeAi PublishingPMC1287444712874447128744474165794510.1016/j.bioactmat.2025.12.034Glycosaminoglycans in tissue regeneration: Insights into glycobiology and their biomedical application
KasarinaiteAlvile OuJunhan ChenKailin PengDayang JiaWendi DingChenyang HuangWenwen HayDavid C ChenYishan aZhejiang University-University of Edinburgh Joint Institute, Zhejiang University, Haining, 314400, ChinabCentre for Regenerative Medicine, Institute for Regeneration and Repair, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh BioQuarter, Edinburgh, EH16 4UU, UK⁎Corresponding author. Zhejiang University-University of Edinburgh Joint Institute, Zhejiang University, Haining, 314400, China. wenwenhuang@intl.zju.edu.cn
⁎⁎Corresponding author. Centre for Regenerative Medicine, Institute for Regeneration and Repair, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh BioQuarter, Edinburgh, EH16 4UU, UK. david.hay@ed.ac.uk
⁎⁎⁎Corresponding author. Zhejiang University-University of Edinburgh Joint Institute, Zhejiang University, Haining, 314400, China. yishanchen@intl.zju.edu.cn
1These authors contributed equally to this work.
291202660320320–337622026© 2026 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
Tissue regeneration is orchestrated by both intracellular signaling programs and extracellular matrix remodeling. Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) are essential sugar chains ubiquitously expressed throughout the body. Their spatiotemporal turnover is an important part of normal organ biology and essential to tissue repair following injury. Glycoscience is a hot topic and is its role in organ physiology is being increasingly unraveled due to both scientific and technological advances. The mechanistic understanding of GAG regulation and manipulation is multidisciplinary effort, spanning biology, chemistry, materials science and translational medicine. This review broadly examines how GAG biology is naturally regulated and precisely controlled in health and disease, including data analysis from a stem cell-based model of liver disease. Despite being limited in types, GAGs successfully regulate complex cell and tissue level biology. We also discuss preclinical and clinical applications of GAGs, with a focus on biomaterials for tissue engineering and precision drug delivery, stressing their importance in biomedical engineering and clinical therapy. In addition, we outline state-of-art detection techniques and molecular modeling tools for analyzing GAG quantity, structure and interactions with other molecules. This review provides a timely and comprehensive overview of GAG biology highlighting their role in tissue repair and engineering, and outlines future directions for their design and next-generation therapies.
Keywords: Glycosaminoglycan, Tissue regeneration, Glycobiology, Tissue engineering

## Graphical abstract
The schematic describes how cells regulate GAGs and proteoglycans during tissue homeostasis.
 

## Highlights
•Recognition of how GAGs are naturally metabolised, how their tissue specificity is regulated, how they evolve and are altered in diseases.
•GAGs applied as biomaterials in tissue engineering and drug delivery, as well as new strategies for modifying and editing them.
•Representative clinical applications showing that GAGs are safe and applicable materials for treating diseases.
•State-of-art methodology for GAG detection and structure modeling, as well as the remaining challenges are also present.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 Sep 23; Revised 2025 Dec 7; Accepted 2025 Dec 19; Collection date 2026 Jun.

1.

## Introduction
The study of glycoscience has gained increasing attention, underscored by the 2022 Nobel Prize award [ ]. Critically, numerous studies highlight their roles [ , , , , ], not only as energy sources, but in the regulation of diverse biological processes and post-translational decoration of proteins. Notably, glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) are a special type of glycan, ubiquitously distributed in the extracellular matrix (ECM) of all mammalian tissues [ ]. With the development of advanced techniques for exploring GAG biology, they have been deemed essential ECM components in maintaining tissue homeostasis and regulating cell signaling during repair [ , ], making the important targets to combat human disease and aging [ , ].
GAGs are long, linear, and negatively charged polysaccharides, consisting of repeating disaccharide units. There are currently four accepted species of GAGs: hyaluronan (HA), chondroitin/dermatan sulfate (CS/DS), heparin/heparan sulfate (HP/HS), and keratan sulfate (KS) [ ]. HA, the simplest GAG lacking sulphation, is not covalently attached to core protein, and composed of glucuronic acid and N-acetylglucosamine [ , ]. CS/DS are composed of N-acetylgalactosamine and hexuronic acid, differing in glucuronic acid in CS and iduronic acid in DS. Sulphation at different positions contributes to their diverse subtypes. They can also bind to core proteins through a serine residue and the tetra saccharide linker, forming proteoglycans (PGs) in a bottom-bruch-like structure [ ]. HP/HS contain repeating units of N-acetylglucosamine and hexuronic acid, which is iduronic acid in HP and glucuronic acid in HS, and their sulphation and attachment to core proteins are similar to CS/DS. Compared with HS, HP exhibits a higher degree of sulphation [ , ]. KS consists of galactose and N-acetylglucosamine. It can be classified into three types based on different attachment sites to core proteins of KSPGs [ ]. Negative charge is a shared between all GAGs, primarily caused by the presence of carboxyl and/or sulfate groups except for the case in HA, where negative charge is associated with the presence of glucuronic acid (GlcA).
Although the basic sequence of GAGs appears to be simple, their subtle alteration plays a vital role in fine tuning their biology. Due to their highly negative charges, GAGs attract water molecules by hydrogen bonds, thereby maintaining the hydrostatic pressure to confer mechanical stability in connective tissues [ ]. They also bind cationic ions, growth factors, and cytokines, which provide customizable niches for diverse cell types. In addition, GAGs mediate cell-ECM interactions, and participate in cell differentiation, cell-cell communication, cell migration, cell homeostasis maintenance and disease-related processes [ ].
In this review, we provide an up-to-date overview of GAG biology and summarize their essential roles in tissue homeostasis and pathogenesis, as well as their clinical application. Unlike protein biology, GAG synthesis is not template-driven, making it challenging to precisely edit their structure and function. That being said, GAGs can be successfully employed to specifically regulate complex cell and tissue level behaviors. This is likely through the provision of a structural framework. Additionally, we discuss cutting edge methodologies in GAG-related material engineering and introduce their broad potential for clinical application in treating disease. Finally, we outline state-of-art detection techniques and molecular modeling tools for analyzing GAG quantity, quality, structure and molecular interactions.

2.

## Natural regulation of GAGs in tissue homeostasis and human diseases
GAGs are macromolecular ECM components synthesized, modified, secreted, and degraded by cells. In this section, we provide a brief overview of the regulatory mechanisms of GAG in nature, including how tissue cells produce and degrade GAGs, the potential regulatory mechanisms underlying GAG tissue specificity, the evolutionary changes of GAGs over time, and their roles in human disease.
2.1.

## Cellular turnover of GAGs
To understand how GAGs are regulated by cells and how they function specifically in different tissues, we first consider the metabolic processes within the cells that drive their synthesis, including steps of precursor biosynthesis, linker biosynthesis, elongation and modification ( ) [ ].
 The initial steps of GAG production involve the synthesis of uridine diphosphate (UDP)-derived activated sugars and 3′-phosphoadenosine-5′-phosphosulfate (PAPS) in cytoplasm, which are subsequently transported to Golgi body for post translational modification and protein folding. A tetra saccharide linker is synthesized for bridging the core proteins and disaccharide chains [ , ]. It is composed of a xylose residue, followed by two D-galactose (Gal) molecules and one D-gluconic acid (GlcA) molecule, and it will be attached to a serine or an asparagine/threonine amino acid to form PGs [ , ]. After tetrasaccharide linker synthesis, the addition of disaccharide chains take place in the Golgi apparatus. This process is called chain elongation. Finally, the assembled GAGs undergo post-elongation modifications which results in the formation of mature sulphated GAG chains [ ]. Sulphation occurs within Golgi apparatus and requires PAPS as a sulfate donor [ ].
GAG synthesis is comprehensively regulated by various enzymes, including glycosyltransferases, epimerases and sulphotransferases [ ]. Glycosyltransferases are required for the synthesis of all GAGs. Namely, chondroitin synthases with dual glucoronyltransferase II (GlcAT-II) and N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase II (GalNAcT-II) activities are required for CS synthesis [ ] whilst 1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (β3GnT) and β1,4-galactosyl transferase (β4GalT) catalyze KS biosynthesis [ ]. In HP/HS synthesis, monosaccharides are added by EXT glycosyltransferases (EXT, EXT1, and EXT2) [ ]. Notably, HA is synthesized at the plasma membrane rather than Golgi complex [ ], where three synthases are required for its synthesis in vertebrates (HAS1-3) [ , , ]. Sulphotransferases (STs) are required for the biosynthesis of all GAGs, with the exception of HA, which is the only non-sulphated GAG [ ]. For instance, 4-O or 6-O sulphation of N-acetyl-glucosamine (GalNAc) units on CS need sulphotransferases (STs), whereas 1 and 2-O-sulphation on CS is also possible by CS/DS2ST [ ]. Sulphation of DS can be catalysed by the CS STs [ ], with the exception of 4-O-sulphation of GalNAc performed by DS-specific D4ST1 [ ]. KS is sulphated by N-acetyl glucosaminyl-6-sulphotransferase (GlcNAc6ST), Gal actosyl sulphotransferase (GST1), and GlcNAc 6-sulfotransferase (GlcNAc6ST5) [ , ]. In the case of HP/HS, up to 22 enzymes are involved in catalysing their biosynthesis, such as N-deacetylate/N-sulphotransferase (NDST) enzymes [ ], 6-O-sulphotransferases and 3-O-sulphotransferases, e.g. 3-OST-1, involved in the sulphation steps [ , ]. Epimerisation step is used in DS synthesis, when chondroitin GlcA-C5-epimerase, and DS epimerases 1 and 2 (DSE1 and DSE2) epimerise the GlcA residues into IdoA [ ]. Epimerisation also occurs in HP/HS, when GlcA is transformed to IdoA, converting them into 2-O-sulpho forms.
Cells also digest GAGs via various enzymatic reactions. PGs can be firstly proteolytically cleaved, and their fragments then proceed to the intracellular digestion. Depending on the type of the GAGs, it enters a specific and stepwise lysosomal degradation involving glycosidases/galactosidases, sulphatases and non-hydrolytic transferase [ ]. Glycosidases in animals are hydrolases from glycoside hydrolase family [ ]. Hyaluronidases degrade both CS and HA due to the structural similarities, cleaving β-1,4-glycosidic bond between GalNAc and GlcA residues [ ]. There are six homologous genes encoding hyaluronidase sequence in humans (HYAL1, HYAL2, HYAL3, HYAL4, SPAM1 and HYALP1), and their products, except for HYALP, display a broad range of degradation activities [ ]. HA is cleaved by extracellular HYAL2 and further degraded by HYAL1, exoglycosidases β-glucuronidase and β-hexosaminidase (HexA and HexB isoforms) [ ]. Hyaluronidases also cleave the glycosidic bonds between GalNAc and GlcA residues in DS, whilst heparanase (Hpa-1, HPSE) degrades β-glucuronosyl bonds within the HS and HP in lysosomes [ , ]. KS is digested by β-galactosidase and N-acetylgalactosamine-6-sulfate sulphatase (GALNS) [ ]. After the initial degradation, shorter fragments are digested further by exoenzymes [ ], which is also highly regulated by numerous enzymes, including iduronate-2-sulphatase (I2S), hydrolysing the C2-sulfate ester bond α-l-IdoA residues in HS and DS [ ]. Moreover, degradation process via sulphatases is important in the regulation of the GAG structure and signaling. For example, extracellular sulphatases, such as SULF1 and SULF2, are involved in regulating the 6-O-sulphated structure of HS [ ].

2.2.

## Tissue specificity regulation of GAGs
It is important to understand how the subtypes of GAGs support specific tissue function and, the enzymes involved in these processes. The enzymes EXT2 and CHPF are expressed in almost all human tissue types, except for the retina [ ]. However, other GAG processing enzyme expression and function appears to be tissue specific. For example, dermatan sulfate epimerase (DSE) is mostly expressed in breast tissue and adipose tissue, whilst HP sulfate-glucosamine 3-sulphotransferase 1 (HS3ST1) is restricted to the ovaries [ ]. Whereas, Chondroitin sulfate N-acetyl-galactosaminyltransferase 1 (CSGALNACT1) is highly expressed in amygdala, heart muscle, urinary bladder and thyroid gland [ ]. Enzymes regulating GAG structural features, like sulphation are differentially regulated, imparting differences in tissue biology. For instance, during human brain development, CS sulphation switches from GlcA-GalNAc(6S) to GlcA-GalNAc(4S) [ ], suggesting the changes in activity of sulphotransferases and sulphatases. Mouse cell culture also shows a transition of sulphation levels in HS upon differentiation. The majority of GAGs produced by mouse embryonic stem cells display low levels of sulphated HS, which increases during cellular differentiation [ , , ].
GAGs are attached to core proteins. Those proteins are specifically expressed in certain tissues, and these changes can even occur zonally within the same tissue (summarised in ). For example, syndecan-1 (HSPG) is expressed in sinusoidal endothelial cells in human liver but is not expressed in portal vessels [ ]. Syndecan-4 is expressed in hepatocytes in close proximity to bile canaliculi [ ]. In addition to this, proteoglycans can also undergo alternative splicing, changing GAG structure and attachment. As an example, alternative splicing can result in versican without any CS chains, which is termed V3. This subtype is found in the brain, liver, retina and stomach of humans [ ].
 Tissue specificity is also augmented by GAG interaction with niche molecules, such as, growth factors, cytokines, and their receptors. Therefore, how GAGs act in situ largely relies on GAG binding with proteins/molecules and the cell secretome. A good example of this is HS bonding with interleukin-8 (IL-8) on the endothelial cell surfaces, regulating leukocyte biology [ ]. HS also binds fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) and regulates FGF signaling, regulating mouse heart development and neighboring tissues. [ ]. In this study, FGF-2 and FGF-4 binding differences were attributed to different HS sulphation patterns in endothelial and smooth muscle cells lining the heart endothelium [ ].

2.3.

## Evolutionary changes of GAGs
The structural complexity of GAGs generally increases from lower to higher animals, driven by progressive chain elongation and increasingly complex modification. HS was once considered the earliest evolutionary GAG, however chondroitin (Chn) and CS were also reported to appear around the same time, with all subtypes found in Hydra magnipapillata of Cnidaria [ , ]. The structures of early-stage GAGs are rather simple, as the majority of HS is non-sulphated. Chn only contains a repeating disaccharide backbone, and CS undergoes 4-O and 6-O sulphation at GalNAc [ , ]. Nodipecten nodosus HS exhibits structural heterogeneity, with GlcA (non-/2-O-/3-O-sulphated) and GlcNAc (2-N- and/or 6-O-sulphated), Helix lucorum HP-like component contains galactose residues, suggesting branching structures, and low-molecular-weight HA can be produced by Mytilus galloprovincialis [ , , ]. During the course of evolution, all the classical GAGs were detected in mammals. These featured varied chain lengths and diverse sulphation patterns, advancing GAG tissue specificity.
The structural evolution of GAG complexity is non-linear with species-specific heterogeneity detected. The occurrence of GAG synthases and auxiliary enzymes determined the biogenesis of specific GAGs [ , ]. For instance, the Chn synthases contain two GT2 modules in Escherichia, but human Chn synthases possess distinct structure designated GT31, which causes different structures of Chn in specific species [ , , ]. Essentially, the structure and activity of GAG synthases are regulated by key genes and genetic diversity [ ]. Additionally, GAG structures can be affected by environmental factor, such as high-salt environments which promotes sulfation [ ].

2.4.

## GAGs in human disease
GAG biology is key to normal cell/tissue biology and the dysregulation of these processes can have profound impacts on body homeostasis (summarised in ). HP has been well recognized as a functional molecule to regulate coagulation and inflammatory processes [ , ]. In this process, HP binds to platelet factor 4 (PF4, CXCL4) which is known for its role in normal blood coagulation. However, the in the context of disease, overexposure to HP can lead to HP-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) [ , ]. HP has also been shown to reduce inflammation via NF-κB signaling and tumor necrosis factor α production in isolated human endometrial stromal cells [ ]. Similar anti-inflammatory function of HP has been reported in disease, such as bronchial asthma, ulcerative colitis, as well as skin wounding [ ].
 Most of the HS-associated disorders are due to abnormal HS degradation, altered activity of HS proteoglycans (HSPGs) and the bound growth factors/proteins [ , , ]. Impaired degradation has also been linked to the development and progression of multiple cancers [ , ]. Additionally, HS-mediated fibrillogenesis and cytotoxicity, upon amyloid protein binding, drives Alzheimer’s disease, type II diabetes and Parkinson’s disease development [ , , , , ]. Additionally, HS plays a role in chronic liver disease. HSPGs and integrins were found to be involved in exosome binding to hepatic stellate cell surface and their activation led to liver fibrosis in mice [ ]. Additionally, macrophage HPSE expression, responsible for HS degradation, is increased after carbon tetrachloride-induced chronic liver injury and interacted with hepatic stellate cells, regulating ECM production [ , ]. Moreover, an increase in HS levels was observed in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and in the urine of type II diabetes patients (T2D) [ , ]. This suggests that optimized degradation and inhibited synthesis of HS might have positive results in certain anti-cancer therapies, pancreas and lung disorders. Additionally, it has been reported that cancer microenvironment could be influenced by a tumoral HS-related GAG. For example, carbohydrate A10 (Ca10) derived from Ehrlich’s tumor cells, contributes to the production of suppressive regulatory T cells by promoting the development of tolerogenic features in human dendritic cells [ ]. Despite HS dysfunction observed in model organisms, only a few have been reported in humans [ ]. This could be due to the early embryo lethality, as in the case of glycotransferase depletion [ , ]. The Gly611Ser mutation in N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferase member 1 (NDST1) gene has been reported. NDST1 is responsible for the deacetylation and sulphation of N-acetyl-glucasamine during HS synthesis, and its mutation results in a complete loss of sulphation and impaired cognitive functions in humans [ ].
HA is widely found in ECM and is known to play important roles in structural support and lubrication. Compared to other GAGs, HA possesses a much higher molecular weight—ranging from hundreds of kilodaltons to several million—and often exists as fragments in varying sizes, which may contribute to the variation of its biological functions. HA is known to function through the interactions with specific receptors, primarily CD44 and hyaluronan mediated motility receptor (HMMR) (also known as RHAMM) and regulate a broad spectrum of cellular behaviors including cell growth, adhesion, migration, differentiation, and apoptosis [ , , , ]. A typical example is the involvement of HA in immune and inflammatory processes in injuries and diseases. Studies have shown that HA of different molecular weights elicits distinct immune effects—high-molecular-weight HA (HMW-HA) tends to be anti-inflammatory, while low-molecular-weight HA (LMW-HA) is more likely to exhibit pro-inflammatory effects [ ]. These context-dependent effects of HA are known to be associated with a series of molecules, including CD44, Toll-like receptors (TLR) 2/4, RHAMM, and HA binding proteins (HABPs) [ , , , ]. In chronic non-healing wounds, excessive degradation of HMW-HA into pro-inflammatory LMW-HA sustains inflammation and impairs re-epithelialization through persistent activation of TLR2/4 and CD44 signaling [ ]. In osteoarthritis (OA), reduced concentration and molecular weight of HA are found in the synovial fluid and that impair joint lubrication, while LMW-HA activates TLR2/4 and CD44 to promote synovial inflammation and cartilage degradation causing pain and joint functional degradation in clinical cases [ , ]. Similarly, in atherosclerosis, accumulated HA within vascular lesions engages TLR2, TLR4, and RHAMM receptors, triggering NF-κB-mediated inflammatory responses and enhanced immune cell infiltration [ , ]. In idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), aberrant HA accumulation and fragmentation activates CD44 and TLR4 signaling in fibroblasts, leading to persistent proliferation and extracellular matrix deposition [ , ]. Whereas during the aging process reductions in skin HA content are detected, contributing to loss of tissue hydration and elasticity [ ]. Beyond these conditions, cancer progression is associated with increased HA deposition in tumor microenvironments, particularly at invasive margins, inducing immunosuppression within the tumor microenvironment [ , , ]. It has been shown that HA promotes the differentiation of tumor-associated macrophages that express programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1) macrophages, which interact with PD-1 expressed on T-cells and hinders their antitumor biology [ ].
Similar to HA, CS/DS performs water absorption, lubrication, inflammatory immunity regulation functions amongst others [ ]. Differently, CS/DS usually exist to form CSPGs, like lectican, phosphacan and Neuron-Glial Antigen 2 (NG2)/CSPG4 [ , ]. Growing evidence has revealed that CSPGs play essential roles in multiple important biological processes, especially in both developmental and pathological processes of neural tissues. The lectican family is widely expressed in the nervous system, which include aggrecan (ACAN), versican (VCAN), neurocan (NCAN), and brevican (BCAN) [ , ]. Studies have shown that traumatic injuries in the central nervous system often cause a substantial upregulation of lectican, indirectly triggered by activated microglial cells secretion of cytokines. These cytokines strongly stimulate the expression and deposition of CSPGs around the lesion site [ , ]. CSPG is also known to drive immune regulation after spinal cord injury (SCI), and inhibit the conversion of pro-inflammatory immune cells to a pro-repair state, which prolongs the inflammation [ ]. After SCI, astrocytes are activated to produce abundant CSPGs [ ], and the CSPG-rich extracellular matrix amplifies TLR4 signaling and further activates the phosphorylation of p38-MAPK pathway, leading to an upregulation of pro-inflammatory mediator expression, such as iNOS and IL-1β [ , , ]. These factors can sustain the pro-inflammatory state of microglia and macrophages, and even contribute to secondary injury after SCI [ , , ]. Typically, CSPGs also serve as important components in cartilage tissues. The pathogenesis and progression of OA closely relate to the abnormal metabolism of ACAN, which is known as an early pivotal event in OA development [ , ]. In OA joints, increased inflammatory cytokines can stimulate the expression of aggrecanases that cleave the interglobular domain of ACAN, leading to its degradation [ , , ]. Additionally, CSPGs are also involved in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis, tumor metastasis and immune regulation. It has been shown that VCAN is markedly upregulated in arterial walls, driven in part, by arterial lipid accumulation in atherosclerosis [ ]. Meanwhile, some proatherogenic molecules, such as low-density lipoprotein, are easily trapped by VCAN, further inducing proliferative matrix-producing capacity of smooth muscle cells [ ]. In the context of hepatocellular carcinoma, some evidence shows that decorin, a small leucin-rich CSPG, possesses the ability to act as tumor inhibitor, which is expressed highly in peritumoral tissues to form ECM barrier against the invasion of cancer cells [ ].
As for the regulation in tumour immunity, it has been reported that the low level expression of CSPG4 in tumours is associated with accumulation of inflammatory cancer-associated fibroblasts, which release cytokines and entrap T cells, contributing to an immunosuppressive microenvironment [ , ].
KS and its associated PGs regulate tissue function and pathogenesis, involved in wound healing process, cornea transparency, degenerative disorders, and cancers [ ]. For instance, the ablation of lumican (KSPG) causes impaired skin healing and corneal opacity in mice and human cell lines [ ]. Whereas, wound healing was enhanced by lumican in human cell lines [ ]. Deficiency of N-acetylglucosamine, the transferase responsible for KS biosynthesis, causes human macular corneal dystrophy. This is the result of shorter KS fragments which leads to a reduction in corneal stroma thickness [ ]. Serum levels of sulphated KS epitope are associated with OA and degenerative process in joints [ ]. KS is also involved in neurodegenerative disorders. Galactose-6– and N-acteylglucosamine-6–sulphated KS were found to be upregulated in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patient samples and in activated microglia of ALS model mice at end stage disease, resulting in neuronal degeneration [ ]. Lack of KS degeneration (depletion of N-acetylgalactosamine-6-sulfatase and β-galactosidase) can cause mucopolysaccharidosis type (MSP) IV disorder whose patients often suffer with heart disease, such as valvular disease [ ]. The increase of KS expression levels is also correlated with worse pancreatic cancer prognosis in human patients [ ]. Whereas, sulphotransferase encoding gene CHST5-6 expression was found to be upregulated in metastatic lung cancer compared to the primary tumours [ ].

2.5.

## Example models showing GAG’s regulation in diseased cellular status
Metabolic diseases are considered to be at epidemic levels worldwide. This term encompasses diseases such as obesity, cardiovascular disorders, metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease and T2D [ ]. Unsurprisingly, GAGs biology is disruped upon metabolic change, and this is one important driver of disease progression. In the case of diabetes, hyperglycemia drives an increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS) [ ]. Negatively charged GAGs can attract metal ions and increase the formation of reactive hydroxyl and alkoxyl radicals [ ], further increasing ROS production. High glucose levels also upregulate HPSE production, causing degradation of HS and injury of endothelial cells [ ]. Moreover, inflammation, often associated with metabolic stress, can contribute to the destruction of GAGs. Activated neutrophils have been shown to lead to HA, CS and HP fragmentation [ , ]. Interestingly, loss of the Extl2 expression in metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis (MASH) mouse model, drives overproduction of GAGs and progression to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) [ ].
To study GAG dysregulation in the context of metabolic disease, we have created an in vitro model to mimic the phenotype of late-stage metabolic dysfunction steatotic liver disease (MASLD) from human pluripotent stem cells [ ]. We exposed stem cell derived liver spheres to a high energy diet which over loaded mitochondrial β-oxidation and the TCA cycle, resulting in macro-vesicular steatosis [ , , ]. Then we interrogated gene expression using single-nuclei RNA-sequencing comparing control spheroids [ ]., with a focus on GAG-biosynthesis and sulphation, and the degradation of HS, CS, DS, KS and HA ( , the authors performed new data analysis from an existing publicly available dataset: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/PRJNA1284036).
 The results demonstrate cell-type specific regulation. In steatotic liver spheres, we observed the up-regulation of CHST1, CHST11, GALNT7, HS3ST4 and SULF2 within hepatocytes (HEP); CHST11, SULT1E1 and UST in proliferative hepatocytes (pHEP); CHST1, CHST11, GALNT7, GALNT9, HAS3, SULT1E1 and UST in HB; HS3ST5, SULT1E1 and UST in mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC); CHST11, HS3ST3A1, HS3ST4 and UST in quiescent hepatic stellate cells (qHSC); and CHST1, GALNT7, GPC5 and HS3ST4 in activated hepatic stellate cells (aHSC). In contrast, a downregulation of GALNT1, HMMR, HS3ST5, SULF1 and SULT1C3 in HEP; GALNT1, HS3ST3A1 and HS3ST5 in dying hepatocytes (dHEP); GALNT1, GALNT6, HS3ST5, NDST3, SULF1, SULT1A2 and SULT1C3 in HB; GALNT1, HMMR, HS3ST3A1 and SULF2 in MSC; and in aHSC GALNT1, HMMR, HS3ST3A1, SULF1 and SULF2, was observed in steatotic liver spheres.
A number of the genes implicated in our studies have been previously associated with various disorders and tissue damage. N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase enzymes, encoded by GALNT genes, were shown to be impaired in cancers. GALNT7 was found to be heightened in liver, prostate and other cancer types [ , ]. CHST11 expression was increased in clear cell renal cell carcinoma patients [ ], whilst CHST1 is overexpressed in liver hepatocellular carcinoma in humans (HCC) [ ]. Impaired sulfotransferases (SULT) are associated with enhanced glycolysis and fatty acid metabolism, promoting HCC progression (SULT1E1) [ ]. Shifts in sulphation patterns are also associated with progression to HCC in humans, that was also detected within steatotic liver spheres (HS3ST3A1, HS3ST4 and HS3ST5) [ ]. As a single organoid, it is sufficient to simulate the crosstalk between liver and other organs, and this model also lacks immune cells that are necessary to accurately show GAG regulation during metabolic liver injury. However, our studies demonstrate GAG-related changes in prominent liver cell types highlighting alterations in gene expression, providing a valuable starting point to understand changes in the underlying cell biology [ ].
In summary, GAGs are conservative molecules consisting of linear repeating units, which seem to exist in a simple regulatory principle for supporting tissue mechanical properties. However, they perform crucial niche functions, especially in the maintenance of tissue homeostasis. The understanding of GAGs regulation in healthy and diseased tissues together with the development of new models will allow researchers to investigate new biomarkers for staging and targeting disease. As highlighted in our liver disease model and other reviewed GAG-associated disorders, there is a crucial need to specifically define ECM composition and cell metabolic status in pathological conditions to determine early biomarkers. Additionally, GAGs are key ECM components that can function as materials to guide differentiation and adhesion of cells, as such they are also being explored as components of bioactive and stable scaffolds, bioinks and drug carriers. Importantly, GAGs represent valuable therapeutic targets that can be engineered or supplemented to modulate disease processes, which can be extremely crucial in the design of tissue repair treatments.

3.

## GAG engineering strategy
As mentioned above, GAGs are not only natural molecules that can be intrinsically regulated in tissues, but also functional ingredients in the design of biomaterials in tissue repair [ , , ]. Due to their inherent biocompatibility and bioactivity, naturally derived GAGs such as HA, CS, and HP have been widely applied to the development of tissue engineered scaffolds and drug delivery systems, for applications such as bone and cartilage regeneration, skin wound healing, and tumor therapy, amongst others [ , , , ]. Despite their advantages, some intrinsic features of GAGs, such as fixed chemical composition, limited reactive sites, rapid degradation, and relatively low mechanical strength, present limitations for biomedical application [ , , , ]. Therefore, engineering strategies have been developed to refine their functional properties, in response to the growing interest in maximizing the therapeutic potential of GAGs. In thishis section we describe how GAGs can be modified for use in treating disease and driving tissue repair, which includes physical blending and supramolecular assembly, covalent chemical functionalization, macromolecular conjugation with polymers or proteins, and genetic and metabolic engineering strategies.
3.1.

## Physical blending and supramolecular assembly
The direct strategies are grounded on non-covalent interactions between natural GAGs and other biomaterials. HA, as a natural GAG, can form hybrid systems with chitosan, collagen, and other natural polymers through diverse assembly routes such as aqueous mixing, freeze-drying, overrun processing, and electrospinning [ , , , ]. These strategies create porous, injectable, or fibrous scaffolds with excellent biological performance [ , ]. For example, Zhang et al. blended chitosan and β-glycerophosphate with HA, to construct an injectable, thermo-sensitive hydrogel. Where HA enhanced the mechanical strength, it promoted cancer cell adhesion to the hydrogel [ ]. In another study, HA could be combined with collagen in fibrous membranes, with an interfacial self-assembly strategy, supporting stem cell encapsulation [ ].
CS has likewise been widely studied, applied with gelatin and silk fibroin through physical blending and supramolecular assembly strategies [ , ]. Deng et al. constructed a multifunctional hydrogel through physically blending CS with a silk fibroin (SF)-based gelling system and incorporation of graphene oxide quantum dots (GOQDs) [ ]. CS significantly enhanced the biodegradation kinetics and cellular migration capabilities, synergizing with GOQDs’ photothermal antibacterial activity to accelerate wound healing. Similarly, CS was also employed with polydopamine and integrated into a polyacrylamide (PAM) network to achieve effective cartilage defect repair [ ].
Other GAGs, such as HP, also participate in non-covalent strategies by forming physically blended systems with Poly (ethylene glycol) (PEG), gelatin, or fibrin [ , , ]. The strategy allows integrations of GAGs and other biomaterials without further chemical reactions, which better preserves their intrinsic bioactivity and enables their functional modularity with mild processing conditions [ ]. Nevertheless, these systems still face some challenges, including issues of unstable mechanical performance, rapid degradation, and the complexity of optimizing assembly conditions, which may hinder their broader applicability [ ].

3.2.

## Chemical functionalization
Compared with physical blending and supramolecular assembly, chemical functionalization of GAGs introduces new functional groups that expand their chemical reactivity and tunability [ , , ]. Unlike non-covalent strategies, covalent functionalization enables stable and targeted modification of specific sites within the GAG backbone, to overcome the limitations of their native features.
Although HA is a non-sulphated GAG and therefore is a naturally weak and degradable scaffold material [ ], there are reactive sites in its structure, including carboxyl, primary hydroxyl, secondary hydroxyl, and N-acetyl groups, which provide diverse opportunities for chemical functionalization. Carboxyl groups in HA, can be typically functionalized via amidation or esterification [ , ]. The primary hydroxyl groups can be modified by introducing methacrylate or ether groups for photo-crosslinking, and the secondary hydroxyl groups can be oxidized to aldehydes and further reacted to form injectable hydrogels [ , , , ]. Beyond these, specialized modifications such as adding thiols, phenolic groups, hydrazides, or host-guest motifs enable advanced crosslinking strategies like Michael addition, Schiff base reactions, and enzymatic crosslinking [ , , , ]. The functionalized HA has been widely exploited to construct scaffolds for regeneration of bone, cartilage, and skin repair. Adipic dihydrizide-modified hyaluronan (HA-ADH) was cross-linked with o-phthalaldehyde-terminated PEG to form injectable hydrogel adhesives for sutureless wound closure [ ]. This functionalization enabled rapid, catalyst-free gelation via hydrazone bonds, while HA provided essential biocompatibility, extracellular matrix mimicry, and enzyme-triggered biodegradation. In some studies, HA could be modified with phenylboronic acid, enabling it to form dynamic and reversible boronate ester bonds with diol-containing compounds such as tannic acid, thereby constructing an injectable hydrogel [ ]. This dynamically crosslinked system exhibited excellent environmental responsiveness, allowing for the sequential release of anti-inflammatory and osteogenic factors to effectively promote periodontal bone regeneration within an inflammatory microenvironment [ ]. HA could also be oxidized to form OHA, which was then crosslinked with carboxymethyl chitosan via a dynamic Schiff base reaction to create an injectable hydrogel. This hydrogel leveraged the biocompatibility and degradability of HA for sustained lactic acid delivery and final accelerated rotator cuff healing [ ].
CS is a sulphated GAG that possesses a variety of functional groups like hydroxyl, carboxyl, and N-acetyl moieties, which serve as targets for chemical functionalization strategies [ ]. These reactive sites enable diverse modification such as sulphation and desulphation, oxidation, and amidation, allowing tailored functionalization of CS for tissue engineering [ , , , ]. Strehin et al. developed a versatile tissue adhesive hydrogel by modifying CS with N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) to form CS-NHS, enabling covalent crosslinking via amide bonds with amine-terminated six-arm polyethylene glycol [ ]. Another injectable, self-crosslinking hydrogel for postoperative adhesion prevention was developed by aldehyde-modified chondroitin sulfate (ChS-CHO) and hydrazine-modified chondroitin sulfate (ChS-ADH) [ ]. These derivatives spontaneously crosslinked via hydrazone bonds upon mixing in situ, leveraging the inherent anti-inflammatory properties and biocompatibility of CS to create a physical barrier when promoting wound healing. Methacrylation is another widely developed strategy for CS engineering, enabling covalent crosslinking and photocrosslinking to form stable systems. Based on this, Kim et al. developed CS modified with methacrylate groups (MeCS), combined with polyethylene glycol diacrylate (PEGDA), to fabricate biomineralizing hydrogels for bone regeneration [ ]. In a similar strategy, methacrylated CS (CSMA) can be combined with methacrylated collagen (CoLMA) to construct a photo-crosslinked dual-component hydrogel for building 3D biomimetic skin [ ]. CSMA incorporation led to enhanced pore uniformity and biodegradability, achieving skin-like mechanical properties to support epidermal-dermal tissue formation.
Beyond HA and CS, other GAGs such as HP, DS, and KS, have also been functionalized to enhance their biomedical applications. HP is frequently modified at carboxyl or hydroxyl groups to introduce thiols, maleimides, or azides for controlled crosslinking, particularly in growth factor delivery systems [ , , , ]. DS is less studied, but they are also able to be methacrylated or activated for hydrogel formation [ , ]. Despite the challenges derived from structural heterogeneity and high charge density, emerging approaches offer promising routes for their precise and biocompatible modification.

3.3.

## Macromolecular conjugation
While chemical functionalization introduces small reactive moieties onto GAG backbones to enhance their chemical reactivity, macromolecular conjugation refers specifically to grafting or conjugating synthetic polymers, proteins, peptides, or other macromolecules onto GAG chains. These strategies enable the tuning of material properties by adjusting the composition, length, or density of the conjugated macromolecules and often lead to formation of hybrid or multifunctional systems suitable for advanced applications.
HA carries side‐chain functional groups, like carboxyl on glucuronic acid and hydroxyls on N‐acetylglucosamine, which serve as convenient handles to conjugating macromolecules. Synthetic polymers, peptides, nanoparticles, and nucleic acids have all been shown to be applied to HA covalent conjugation, primarily for drug delivery systems [ , , , ]. And cases for tissue repair have also been reported [ , , ]. Hlaing et al. synthesized HA-conjugated poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) nanoparticles (Cur-HA-PLGA-NPs), which achieved superior therapeutic efficacy against ulcerative colitis [ ]. Similarly, Fujita et al. fabricated HA hydrogels with shear-thinning injectability by conjugating HA with complementary long DNA fragments [ ]. In the context of tissue regeneration, HA has also been grafted with dopamine to create a synovial lubrication factors-recruiting biomimetic system for OA treatment [ ]. An injectable HA hydrogel via chemically conjugated with a BMP-2 mimetic peptide has also been developed for significantly enhancing osteogenic differentiation of human dental pulp stem cells [ ].
HP can also be engineered through macromolecular conjugation, due to its high negative charge density, strong protein-binding capacity, and well-characterized chemical structure [ , ]. Reportedly, HP could be conjugated end-on with polyethylene glycol (HP-b-PEG) via oxime ligation, which extended its half-life, enhanced its therapeutic profile while preserving its anticoagulant function [ ]. Besides, peptides and antioxidants were also grafted onto the HP-mimicking polypeptide through one-step solid-phase synthesis in another research [ ]. The resulting hydrogel retained HP-like bioactivity and was demonstrated to promote angiogenesis and wound healing.
Other GAGs such as CS, DS, and KS have also been explored for macromolecular conjugation. CS is often grafted with polymers like poly(ε-caprolactone) or gelatin to fabricate composite scaffolds with improved mechanical strength and biological activity [ , , , ]. Although less frequently studied, DS and KS have potential in niche applications due to their tissue-specific expression and unique interactions with proteins and cytokines.

3.4.

## Other engineering techniques
Beyond chemical and macromolecular modifications, emerging strategies have expanded the toolkit for GAG engineering by synthetic biology, which not only introduces new functionalities, but also mimics or manipulates the complex biological context in which GAGs operate.
Synthetic biology and genome editing techniques offer opportunities for precise modulation of GAGs biosynthesis or receptor interactions in living organisms [ ]. Combining gene editing techniques to knockout or knock-in of the genes encoding in the synthesis pathway could achieve better control of GAGs and obtain richer information [ , ]. For instance, Qiu et al. generated a HS-mutant mouse lung endothelial cell (MLEC) library by systematically deleting HS biosynthetic genes using CRISPR-Cas9 and Cre-loxP techniques [ ]. This library enabled systematic analysis of HS structure-function relationships, providing a robust platform to dissect HS-mediated cellular processes. Enzymatic synthesis represents a highly controlled and biologically relevant strategy for GAG engineering. This strategy employs specific glycosyltransferases and sulfotransferases to catalyze the stepwise polymerization and modification of sugar units, closely mimicking natural biosynthetic pathways, which is particularly valuable for investigating structure–function relationships and tailoring GAGs for targeted biomedical applications [ , ].
Metabolic glycoengineering (MGE) is an efficient and versatile strategy for manipulating cell metabolism to insert non-natural monosaccharides into native glycan structures to remodel glycans on cell surfaces or in ECM [ , ]. When combined with membrane-anchoring techniques, this strategy enables precise control over the cellular glycan environment, offering a promising platform to direct cell behavior and microenvironmental cues [ , ]. HS was bioengineered via covalent conjugation to a membrane-anchored protein, enabling long-term display on stem cell surfaces [ ]. This significantly enhanced neural differentiation, and demonstrated the potential of stable, cell-surface GAG engineering in directing stem cell fate for regenerative applications.
Overall, through these engineering strategies, GAGs’ functionality has been significantly enhanced. Nevertheless, several challenges still exist, including potential loss of bioactivity, difficulties in precisely controlling modification sites and degrees and insufficient long-term stability. Future research may focus on developing milder and more selective engineering techniques, achieving a better reproducibility and a higher spatial precision in functionalization.

3.5.

## GAG applications in different fields and the clinical prospects
To understand how engineered GAGs could be used in tissue repair, here we also present some case studies in different types of tissue and various fields ( ). Typically, GAG-based materials offer unique advantages in soft tissue regeneration, including their excellent functions on water attraction, microenvironment modulation, and cell behaviour regulation. HA-based hydrogels have been shown to accelerate wound closure and enhance re-epithelialization, while CS-based hydrogels can promote angiogenesis and reduce inflammation in skin defect models [ , , , , ]. For instance, an injectable MMP-responsive HA hydrogel has been developed as a cell delivery platform to enhance local retention and promote wound healing in rodent and porcine models [ ]. At both the laboratory and preclinical levels GAG-based materials demonstrate considerable promise for future clinical therapies dealing with wound healing and soft tissue regeneration.
 GAG-based systems also contribute to hard tissue repair by providing microenvironments that support cell proliferation, cell differentiation, and matrix deposition [ , ]. For bone repair, materials obtaining bone-like mechanical properties and abilities to deliver bioactive factors are particularly valued, and the requirements can be met by engineered GAG-based materials. For example, methacrylated HA is a modified form of HA with an increase in strength compared to conventional hydrogels, which also retains sufficient elasticity to support bone defect regeneration [ ]. Dopamine-grafted CS system has been shown to effectively promote bone defect healing in rats [ ]. In dental tissue engineering, particularly for alveolar bone regeneration and periodontal therapy, GAG-based formulations have demonstrated the ability to improve defect filling, support biomimetic mineralization, and enhance integration with surrounding periodontal structures [ , , ]. The injectability of engineered GAG-based hydrogels further positions these materials as promising alternatives for minimally invasive periodontal tissue repair. Reportedly, a dual-crosslinked O-HAMA based hydrogel can effectively support bone regeneration in periodontitis-associated alveolar defects [ ]. In addition, an injectable boronate-crosslinked HA hydrogel carrying tannic acid and BMP-2 has been developed as a multifunctional platform for inflammation-associated alveolar bone defects repair [ ].
Growing emphasis on GAGs’ properties and the expanded versatility in engineering has highlighted their promise in constructing various tissue models for precision regenerative medicine [ , ]. Due to the biocompatibility, tunable stiffness and accessible biochemical cues in engineered GAGs, they are suitable for constructing patient derived organoids, allowing the study of human disease in relevant conditions [ , ]. GAG-based materials have been applied to model many tissues, including the bone marrow [ ], vasculature [ ], liver [ ], intestine [ ], and cancers [ ]. Beyond structural support, GAG also modulate organoid biological activities through biophysical properties. For example, GAGs with adjusted stiffness can influence the drug responses of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma organoids, providing increased relevance in drug screening and mechanistic studies [ ].
In addition to tissue engineering and organoid studies, GAGs also show a strong potential in drug delivery by providing special molecular signatures. HA- and CS-based drug delivery systems can target CD44, which is highly overexpressed on the surface of tumor cells [ , ]. This targeting increases the local drug accumulation and effectives tumor growth inhibition while limiting systemic exposure. The GAG-based systems can also respond to pro-inflammatory macrophages in inflammatory environments [ , ]. Based on the selective targeting, engineered GAG materials have been developed for more precise treatment of conditions such as colitis [ , ], osteoarthritis [ ], and acute lung injury [ ]. The expanding toolkit of GAG engineering will significantly accelerate the development of personalised therapies and provide more effective solutions for tissue regeneration and repair.
Natural GAG formulations, such as HA viscosupplementations for osteoarthritis, dermal fillers, wound-healing matrices, and CS-based supplements have already achieved regulatory approval. These existing products form the foundation of the next section of this review. Some critical challenges still lie in the translation of engineered GAG systems from lab to clinic, including comprehensive biosafety, batch-to-batch consistency, and scalable manufacturing. Although a few engineered GAGs have been brought to market, most of them remain at the pre-clinical stage. Achieving clinical translation demands a systematic evaluation of safety, manufacturability, and regulatory compliance, making this a complicated process [ , ]. That being said, numerous GAG materials have shown excellent outcomes in both small and large animal models, and there is an increasing number of studies beginning to study their regenerative capacity in large-animal models, such as pig and sheep [ , , ].
This shift toward clinically relevant models represents an important step to therapeutic application. Looking ahead, we anticipate that the expanding toolbox of engineered GAGs, with their capacity for programmable mechanics, bioactivity, and therapeutic specificity, will play an increasingly important role in shaping the future of tissue regeneration and in enabling their clinical translation.

4.

## Application of GAGs in translational medicine
Building upon the advanced strategies, engineered GAGs are now being widely explored as functional components in tissue regeneration and reconstruction, particularly showing significant effects in skin wound healing, bone and cartilage regeneration, as well as vascular and neural repair [ ]. Generally, the regulatory authorities support the use of GAG-based materials where there is sufficient safety data to justify their use. For example, most HA-based materials, such as viscosupplements and dermal fillers, are regulated by USA Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as medical devices, while HA for pharmacologic purposes is regulated as a drug or biologic [ , ].
Similar policies applied to European Union [ ]. China’s National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) guidelines also categorise HA by its use: products for treating arthritis and dry eye syndrome are regarded as drugs, while the ones without any pharmacologic, metabolic, or immunologically regulated ingredients are as a Class I–III medical devices (https://globalregulatorypartners.com/china-nmpa-new-requirements-for-sodium hyaluronate/#:∼:text = ,DRUG%20IN%20CHINA). Currently, dozens of GAG-based materials have been cleared or approved worldwide, and some representatives will be introduced in this section and summarised in .
 HA is a safe macromolecule that has a wide range of effects on human tissues, and they are commonly used in many medical products. In 2024, market of HA products is approximately USD 10.7–11.4 billion and continues to grow steadily, driven by its advantageous biological properties. In beauty industry, due to its strong hydrating capacity, viscoelasticity and biocompatibility, HA has been applied to many formulations and injectable filler products such as Restylane and Juvéderm [ , ], aiming to improve facial volume and reduce wrinkles. Given its role in promoting tissue regeneration and facilitating wound healing, HA has been utilized in Hyalomatrix PA, a bioengineered wound dressing for chronic and complex wounds [ ]. Its clinical efficacy has been demonstrated in multiple studies, and it contributes to the advanced wound care market, particularly in Europe and North America. Beyond aesthetics and wound healing, HA is used as a therapeutic option for the treatment of OA, a highly prevalent degenerative joint disorder, currently affecting approximately 7.6 % of the global population [ ]. Products like Euflexxa and Synvisc, mainly serve as lubricants to enhance joint lubrication and cushioning [ ]. Additionally, HA-based anti-adhesion barriers like Hyaloglide have been clinically proven to reduce postoperative intra-abdominal adhesions, especially in gynecologic surgeries [ ].
CS are essential components of ACAN in cartilage and therefore have been used to treat OA [ , ]. CS delivery as a slow‐acting drug, has demonstrated efficacy in pain reduction and joint function improvement in clinical trials [ ]. CS was found to be well-tolerated, with adverse events similar to placebo and lower risk than non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). However, CS treatment does face challenges, which includes batch to batch variability, poor regulatory control, off-target effects, limiting the routine use of many CS supplements [ ]. CS also serves as a key component of FDA-approved ophthalmic viscosurgical devices (OVDs) and can be used during cataract surgery to protect intraocular tissues [ ]. Preservative-free topical CS/HA eye drops (e.g., SH/CS-PF) also have demonstrated efficacy in treating mild-to-moderate dry eye disease [ ]. DS, has been shown in randomized trials to play an effective role in preventing postoperative deep vein thrombosis (DVT) with a safety profile comparable to HP, offering a low-bleeding-risk alternative for DVT prophylaxis in surgical patients [ ]. Moreover, marine-derived DS from Styela plicata promotes wound healing in murine models, suggesting its potential in regenerative therapy [ ].
HP is a widely used anticoagulant drug for thrombosis treatment [ ], which decreases blood clotting and is commonly applied to treatments of disorders within blood vessels, such as deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism and atrial fibrillation [ ]. It is also supplied in open-heart and bypass surgeries, kidney dialysis, and blood transfusions [ ]. The global market size of HP was estimated to be 7.35–10.21 billion US dollars in 2023 and is expected to grow due to rising prevalence of cardiovascular diseases and aging populations worldwide (https://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/heparin-market). There are a few types of HP used, namely unfractionated HP (UFH) and low molecular weight HP (LMWH). Whilst UFH is the naturally occurring GAG and is commonly provided at hospitals requiring continuous injections, the effect of LMWH lasts longer than UFH. Both UFH and LMWH inactivate thrombin factors, although UFH is considered to be more specific when binding thrombin than LMWH [ , ]. HP interventions can be applied through injections, ointments, creams or gels (https://go.drugbank.com/drugs/DB01109). There are a few synthetic products structurally similar to UFH and LMWH currently used as anticoagulants, such as Fondaparinux (Arixtra®) [ ], Enoxaparin (Lovenox, Inhixa), Dalteparin (Fragmin), and Tinzaparin (Innohep). Interestingly, a few HP non-anticoagulant related analogues exist, such as Pentosan polysulfate (Elmiron), which is used to treat bladder pain, and Sucralfate (Carafate, Sulcrate) [ , ], used for gastric/duodenal ulcers.
In contrast to HP treatments, there are currently no FDA-approved therapies using HS. However, HS applications have been widely studied in pre-clinical research. Structurally defined HS oligosaccharides have shown potential therapeutic benefits in liver disease using mouse models [ , ]. In particular, HS octadecasaccharide (18-mer HP) prevented acute liver failure in paracetamol-injury mouse model, whilst 12-mer AXa (HS oligosaccharide) compound reduced the plasma concentration of alanine aminotransferase (ALT), neutrophil infiltration and necrosis in mouse ischemic liver lobe [ , ]. In addition, the role of HS as the disease biomarker is being explored in clinical trials. For example, recent phase 1/2 study and phase IIb randomised trial on MPS III disorder, associated with the impaired degradation of HS and its accumulation, showed declined HS levels in cerebrospinal fluid after heparan-N-sulfatase use in patients [ , , ]. Interestingly, there are approved drugs targeting HS or HSPGs, including Bleomycin, Panitumumab, Trastuzumab and Zoledronic acid [ ]. Whilst majority of those drugs are used as anti-cancer therapies, Zoledronic acid is also given to the patients with bone disorders, such as osteoporosis, to prevent bone fracture [ ]. Representative commercial GAG products for clinical application are provided in .
Overall, GAGs are regarded as safe broadly acting biomacromolecules, and are widely adopted in clinical practices. With deeper understandings of their biology and robust progress in its engineering methodology, GAGs hold the promise to be applied to treating multiple tissue injuries and age-related degeneration in a more effective manner.

5.

## State-of-art technology and challenges
Improving our knowledge base on glycoscience, the development of new GAG engineering strategies or applying GAGs to clinical applications, all require robust detection technologies. In this section we briefly review the current state of tools and technologies for GAG detection and structural modeling. We discuss the merits of each technology, whilst highlighting their limitations, in the quest to uncover novel glycoscience for biomedical application.
5.1.

## GAG detection
Antibody-based methods, including ELISA, Western blot, immunochemistry detection, have been employed to semi-quantify GAG levels in animal or human tissues. Importantly, cutting-edge technologies, such as single-cell sequencing and spatial transcriptomics, can facilitate progress in GAG research. Although GAGs cannot be detected directly, single-cell sequencing has been employed to reveal the gene expressions of GAG-associated enzymes and resolve cell-type specific GAG signatures. For instance, Chrysinas et al. unveiled the cellular and tissue-level landscape of GAG biosynthetic pathways by investigating the expression of related enzymes, such as glycosyltransferases, enabling further inference of GAG biosynthetic ability across different cell types and tissues [ ]. Moreover, as GAG structures exhibit considerable tissue-specific diversity, spatial profiling of GAG enzyme-encoding genes furthers our understanding of the assembly, localization and functional roles of GAGs [ ]. Combined with single-cell data, spatial transcriptomics can preserve spatial context and uncover localized expression patterns of GAG-related genes without dissociating tissues into individual cells [ ], providing a basis for future studies on GAG spatial dynamics.
Microarray probes serve as effective tools for detecting carbohydrates and their interactions with other molecules. For instance, Li et al. constructed a mucin O-glycan microarray and identified that specific VP8∗ proteins of rotavirus genotypes can specifically bind to mucin core structures, providing crucial foundations for viral research [ ]. Using glycan microarrays, Wu et al. clarified the glycan-binding specificities of five stem cell antibodies and determined that R-10G recognizes mono-sulphated type 2 chains through the beam search method, offering new perspectives for studies on stem cell glycan ligands [ ]. Tajadura-Ortega et al. optimized customized glycan microarrays by incorporating 187 glycan probes, revealing the binding profiles between vaginal flora and glycans as well as pH-dependent competition, thus providing key information for reproductive health research [ ]. This semi-quantitative, high-throughput microarray technology can enrich glycoscience research information, however, the precise structural analysis and dynamic detection methods for direct detection and quantification of GAGs still require optimization.
Mass spectrometry (MS) is useful in quantification of GAGs. Using specific lyases or hydrolases, GAG can be depolymerized and the disaccharides in linear sequences can be identified. Electrospray Ionization (ESI) and Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization (MALDI) are applicable MS approaches in GAG characterization. Negative ion mode is employed in ESI as a standard GAG analysis, but GAGs have low ionization efficiency with negative ion mode in MALDI [ ]. It has been shown that Ionic liquid matrices (ILM) and alkali metal counter ions could optimize the ionization and sulfate stability of GAGs in both positive and negative ion modes [ , , , ]. And recently MALDI mass spectrometry imaging (MALDI-MSI) has been widely recognized in GAG in situ detection in tissues [ ]. Moreover, methods paired with liquid chromatography have been developed and many technical advances for GAG fragments, mixture isolation and computational analysis have also led to remarkable improvement in the detection of GAGs [ , ].
However, due to their large size and structural heterogeneity, high-resolution structural analysis of GAGs remains to be extensively developed. GAGs’ high structural flexibility usually hinders the detection of X-ray crystallography and cryo-electron microscopy (EM), and their highly repetitive nature may render the assignments in nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) [ ]. Thus, it is relatively simple to characterize short GAG fragments and GAG-protein complexes. For instance, the structures of subunits in HS and CS have been shown to be analyzed by isotopic NMR techniques previously [ ]. And the crystal structure of HP-FGF-FGF receptor (FGFR) complex has also been uncovered using X-ray crystallography and NMR [ ]. Additionally, there have been cases of glycan dissection with cryo-EM [ ]. But the approaches are highly relied on the size, purification and stability of target proteoglycans or protein-glycan complexes. It is difficult to finely consider the influences of chain length, charge density, monosaccharide composition, sulphation pattern on GAGs’ function and their interactions with proteins. Therefore, computational analysis is usually conducted in parallel wet experiments especially when the GAGs’ poses binding with proteins are not fully uncovered yet.

5.2.

## GAG modeling
Despite the limitations in GAG structural analysis, computational modeling has been applied to quantify biomolecular features and predict GAG structures, complementary to experimental analysis [ , , ]. The typical workflow of GAGs computational modeling involves structural modeling, molecular docking to molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, constructing the three-dimensional (3D) structures and interpreting biological behavior [ ]. Computational methods currently dominate GAG structural modeling, often building on preliminary structures obtained from X-ray crystallography and NMR or converting 2D sequences into computed 3D structures using tools like CT23D [ , ]. To further explore GAG-protein interactions, molecular docking has been developed based on favorable arrangements to model ligand-receptor complexes. For example, conventional methods such as Autodock3 and HADDOCK are applicable for short GAGs, refined methods are combined with molecular dynamics and fragment-based approaches are useful for analyzing longer molecules [ ]. Furthermore, MD simulations are significant for interpreting the conformational variations of GAGs, whose development underlies force fields and computational parameters [ , , ]. Since the molecular behavior of GAGs depends on properties such as bond lengths, electron distributions and torsional angles, quantum mechanics and molecular mechanics substantially establish the theoretical foundation for MD simulations, and various force fields, including GLYCAM, CHARMM, and GROMOS, define the parameters used in these simulations [ , , ]. Additionally, coarse-grained models, such as One-Bead-Per-Saccharide (1BPS) model, provide new ideas for MD simulations, which offer integrative insights into GAG-protein complexes at lower resolution [ ].
However, current computational modeling methods are not universally applicable to all types of GAGs, and most of them apply to HP because of its well-characterized biological functions and the development of structurally similar therapeutic agents [ , ]. With advances in modeling techniques, newer computational methods have expanded their applicability to a wider range of GAGs. For example, the early 1BPS model construction was mainly applicable for HA and a few CS, but recent coarse-grained models integrated with extended Martini v2.2 force field can simulate all kinds of GAGs [ ]. Despite these advancements, current computational modeling methods are proven insufficient for their modeling and analysis. Notably, the computational power and complexity continuously increase with the chain-length elongation and modification variations, encouraging the creation of unique advanced methods to model GAGs in the future [ , , ].

6.

## Conclusion and future perspectives
In summary, glycobiology is a hot topic, promising advances in human tissue regeneration and repair. Although carbohydrates are widely recognized for their roles as energy substrates and as protein post-translational modifiers [ , , , ], their contribution to ECM complexity has been underexplored. This is primarily due to technical issues and limitations in biological understanding. Although GAG backbones seem to be conserved molecules, their rapid modification quickly changes their biology, providing functional diversity across different tissues. The synthesis of GAGs does not depend on a defined template, rather it relies on a linked, but complicated, enzyme pipeline. This has proven difficult to emulate ‘in the dish’ and brings many challenges for researchers. Therefore, a number of fundamental questions remain, such as: does GAG regulation work in a precise and defined manner? If so, does a blueprint exist for different human tissue types? If so, how can this be exploited to better understand disease and treat it? It is worth noting that in the context of regenerative and anti-aging medicine, the function of GAGs has been recognized. With technological advances, future research should focus on the intrinsic regulatory logic of GAGs, to chart a comprehensive atlas of their regulatory elements, and to determine precise mechanisms of action.
GAGs serve as smart materials to support repair of various tissues, such as bone, cartilage, skin, nerves and blood vessels. Their flexibility in engineering has benefited their applications in tissue ECM remodeling, organoid model construction and precise drug delivery. With a deeper understanding on GAG biological specificities and biochemical properties, future techniques may be designed for more selective modifications of GAGs and effective interactions with in situ tissues. Future GAG-based smart materials may be incorporated with increasingly functional modules, to offer greater biomimetic signatures, biological responsiveness, and dynamically regulation abilities, and allow them to be tailored to specific tissue types and disease contexts. Additionally, the study of how GAG chemistry can be modified, delivered safely, and remodeled within recipient tissue should be performed to understand their therapeutic effect under certain conditions. This should be carried out in parallel with process optimization, so that GAG manufacture can be precisely controlled for cost effective scale-up at clinical grade.
Underpinning these aspirations is the development of cutting-edge multidisciplinary methodologies that enable the production of higher-resolution maps of GAG structures. Additionally, the development of more accurate in silico modeling tools to guide targeting and design, in combination with deep-learning,-are essential to develop new working models of carbohydrate biology. By taking such approaches, it will be possible to develop new principles and international standards for glycobiology.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Alvile Kasarinaite: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Formal analysis, Data curation. Junhan Ou: Writing – original draft, Visualization. Kailin Chen: Writing – original draft. Dayang Peng: Writing – original draft. Wendi Jia: Writing – original draft. Chenyang Ding: Writing – original draft. Wenwen Huang: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. David C. Hay: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration, Conceptualization. Yishan Chen: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.

## Ethics approval and consent to participate
The human iPSC cell line present in this manuscript ( ) was purchased from WiCell Research Institute, which does not meet the criteria requiring ethics approval.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: Yishan Chen reports financial support and article publishing charges were provided by National Key Research and Development Program of China. Yishan Chen reports financial support was provided by National Natural Science Foundation of China. Wenwen Huang reports financial support was provided by National Natural Science Foundation of China. Wenwen Huang reports financial support was provided by Huadong Medicine Joint Funds of the Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China. David C. Hay and Wewen Huang reports financial support was provided by Zhejiang University International Campus International Scientific Research Cooperation Incubation Project If there are other authors, they declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2024YFA1108600), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (82472457, 52003233), the Huadong Medicine Joint Funds of the Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (LHDMZ22H300004), Zhejiang University International Campus International Scientific Research Cooperation Incubation Project and Liangzhu Laboratory.

## Footnotes
Peer review under the responsibility of editorial board of Bioactive Materials.

## Contributor Information
Wenwen Huang, Email: wenwenhuang@intl.zju.edu.cn.
David C. Hay, Email: david.hay@ed.ac.uk.
Yishan Chen, Email: yishanchen@intl.zju.edu.cn.

## References