pmcCell Rep MedCell Rep Med3954cellrepsmedCell Reports Medicine2666-3791ElsevierPMC12208339PMC12208339.112208339122083394050565910.1016/j.xcrm.2025.102183S2666-3791(25)00256-31021831ArticleBRAF/MEK inhibition induces cell state transitions boosting immune checkpoint sensitivity in BRAFV600E-mutant glioma
XingYao Lulu PanovskaDena ParkJong-Whi GrossauerStefan KoeckKatharina BuiBrandon NasajpourEmon NirschlJeffrey J. FengZhi-Ping CheungPierre HabibPardes WeiRuolun WangJie ThomasonWes MonjeMichelle XiuJoanne BeckAlexander WeberKatharina J. HarterPatrick N. LimMichael MahaneyKelly B. ProloLaura M. GrantGerald A. JiXuhuai WalshKyle M. Mulcahy LevyJean M. HambardzumyanDolores PetritschClaudia K.clpetritsch39@gmail.com 1Department of Neurosurgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA2Department of Life Sciences, Gachon University, Incheon 21999, South Korea3Vienna Medical Center, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna 1090, Austria4Center for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna 1090, Austria5Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA6The Australian National University Bioinformatics Consultancy, John Curtin School of Medical Research, The Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 2600, Australia7Department of Radiology, Molecular Imaging Program at Stanford (MIPS), Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA8Department of Oncological Sciences and Neurosurgery, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA9Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA10Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA11Medical Affairs, Caris Life Sciences Inc, Phoenix, AZ 85040, USA12Center for Neuropathology and Prion Research, Faculty of Medicine, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, 80539 Munich, Germany13Goethe University Frankfurt, University Hospital, Neurological Institute (Edinger Institute) and University Cancer Center (UCT), 60629 Frankfurt am Main, Germany14Frankfurt Cancer Institute, 60629 Frankfurt am Main, Germany15German Cancer Consortium (DKTK) and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany16Department of Neurosurgery, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA17Human Immune Monitoring Centre, Institute for Immunity, Transplantation, and Infection, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA18Division of Neuro-Epidemiology, Department of Neurosurgery, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA19Morgan Adams Foundation Brain Tumor Research Program, Department of Pediatrics, Children’s Hospital Colorado and University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045, USA20Maternal & Child Health Research Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA21Stanford Cancer Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA∗Corresponding author clpetritsch39@gmail.com22These authors contributed equally
23These authors contributed equally
24Lead contact
1762025126202566491839102183239202428320251652025120620250107202502072025© 2025 The Author(s)2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
BRAF/MEK Inhibition Induces Cell State Transitions Boosting Immune Checkpoint Sensitivity in BRAFV600E -mutant Glioma

1420252023.02.03.526065bioRxiv10.1101/2023.02.03.526065PMC1148282039416185

## Summary
Resistance to v-raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B1 (BRAF) plus mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK) inhibition (BRAFi+MEKi) in BRAFV600E-mutant gliomas drives rebound, progression, and high mortality, yet it remains poorly understood. This study addresses the urgent need to develop treatments for BRAFi+MEKi-resistant glioma using preclinical mouse models and patient-derived materials. BRAFi+MEKi reveals glioma plasticity by heightening cell state transitions along glial differentiation trajectories, giving rise to astrocyte- and immunomodulatory oligodendrocyte (OL)-like states. PD-L1 upregulation in OL-like cells links cell state transitions to immune evasion, possibly orchestrated by Galectin-3. BRAFi+MEKi induces interferon response signatures, tumor infiltration, and suppression of T cells. Combining BRAFi+MEKi with immune checkpoint inhibition enhances survival in a T cell-dependent manner, reinvigorates T cells, and outperforms individual or sequential therapies in mice. Elevated PD-L1 expression in BRAF-mutant versus BRAF-wild-type glioblastoma supports the rationale for PD-1 inhibition in patients. These findings underscore the potential of targeting glioma plasticity and highlight combination strategies to overcome therapy resistance in BRAFV600E-mutant high-grade glioma.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•BRAFi+MEKi triggers glioma cell state transitions that foster immune evasion
•BRAFi+MEKi activates interferon response and simultaneously suppresses T cells
•High PD-L1 expression in BRAF-mutant GBM provides a criterion for anti-PD-1 therapy
•Concurrent BRAF/MEK and checkpoint inhibition enhance anti-tumor immunity and survival

Xing et al. report that combined BRAF and MEK inhibition (BRAFi+MEKi) in BRAFV600E-mutant high-grade glioma shifts tumor cell states and upregulates PD-L1, via Galectin-3 secretion, contributing to T cell suppression. Concurrent but not sequential immune checkpoint inhibition in mice overcomes these tumor-intrinsic adaptations, highlighting its translational promise for glioma therapy.

## Keywords
BRAF V600Ehigh-grade gliomaBRAF and MEK inhibitor adaptationimmune checkpoint inhibitionprogrammed death-ligand 1cell state transitionsGalectin-3T cell modulationpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesPublished: June 12, 2025

## Introduction
Brain tumors cause the most years of life lost among cancers and are the leading cause of cancer-related death in children. , , , Unlike other cancers, targeted therapies for brain tumors remain limited, with notable exceptions including BRAF (v-raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B1) and IDH (isocitrate dehydrogenase) inhibitors now clinically used for BRAF- and IDH-mutant gliomas, respectively. , BRAF, a kinase in the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway, links growth factor signals to transcriptional changes, thereby regulating cell proliferation, survival, and differentiation. It is the most mutated kinase in cancer, with the V600E mutation comprising 90% of BRAF alterations. BRAFV600E occurs in 7% of pediatric and 4% of adult primary brain tumors, particularly epithelioid glioblastoma (GBM), pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma (PXA), and ganglioglioma. , , In pediatric low-grade gliomas (pLGGs), BRAFV600E confers poor outcomes with conventional therapies and increases the risk of malignant progression to high-grade gliomas (HGGs), especially with CDKN2A deletion. , , , , The BRAFV600E mutation results in constitutive MAPK activation and loss of feedback inhibition, promoting oncogenic transformation. , , 
ATP-competitive BRAF monomer inhibitors (BRAFi)—vemurafenib, dabrafenib, and encorafenib—effective in melanoma, , , , , were repurposed for patients with BRAFV600E-mutant glioma alongside broader BRAFV600E screening. However, BRAFi monotherapy shows limited efficacy due to multiple adaptive resistance mechanisms, including MAPK pathway reactivation. Sustained MAPK suppression correlates with clinical benefit, leading to strong preclinical and clinical support for combining BRAF with mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK) inhibitors (MEKi). , , Combined BRAF and MEK inhibition (BRAFi+MEKi) outperforms chemoradiation in LGG and shows encouraging response rates (∼47% in pLGG, ∼54% in adult LGG, and ∼33% in adult HGG) with reduced toxicity compared to monotherapy. , , In 2022, dabrafenib plus the allosteric MEKi trametinib received histology-agnostic, accelerated Food and Drug Administration approval for patients with unresectable or metastatic BRAFV600E/K-mutant solid tumors who have progressed following prior treatment and lack satisfactory alternatives. , In 2023, approval expanded to pediatric patients with BRAFV600E-mutant LGG who require systemic therapy. , 
Despite promising objective response rates (ORRs), most BRAFV600E-mutant gliomas escape BRAFi+MEKi, with residual tumor driving rebound, progression, resistance, and unbridled mortality. , , , , , , , , , Resistance mechanisms, well characterized in melanoma, remain understudied in gliomas. Nevertheless, both tumor types exhibit intrinsic, acquired, and adaptive resistance to BRAFi, with shared resistance mechanisms including MAPK reactivation , , , and MAPK-independent mechanisms such as activation of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. , , , Unlike melanoma, BRAFV600E-mutant HGGs exhibit a higher intrinsic (primary) resistance often due to concomitant genetic alterations, like CDKN2A deletion and PI3K-mTOR mutations. , High intra-tumoral heterogeneity contributes to this intrinsic resistance, with polo-like-kinase 1 (PLK1)-high subpopulation characterized by prolonged G2-M phase and increased asymmetric cell division, driving recurrence. Hence, preclinical studies have explored combining BRAFV600E inhibitors with PLK1, MEK, mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), or epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors, , , , , , although only a few combinations have entered clinical trials (NCT04201457 and NCT03919071).
Intrinsic resistance could also be attributed to the highly immunosuppressive glioma tumor microenvironment (TME), making immunotherapy extremely challenging, in contrast to melanoma’s immunologically active TME characterized by robust T cell infiltration. , , , Programmed cell death protein-1 (PD-1) and cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen-4 (CTLA-4) immune checkpoints, exploited by tumors to evade immunity, offer therapeutic targets for immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) , , and were effective in BRAFV600E-mutant metastatic melanoma. , However, ICIs have demonstrated limited efficacy in HGGs , althoughencouraging responses in replication-repair-deficient HGG and evidence of immune synergism with PD-1 blockade and MEKi (trametinib) in a small number of patients have been reported. Moreover, ERK1/2 phosphorylation predicts survival following anti-PD-1 immunotherapy in recurrent GBM. 
Considering the variability in BRAFi+MEKi responses across tumors, and the distinct intra- and inter-tumoral heterogeneity and TME of BRAFV600E-mutant HGGs, their treatment adaptations require deeper investigation. , , Evidence suggests that therapies tap into tumor plasticity, forcing cells to transition to distinct cell states that enable survival and resistance of solid tumors. Understanding BRAFi+MEKi-induced adaptations is critical yet largely unexplored in gliomas due to limited patient cohorts; therefore, mechanisms of cell state transitions in response to treatment in BRAFV600E-mutant glioma remain unknown. Preclinical models are essential tools to investigate potential mechanisms of glioma cell adaptations and plasticity in BRAFV600E-mutant HGGs.
In this study, we investigated changes in HGG cell states following BRAFi+MEKi treatment and uncovered cell plasticity as a potential adaptive resistance mechanism of BRAFV600E-mutant HGG. BRAFi+MEKi heightened cell state transitions along glial differentiation trajectories, giving rise to astrocyte (AC)- and oligodendrocyte (OL)-like states. PD-L1 upregulation in OL-like cells linked cell state transitions to immune evasion, possibly orchestrated by Galectin-3. BRAFi+MEKi-induced adaptive transcriptional changes included upregulation of interferon (IFN)-γ response- and antigen presentation-associated gene signatures, suggesting enhanced T cell-mediated anti-tumor immunity and potentially linking cytotoxicity to therapy response. Therapy-resistant murine tumors exhibited diminished cytotoxicity and impaired antigen presentation to T cells, indicative of immune evasion. This effect can be reversed by concurrently combining BRAFi+MEKi with ICI treatment, leading to significantly improved survival in a T cell-dependent manner. PD-L1 expression was consistently elevated in BRAF-mutant versus BRAF-wild-type GBM patient cohorts, suggesting a pervasive immune evasion mechanism. Collectively, our parallel investigations of patient tumor samples, high-fidelity murine models, and patient-derived cell lines offer insights into BRAFi+MEKi modulation of tumor cell states and the tumor immune microenvironment and may hold promise for a rational strategy combining BRAFi+MEKi with ICIs to improve outcomes in BRAFV600E-mutant HGGs.

## Results

## BRAFV600E-mutant HGGs undergo cell state transitions along glial differentiation trajectories following extensive treatment in patients
Cancer treatment induces cellular adaptations via non-genetic mechanisms to drive resistance. Adaptive responses to BRAFi+MEKi in HGG are poorly understood. To investigate potential cellular adaptations to BRAFi+MEKi treatment, we analyzed the transcriptomes of paired BRAFV600E-mutant HGG from patients before dabrafenib + trametinib treatment and at recurrence (Figure 1A) using gene ontology (GO) analysis of bulk RNA sequencing (RNA-seq). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed recurrence (Figure 1B), and immunofluorescence (IF) and immunohistochemistry (IHC) were conducted for validation ( E-F and ; ). GO analyses showed upregulation of genes engaged in gliogenesis, synapse organization, axonogenesis, and cell-cell adhesion among other pathways after BRAFi+MEKi treatment ( C and D). 
We further investigated pathways associated with gliogenesis for specific cell states and found that they are significantly enriched for markers for neural stem/progenitor cell (NSPC) (PROM1/CD133), pre-oligodendrocyte progenitor cell (pre-OPCs) (ASCL1, HES6, EGFR, and DLL1), AC (GFAP and AQP4), myelin-forming OL (PROM1/CD133, MBP, and PLP1), and—albeit at lower rates—mature OL (ASPA, CNP, and CLDN11) states ( D, D, and S1E). Increased PROM1/CD133+ expression aligns with previous findings showing a CD133+ BRAF inhibitor-resistant cell population in BRAFV600E-mutant GBM. PROM1/CD133 and NESTIN expression—typically associated with a stemness state in GBM—were not co-regulated since NESTIN transcript ( D) and protein levels ( F) were unchanged after BRAFi+MEKi. Further IF validation confirmed the upregulation of selected glial markers at the protein level, showing increased GFAP, MBP, and OLIG2 expression in post-treatment samples ( E).
In conclusion, heavily treated BRAFV600E-mutant HGG retain NSPC markers and transition to AC-, pre-OPC-, and OL-like states, the latter reminiscent of pre-myelinating and mature OL-like cells.

## Orthotopic BRAFV600E-mutant mouse models show intra-tumoral cellular heterogeneity
To address small patient cohort limitations, particularly for BRAFi+MEKi treatment, we generated two BRAF600E-mutant glioma models (BRAF-M34 and RCAS-BRAF), with distinct co-mutations on the C57BL/6 genetic background, inducing gliomas at 54 and 70 days post-injection, respectively ( A, 2F, A, and S2B; , STAR Methods). We subsequently isolated cells from these endogenous BRAF-M34 and RCAS-BRAF gliomas and re-injected dissociated cells into C57BL/6 mouse brains to generate large orthotopic masses with high tumor take rate (BRAF-M34: 95%; RCAS-BRAF: 90%) ( A; ), as visualized by MRI ( B and 2G). Histopathologic analyses of orthotopic masses revealed higher grade features, including high nuclear pleomorphism, necrosis, and microvascular proliferation, with subtle model-specific differences ( C, 2H, C, and S2I; , STAR Methods). IF revealed high intra-tumoral heterogeneity in BRAF-M34 and RCAS-BRAF orthotopic glioma tested alongside BRAF-2341, which we previously generated on the FVB/N background. Expression of GFAP, OLIG2, NESTIN, PROM1/CD133, and OPC markers PDGFRα and NG2 in single tumor entities was detected ( D, 2E, 2I, C–S2H, and S2J; ). Glial and neuronal markers are no longer lineage restricted as in the normal brain but are frequently co-expressed in orthotopic gliomas, consistent with human HGGs ( I). Reactive ACs (GFAP+) and glioma-associated oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) (PDGFRα/NG2+) and OLs (nuclear OLIG2/PROM1+) , , , identified by lack of GFP and CRE expression, were found in all three models as part of the TME ( D, middle panel, C, S2D, and S2H). PROM1/CD133 was co-expressed with NESTIN, potentially marking a stemness state ( E), and with OLIG2, which encompasses highly proliferative OPC-like states in addition to the non-proliferative, mature OLs ( F, S2H, and S2J) and, when cytoplasmic, also ACs ( J). Staining with proliferation marker Ki67 revealed that PROM1/CD133-positive cells are less proliferative than OLIG2-single-positive cells, suggesting that PROM1/CD133 differentiate into OL-like cells. Our two murine models (BRAF-M34 and RCAS-BRAF) recapitulate features of human BRAFV600E-mutant gliomas, , , including intra-tumoral cellular heterogeneity, with model-specific differences. These models provide robust preclinical tools, facilitating immunological studies due to their intact immune system and cross-model comparisons owing to their identical C57BL/6 genetic background. 

## BRAFi+MEKi heightenscell state transitions along glial differentiation trajectories in BRAFV600E-mutant gliomas
Our analyses of heavily treated BRAFV600E-mutant HGG patient materials strongly suggested that BRAFi+MEKi treatment boosts cell states associated with glial differentiation ( D and D). To investigate these changes in additional samples, we assessed whether BRAFi+MEKi boosts similar cell state changes in murine BRAFV600E-mutant gliomas. Moreover, we used single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) of tumors in addition to bulk RNA-seq to analyze these changes on a more granular level. Established (BRAF-2341) and newly generated (RCAS-BRAF) mouse models were treated with dabrafenib + trametinib for up to 14 days, and tumors were analyzed by bulk RNA-seq or scRNA-seq and then flow cytometry (FC) and IF for validation ( A and 3C). In BRAF-2341 cells, isolated by flow cytometry (FC) sorting for A2B5, BRAFi+MEKi increased the expression of transcripts associated with myelin-forming OL- (Plp1, Mbp, Cnp, Prom1/CD133, and Cldn11), mature OL- (Aspa), and AC-like states (Gfap and Clu) ( B and E). We confirmed that BRAFi+MEKi upregulated transcripts associated with AC- and OL-like states in two patient-derived BRAFV600E-mutant glioma cell lines (aGBM5 and STN-49), albeit with quantitative differences in certain transcripts ( A and S3B), consistent with their selected upregulation in patient tumors ( D and 1E). Additionally, BRAFi+MEKi boosted the expression of transcripts associated with myelin-forming OL- (Mbp, Plp1, Pllp, and Prom1) and AC-like states (Gfap and Aqp4) in the RCAS-BRAF model, as analyzed by scRNA-seq and validated by IF ( C–3E, F, and S3G). GO analysis revealed significant upregulation of transcripts involved in gliogenesis ( E), while IF confirmed upregulation of GFAP and MBP proteins, associated with glial differentiation (AC and OL) ( F and 3G). Markers for NSPC- (Nes), pre-OPC- (Dll1, Egfr, and Hes6), and OPC-like (Pdgfrα and Cspg4) states were downregulated by BRAFi+MEKi in BRAF-2341 cells ( B and E), suggesting that NSPC-, pre-OPC-, and OPC-like cells are sensitive to short-term 3-day treatment. Decreased expression of transcripts for NSPC- and OPC-like states (Nes and Cspg4) was also detected, whereas some markers for pre-OPC-like states (Ascl1, Hes6, and Egfr) were unchanged in the RCAS-BRAF tumors ( D), and the OPC-like state marker PDGFRα protein was reduced, as shown by IF ( G). 
In glioblastoma, NESTIN and PROM1/CD133 are markers associated with a stemness state that contributes to chemoradiation resistance and drives tumor recurrence. , We therefore investigated the effects of BRAFi+MEKi treatment on NESTIN and CD133/PROM1 cells in mice. Double-positive cell states decreased, as indicated by FC and IF, consistent with downregulated Nestin transcript with BRAFi+MEKi ( C–S3E). The abundance of CD133/PROM1+ single-positive cells, however, increased while their overall abundance remained unchanged ( C and S3D). This suggests that BRAFi+MEKi reduces NESTIN+ but not CD133/PROM1+ cell states; the latter appears to be intrinsically resistant to treatment, aligning with increased CD133/PROM1 transcript level in patient’s recurrent tumors after treatment ( D) and prior reports of CD133+ cells involved in BRAFi resistance. 
Lastly, we tested BRAFi+MEKi effects on tumor cell states in vitro by treating murine (BRAF-M34 and RCAS-BRAF) and human (STN-49 and aGBM5) glioma cell lines with BRAFi+MEKi for 13 days. STN-49, specifically generated for this study, was derived from patient 49 before treatment ( H and H, ). Tumor cells were subsequently analyzed by immunocytochemistry (ICC) for markers for OL-like (MBP), pan-OPC/OL-like (OLIG2), and NSPC/CSC-like states (NESTIN). BRAFi+MEKi reduced tumor cell viability in all cell lines and increased MBP+ and OLIG2+ cell abundance ( I, 3J, I, and S3J), consistent with a treatment-induced boost in glial differentiation states (AC- and OL-like) observed in vivo.
NESTIN+ cells, abundant at baseline (vehicle treatment) in all four cell lines, were unchanged with 13-day BRAFi+MEKi treatment in murine cells, which is further corroborated by findings from the RCAS-BRAF model ( F) and patients ( D and 1F). These data indicated that cells with NSPC/CSC-like states initially decreased with treatment ( B, 3D, and C–S3E) and were reinstated with treatment over time ( I, 3J, I, and S3J). Notably, mRNA and protein levels were not concurrent in the RCAS-BRAF tumors, and model-specific differences are evident as Nestin+ cells are more abundant in untreated RCAS-BRAF tumors ( I) compared to BRAF-2341 and BRAF-M34 tumors ( D and 2E; ).
These findings demonstrate that BRAFi+MEKi treatment temporarily suppresses NSPCs and reduces cells in pre-OPC and OPC-like states, while consistently heightening transitions toward glial cell differentiation states reminiscent of myelin-forming OL and AC in BRAFV600E-mutant gliomas.

## BRAFi+MEKi boosts IFN response pathway gene expression signature in BRAFV600E-mutant HGG
BRAF-altered glioma exhibits higher CD8+ T cell infiltration and major histocompatibility complex MHC class I expression, when compared to BRAF-wild-type glioma, , suggestive of a robust anti-tumor immune response that could be exploited therapeutically in combination with BRAFi+MEKi. We therefore investigated whether BRAFi+MEKi alters immunomodulatory programs in BRAFV600E-mutant glioma cells, using transcriptome analyses and quantitative reverse-transcription PCR (RT-qPCR) for validation. We first analyzed the whole transcriptomes of BRAFV600E-mutant patient-derived (STN-49 and aGBM5) and murine (BRAF-2341) glioma cell lines for differential gene expression and Reactome pathway analysis. We observed that 48-h BRAFi+MEKi treatment upregulated IFN-γ receptor-associated signature with 67 transcripts across human and mouse transcriptomes ( A, 4B, A–S4C, and S4F). Transcripts for MHC genes were included in this signature, along with other inflammation-related transcripts. RT-qPCR confirmed upregulation of selected MHC class I/II genes (HLA-A, HLA-B, HLA-DRA, and CIITA) in patient-derived and murine cell lines ( D, S4E, and S4G; ). These data suggested that BRAFi+MEKi alters the immunomodulatory activity of HGG cells, heightening antigen presentation by MHC class I/II molecules and potentially boosting anti-tumor immune responses.

## BRAFi+MEKi induces glial differentiation cell state transitionsand a PD-L1-expressing immunomodulatory subpopulation
IFN-γ signaling induces the PD-1 immune checkpoint pathway, which is frequently hijacked by cancer cells to circumvent anti-tumor immune responses and is an important immunotherapy target. We therefore investigated BRAFi+MEKi effects on PD-1 signaling through Reactome pathway analysis of whole transcriptomes, validated by ICC and IF. PD-1 signaling was one of the pathways significantly altered by BRAFi+MEKi treatment, in human and murine BRAFV600E-mutant glioma cell line transcriptomes ( A, H, and A). PD-1 signaling components, including T cell receptor complex protein CD247, and the PD-1 ligand PD-L1 (CD274), were upregulated, as shown by gene network analysis ( B). Next, we rigorously tested whether PD-L1 protein and gene expression aligned, using immunostainings. BRAFi+MEKi indeed increased PD-L1 protein expression in BRAFV600E-mutant HGG cells in vitro ( C), and in vivo ( D–4F), consistent with the upregulation of PD-L1 transcript. We also found upregulated PD-L1 expression at protein and transcriptomic levels in BRAFV600E glioma patients post-BRAFi+MEKi treatment ( G–4I). PD-L1 is also expressed in murine BRAF-2341 gliomas, accounting for 83% of NESTIN+ cells ( I). 
Immunomodulatory roles for disease-associated OL-lineage cells have been reported, aside from their function in myelination. , , , We then investigated if OL-like cell states enriched in response to BRAFi+MEKi express the immunomodulatory PD-L1, by assessing the co-expression of PD-L1 with OL markers PLP1, MBP, and OLIG2, by immunostaining. BRAFi+MEKi significantly upregulated PLP1 expression in BRAF-M34 glioma (BRAFV600E+PLP1+) after 12 days of treatment ( D–4F), consistent with an increase in OL-like cell states in the patient tumor ( I). The vast majority (85.92%) of these OL-like tumor cells expressed PD-L1 ( F, left panel), suggesting that treatment induced immunomodulatory function in OL-like glioma cells. Interestingly, 40.28% of PLP1+ BRAFV600-negative cells were immunoreactive for PD-L1 even before treatment (vs. 25.87% after treatment), indicating that these non-malignant OLs, also called glioma-associated OLs, might be hijacked by glioma cells to promote immunosuppression. Co-expression of MBP/Olig2 and PD-L1 was confirmed in vitro to complement our in vivo results ( J). Positive fold changes for co-expression in murine and human cell lines are variable, suggesting model-specific differences ( K, left panel). Lastly, co-expression of pan-OL marker OLIG2 and PD-L1 in BRAFV600E -mutant patient tumors revealed a 10-fold increase in OLIG2/PD-L1 double-positive cells after BRAFi+MEKi treatment ( G and 4H)
In conclusion, our data provide compelling evidence that BRAFi+MEKi treatment induces a transition to differentiating glia cell states, with a subpopulation of OL-like glioma cells acquiring immunomodulatory properties via PD-L1 expression, establishing a direct mechanistic link between cell state transitions and immune evasion.

## PD-L1 expression is elevated in BRAF-mutant gliomas
Our data demonstrated that BRAFi+MEKi upregulated PD-L1 expression, a mechanism for T cell suppression and a key criterion for patient enrollment in PD-1 inhibition therapy. Therefore, we evaluated PD-L1 expression in a large cohort of patients with BRAF-mutant glioma, including those with BRAFV600E. First, we evaluated the association between PD-L1 expression and BRAF mutation status in a large cohort of adult glioblastoma (IDH-wild-type) specimens (n = 3,126), undergoing different characterization analyses ( ). PD-L1 expression by IHC was significantly higher in BRAF-mutant (54%) than in BRAF-wild-type glioblastoma (17%, p < 0.0001) ( A). This was orthogonally validated using whole-transcriptome sequencing data, showing increased PD-L1 (CD274) gene expression in BRAF-mutant (n = 17) versus BRAF-wild-type (n = 1,022) glioblastoma (p = 0.045) ( B). We found that PD-L1 and BRAFV600E showed a high degree of co-expression by IHC ( C), further corroborating PD-L1 expression in BRAFV600E-mutant glioma cells. We also showed that PD-L1 is expressed in various BRAFV600E-mutant glioma types, including ganglioglioma, PXA, and malignant astrocytoma/glioma, albeit with a varied frequency score, as determined by IHC ( C; ). 
Our findings demonstrate that BRAF mutations, including the BRAFV600E variant, are associated with elevated PD-L1 expression in GBM and other glioma subtypes. This correlation suggests that patients with BRAF-mutant gliomas may harbor suppressed T cells that are reactivatable through anti-PD-1 therapy, potentially eliciting a robust anti-tumor immune response and driving a significant survival benefit.

## BRAFi+MEKi treatment enhances tumor-infiltrating T cells
The efficacy of T cell checkpoint therapy is significantly influenced by the presence of tumor-infiltrating T cells. , Since BRAF-altered glioma exhibits robust CD8+ T cell infiltration, , , and our data showed that they express PD-L1 ( C, 4D, 4F, and 4H), we closely assessed tumor-infiltrating T cells in BRAFV600E-mutant murine glioma with and without BRAFi+MEKi treatment, using high-dimensional single-cell mass cytometry (CyTOF), scRNA-seq, and validation by IF ( A, ). We identified robust infiltration of CD4+ and CD8+ effector T cells (Teff), and CD4+FoxP3+ regulatory T cells (Treg) within the tumor mass, as confirmed by CyTOF ( B and A–S6D), scRNA-seq ( G, 6K and 6L), and IF ( H-J, 6M, D, and G). The presence of tumor-infiltrating T cells in murine BRAFV600E-mutant gliomas is consistent with a heightened frequency of CD3+CD8+ T cells in human BRAF-altered glioma compared to BRAF-wild-type astrocytoma. , BRAFi+MEKi further elevated the frequency of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in all three models ( B and 6C, 6H–6J, 6M, and S6G), consistent with upregulation of the antigen presentation machinery ( B and B–S4G) and suggestive of anti-tumor immunity heightened by treatment. 

## Combination of BRAFi+MEKi with ICI enhances survival outcomes in a T cell-dependent manner
Our findings provided a strong rationale for combining BRAFi+MEKi with PD-1/PD-L1 ICI to boost T cell activation and improve survival. To explore this, we assessed the effects of BRAFi+MEKi combined with ICIs on the T cell compartment in our three mouse models ( A). Mice bearing orthotopic BRAFV600E-mutant gliomas were treated with dabrafenib and trametinib (BRAFi+MEKi) and/or anti-PD-L1 antibody. Since PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors alone have shown no survival benefit in HGGs, , we also included CTLA-4 blockade (α-PD-L1+α-CTLA-4; referred to as ICI) ( A and E). Concurrent, quadruple treatment (BRAFi+MEKi+ICI) significantly improved survival over BRAFi+MEKi or ICI alone in all three models ( D–6F; and ). This survival benefit is associated with T cell reactivation, as shown by reduced frequencies of PD-1- and CTLA-4-expressing CD4+/CD8+ T cells ( C) and Treg cells ( A–S6D).
To assess model-specific differences for BRAF-M34 and RCAS-BRAF further, we analyzed the frequency of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells co-expressing inhibitory (PD-L1/PD-1) and activation (CD69) markers. BRAFi+MEKi increased PD-L1+ and PD-1+ T cell frequencies ( H–6J, F, and S6H), suggesting that the PD-L1/PD-1 checkpoints become activated to escape BRAFi+MEKi-induced T cell activation. Only PD-1+ T cells in the RCAS-BRAF model showed the opposite trend, most likely undergoing apoptosis after treatment ( G and H).
We observed differences in T cell inactivity across the models. RCAS-BRAF showed the highest T cell suppression, while BRAF-2341 had the least ( F). This variability is expected and consistent with reported model-specific differences and differences in the immune responses, even in genetically identical mice ( D–6F). Interestingly, both BRAF-M34 and RCAS-BRAF models did not respond to ICI alone, suggesting their T cells were unresponsive to activation ( D, 6F, and 6H). However, their T cells were responsive to BRAFi+MEKi alone, with the BRAF-M34 model showing significantly higher CD4+CD69+ and CD8+CD69+ T cells, indicative of early T cell activation, compared to the RCAS-BRAF model ( M). Furthermore, our in vitro data showed that BRAF-M34 glioma cells with OL-like states have less immunosuppressive effect on T cells ( K).
The survival benefits seen with therapeutic antibodies, either alone or in combination with BRAFi+MEKi, were completely abolished in athymic mice lacking T cells. Similar results were observed in BRAF-M34 mice that are depleted of T cells, confirming T cell-dependent anti-tumor efficacy ( E; and ). Although T cells are not strictly required for the anti-tumor effects of BRAFi+MEKi, increased T cell activation and anti-tumor immunity may contribute to the treatment’s effectiveness, particularly in the BRAF-M34 model.
Lastly, we tested whether sequential therapy optimizes BRAFi+MEKi responses, similar to what has been reported for BRAFV600E-mutant melanoma patients. ICI 1st showed a trend for improved survival over BRAFi+MEKi 1st, which provided no survival benefit over BRAFi+MEKi treatment alone. Importantly, concurrent quadruple treatment provided the greatest survival benefit and is superior to any sequential approach ( D and 6E; ). These findings suggest that patients with BRAFV600E-mutant gliomas are most likely to benefit from a combination treatment regimen integrating BRAFi+MEKi and ICIs concurrently.

## Synergistic effect of BRAFi+MEKi with ICI on T cell reactivation
Our data demonstrated that quadruple (BRAFi+MEKi+ICI) treatment overcomes resistance observed with dual therapies (BRAFi+MEKi and ICI alone) in the RCAS-BRAF model ( F). To gain insights into potential differences in T cell dynamics with dual and quadruple treatments, we analyzed CD4+ and CD8+ T cell and tumor clusters in scRNA-seq data from the RCAS-BRAF model when mice reached their disease-related endpoint ( A). BRAFi+MEKi moderately upregulated selected suppression markers on T cells, including Cd274 (PD-L1), and robustly upregulated others, such as Cd276, Eomes, Socs, Fas, and Fasl in both CD4+ and CD8+ T cell clusters ( G). Foxp3 was upregulated in CD4+ T cells post-treatment, indicating the expansion of Treg cells. BRAFi+MEKi downregulated activation markers in CD4+ T cells, including Gzmk, Gzmb, IL2ra, and others, while upregulating immunosuppressive markers, including Cd27, Cd7, Tnfrsf18, and Tnfrsf4 in CD8+ T cells ( K), suggesting the presence of dysfunctional CD8+ T cells after BRAFi+MEKi treatment. 
We also found that treatment reduced expression of MHC class I and II genes in CD4+ and CD8+ T cells ( L). MHC class I gene expression was diminished in tumor cells and tumor-associated macrophages/microglia ( J and S6K). This downregulation was suggestive of suppressed antigen presentation, potentially enabling immune evasion and BRAFi+MEKi resistance at the survival endpoint.
ICI alone upregulated Treg expansion markers, including Foxp3 and Btla ( G and 6K). Moreover, increased expression of inhibitory markers like Ctla-4, Lag3, and Pdcd1 ( G and 6K) in CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, and increased MHC and Ifng expression, indicated activation balanced with suppression of T cell activity ( K and 6L). ICI also caused excessive pro-inflammatory cytokine production in CD4+ T cells and tumor cells, resembling a “cytokine storm” ( I).
In contrast, quadruple treatment induced expression of genes linked to T cell activation and effector functions, including Itgae, Gzmk, Cd28, Tbx21, Itga1, Cd69, and Tnfrsf9 ( K). Importantly, MHC class I/II gene expression was restored for effective antigen presentation without causing excessive cytokine production ( L and I). MHC class II gene upregulation in CD8+ T cells is associated with memory T cell differentiation ( L and D). This may contribute to a more durable anti-tumor immune response.
Our findings indicate that BRAFi+MEKi resistance is attributed to Teff cell suppression, Treg expansion, and impaired antigen presentation, which collectively could lead to immune evasion in the RCAS-BRAF model. While ICI activates T cells, it also induces severe cytokine release syndrome (cytokine storm) due to excessive cytokine production. In contrast, quadruple treatment effectively ensures full activation of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, which could be pivotal for overcoming therapy resistance and conferring a significant survival benefit.

## BRAFi+MEKi-induced Galectin-3 secretion links glial differentiation to PD-L1 upregulation
To investigate the mechanism for cell state transitions and PD-L1 expression by BRAFi+MEKi, we assessed the secretome of BRAFV600E-mutant glioma cells in vitro using a high-throughput enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (nELISA). STN-49 and aGBM5 cell lines were treated with BRAFi+MEKi over 13 days, mimicking the duration of in vivo treatments ( A, ). Molecular factors measured by nELISA that were either upregulated or below the detectable threshold post-treatment are presented in a heatmap ( A). BRAFi+MEKi significantly elevates the secretion of the carbohydrate-binding lectin family protein Galectin-3 ( B), with levels peaking at day 13, coincidently with increased glial differentiation ( I and S3J). RNA-seq confirmed upregulation of the Galectin-3-encoding gene LGALS3 with 48 h treatment of BRAFi+MEKi ( C and 7D). In addition to Galectin-3, other factors interleukin (IL)-23 and IL-32 were also upregulated post-treatment, albeit the timing of upregulation varied between STN-49 and aGBM5 cell lines ( B and S7C). This indicates that cytotoxic response rates to BRAFi+MEKi could be cell line specific. 
Next, we investigated a potential direct role for Galectin-3 in inducing glial differentiation cell state transitions and PD-L1 expression in STN-49 and aGBM5 cell lines ( A). Adding recombinant Galectin-3 to cells in vitro efficiently enhanced both glial differentiation cell states and PD-L1 expression in STN-49 cells ( E), whereas aGBM5 exhibited only an upward trend in PD-L1 expression in differentiated glial populations ( F). These findings suggest that Galectin-3 secretion from glioma cells potentially provides a key link between tumor differentiation and PD-L1 upregulation after BRAFi+MEKi treatment.

## Discussion
BRAF and MEK inhibitors have revolutionized treatment for BRAFV600E-mutant cancers, including gliomas, where targeted therapies are otherwise limited. Nevertheless, treatment challenges persist, particularly in glioma patients who experience tumor rebound after treatment cessation and in patients who develop therapy resistance. Resistance mechanisms can be categorized as primary (intrinsic), adaptive, and acquired. While intrinsic and acquired resistance mechanisms to BRAFi and BRAFi+MEKi are well described in several solid tumors, like melanoma, the specific mechanisms underlying resistance in glioma remain poorly understood. , Our study addresses this gap, focusing on glioma lineage-specific resistance. Compared to melanoma, the higher intrinsic resistance to BRAFi+MEKi of BRAFV600E-mutant HGG underscores the importance of cancer lineage-specific studies. The high rates for intrinsic resistance in HGG may partially stem from the high intra-tumoral heterogeneity compared to LGG. , Our data confirm that BRAFV600E-mutant HGG express gene programs of both neuronal and glial lineages, suggesting diverse differentiation states within tumors.
We found that BRAFi+MEKi treatment induces significant shifts in glioma cell state, favoring more differentiated phenotypes at the expense of stem- and progenitor-like states. Our in vitro data support this observation, showing that surviving cells adapt to treatment by acquiring a more differentiated state, which is associated with upregulated immunomodulatory PD-L1 expression. This phenotypic heterogeneity and cell plasticity may underlie the high intrinsic resistance and rapid adaptation to treatment observed in BRAFV600E-mutant HGGs. Indeed, similar mechanisms are emerging as key features glioblastomas, where tumor cells transition among four major cellular states. 
Lineage-specific responses to BRAFi+MEKi were also observed. CD133/PROM1, a marker for both CSCs and differentiating OLs, , remains stable or increases with BRAFi+MEKi; whereas NESTIN+ cells decrease after short-term BRAFi+MEKi but persist with prolonged exposure, suggesting distinct CSC populations with unclear roles in tumor recurrence. Notably, differentiated glioma cells have been shown to accelerate CSC-driven tumor growth, implying that BRAFi+MEKi-induced differentiation could paradoxically support tumor persistence by maintaining a CSC reservoir. Traditionally, therapy resistance in glioma is associated with cell de-differentiation and the acquisition of stem cell-like states. In contrast, we demonstrate that BRAFi+MEKi induces a shift toward a more differentiated, immunosuppressive state, which may be a unique adaptation and resistance mechanism in glioma.
Analysis of paired pre-/post-treatment glioma samples identified 13 putative resistance-associated alterations, including mutations in ERRF1, BAP1, ANKHD1, and MAP2K1. Despite a small patient cohort size (4 out of 15 with BRAFi+MEKi), only about half of the cases harbored de novo mutations, suggesting that non-genetic adaptive resistance mechanisms, such as tumor cell plasticity and cell state transitions described in our studies, may play an important role in resistance in BRAFV600E-mutant glioma. Our work shows that BRAFi+MEKi induces cellular plasticity, which may serve as a therapeutic vulnerability. Further studies are needed to determine whether the adaptive mechanisms also extend to non-BRAFV600E-mutant and BRAF-wild-type gliomas.
Our data reveal that BRAFi+MEKi may induce adaptive resistance via increased Galectin-3 secretion from glioma cells. Galectin-3 promotes cell survival and proliferation and induces MAPK reactivation via K-Ras-Raf-ERK1/2 signaling, facilitating glioma cell differentiation while simultaneously upregulating PD-L1 as an adaptive response to BRAFi+MEKi. , , It is not well understood what drives cancer cell state transitions in glioma, although they are a well-recognized adaptive mechanism enabling immune evasion, therapy resistance, and metastasis in many cancer types, influencing both plasticity and the TME. We found that BRAFi+MEKi-induced Galectin-3 secretion promotes glioma cell differentiation into AC- and OL-like states, mirroring its role in normal OL differentiation with increased MBP expression. , This differentiation is associated with increased PD-L1 expression, fostering an immunosuppressive TME. Given the antigen-presenting capabilities of ACs and OLs, , , , these cell state transitions may actively shape immune responses in glioma.
Gliomas are considered immune inactive due to their low mutational burden, but BRAFV600E-mutant gliomas are more immune rich, with elevated CD8+ T cell infiltration, MHC class I expression, and PD-L1 expression (shown here), suggesting intrinsic ICI sensitivity. However, clinical trials with PD-1 and/or CTLA-4 inhibitors show limited efficacy in glioblastoma. PD-1 and CTLA-4 blockade are effective as second-line treatment after BRAFi+MEKi in BRAFV600E-mutant metastatic melanoma, , providing a strong rationale for exploring BRAFi+MEKi+ICI combinations in glioma. Our study demonstrates that this concurrent quadruple therapy significantly improves survival compared to BRAFi+MEKi or ICI alone across all preclinical models, by preserving antigen presentation, enhancing T cell responses, and conferring a significant survival advantage.
While clinical trials of BRAFi+MEKi+ICI in BRAFV600E gliomas are lacking, melanoma studies provide insights. Patients previously treated with BRAFi+MEKi showed similar outcomes when subsequently treated with PD-1 or PD-1+ipilimumab, though the combination treatment had higher toxicity. Subsequent BRAFi+MEKi treatment after anti-PD-1 monotherapy doubled objective response rates compared to anti-CTLA-4 treatment alone. This is consistent with our findings showing that sequential ICI followed by BRAFi+MEKi offers benefit, although less than concurrent quadruple treatment. Additionally, BRAF-wild-type melanoma patients responded better to anti-PD-1+MEKi, while BRAF-mutant patients had lower ORR due to acquired resistance to treatment. 
Toxicity remains a concern, as BRAFi+MEKi causes fever, leukopenia, and hyponatremia, while ICIs induce immune-related adverse effects. , The principal reason for stopping sequential treatment (ICI 1st, BRAFi+MEKi 2nd) was disease progression rather than adverse effects, which is promising and could support quadruple treatment in glioma. Dose reductions for BRAFi+MEKi could be considered for patients on quadruple treatment when tumors respond. Quadruple treatment may increase toxicity, but pediatric patients - enriched for BRAF-mutant gliomas - may tolerate it better than adults, and dose reductions or sequential treatment combined with Galectin-3 inhibitors could help balance efficacy and safety. Clinical data in metastatic melanoma and glioma highlight the necessity for further preclinical studies to refine treatment timing and minimize toxicity in HGG.
In our preclinical models, BRAFi+MEKi could synergize with ICI by increasing T cell activity and antigen presentation, thus enhancing tumor intrinsic sensitivity. We hypothesize that sequential treatment (BRAFi+MEKi 1st, ICI 2nd) is less effective because it allows time for tumor cells to suppress T cell activity to reduce ICI efficacy, potentially through Galectin-3 secretion ( D). Future studies will address whether Galectin-3 inhibition could further improve therapeutic outcomes by simultaneously targeting adaptive resistance and immunosuppressive TME.
In summary, our study underscores the necessity of implementing concurrent quadruple therapy to generate more durable responses, thereby mitigating resistance mechanisms in BRAFV600E-mutant HGG and GBM. Incorporating Galectin-3 inhibitors into existing treatment regimens for these gliomas also offers a promising strategy to enhance therapeutic efficacy while managing toxicity, thereby improving the overall quality of life for patients.

## Limitations of the study
Due to the rarity of matched pre- and post-treatment BRAFV600E-mutant glioma patient samples, we generated two patient-derived cell lines and two immunocompetent mouse models/murine cell lines that effectively recapitulate key disease features. Despite expected inter-individual variability in treatment response within models, , , concurrent quadruple treatment consistently improved survival across all models, except for limited response in the RCAS-BRAF model, potentially caused by a higher PD-L1+ T cell proportion. Future studies are required to elucidate resistance mechanisms in this model. Additionally, future studies should fully characterize BRAFi+MEKi-induced cytokine alterations and their effects on glioma cells, and on CD4/CD8 T cell activation. Lastly, variability in drug responses across different patient-derived cell lines may reflect intrinsic differences in tumor cell types or Galectin-3 receptor expression, highlighting the need for single-cell analyses and expanded biological replicates or patient-derived cell lines.

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Requests for further information, resources, and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact: Claudia K. Petritsch, cpetri@stanford.edu and clpetritsch39@gmail.com.

## Materials availability
Murine BRAF-M34 and RCAS-BRAF cell lines, and patient-derived cell line (STN-49) generated for this study, will be made available upon request and require a materials transfer agreement according to Stanford guidelines.

## Data and code availability

•Data supporting the findings of this study are available in the article and its supplementary files. Bulk RNA-seq data have been deposited in NCBI’s Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) under accession number GSE287972. scRNA-seq data have been deposited in GEO and are accessible through the accession number GSE288791.
•All original code for analyzing bulk and single-cell RNA-seq data is indicated in the .
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.

## Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge Sista Sugiarto, Anne Marie Barrette, Daniella Morales, Kevin Cordero, and Caitlynn Tran for their excellent technical assistance. We thank Egbert Lu, Bill Weiss, Erin Simmons, and the UCSF Flow Cytometry Core for sharing the mass cytometry panel and running the mass cytometry analyses and the UCSF Brain Tumor Tissue Core and Stanford Neuroscience Tissue Bank for providing patient samples. We also thank Mr. Steve Avolicino from Histo-Tec Laboratory Inc. for tissue processing and immunohistochemical staining. We acknowledge the use of Stanford facilities, including Stanford Veterinary Service Center, Neurosciences Preclinical Imaging Lab (Dr. Jieun Kim), Neuroscience Microscopy Service (Dr. Gordon Wang), Human Pathology/Histology Service Center (Pauline Chu), and Stanford Human Immune Monitoring Center (Molly Miranda), and Anita Metha-Damani and Xue Gong (Synthekine) for advice on T cell profiles. Schematic diagrams generated in the figures were created using BioRender. The study was further supported by grants from the 10.13039/100000002National Institutes of Health (NS099836, NS080619, CA164746, and 17X074), Neurosciences Preclinical Imaging Lab Pilot Grant 2022, Stanford Women’s Health and Sex Differences Center, BRAF LGG consortium research fund, and 10.13039/100014549Stanford Cancer Institute.

## Author contributions
Conceptualization: C.K.P. and S.G.; data curation: Y.L.X., D.P., J.-W.P., S.G., B.B., Z.-P.F., P.C., P.H., R.W., J.W., J.X., and A.B.; formal analysis: Y.L.X., D.P., J.-W.P., B.B., J.J.N., Z.-P.F., and K.K.; funding acquisition: C.K.P. and L.M.P.; investigation: Y.L.X., D.P., J.-W.P., S.G., B.B., E.N., P.C., P.H., R.W., J.W., and A.B.; methodology: Y.L.X., D.P., Z.-P.F., and A.B.; project administration: C.K.P.; resources: C.K.P., D.H., J.M.M.L., K.M.W., K.J.W., P.N.H., X.J., L.M.P., K.M., M.M., G.A.G., and M.L.; supervision: C.K.P.; visualization: Y.L.X., D.P., and C.K.P.; writing – original draft preparation: C.K.P., Y.L.X., D.P., and J.-W.P.; writing – review and editing: C.K.P., Y.L.X., and D.P.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Experimental model and study participant details

## Animals
For mouse studies male and female mice are used. All animal procedures were performed in accordance with institutional and federal guidelines (Stanford University APLAC protocol # 33633). Mice were housed in groups of three to five and maintained on a 12-h light/dark schedule. Food and water were available ad libitum. Compound transgenic mice were generated by crossing Cre-dependent BRAF CA with Ink4a/Arf flox/flox mice. BRAF
CA/WT; Ink4a/Arf
flox/flox mice were of a pure FVB/N or C57BL/6 genetic background. Littermates carrying appropriate genotype(s) were randomly assigned to experimental groups. Mice were intracranially injected postnatally or at 6–8 weeks of age. Mice were treated and analyzed at specific postnatal days or in adulthood, as indicated in the text and figure captions.

## Generation of orthotopic glioma models
BRAFCA/WT; Ink4a/Arfflox/flox mice were injected with 2 μL of adenovirus expressing cre recombinase under the control of the ubiquitous CMV promoter (Ad-Cre; Titer = 1 × 10∧9 PFU/mL; Vector Biolabs, Malvern, PA) to induce BRAF V600E expression and deletion of tumor suppressor genes p16 Ink and p19 Arf (Ink4a/Arf: murine Cdkn2a homologous locus). The stereotaxic coordinates selected to target the cortical layer, relative to bregma, are anterior-posterior–1.00 mm, medial-lateral–1.80 mm, and dorsal-ventral–1.5 mm. Animals were observed and sacrificed when exhibiting clinical symptoms consistent with intracranial tumor formation. Brains of symptomatic mice were resected, and tumor cells were used for generation of BRAF-2341 or BRAF-M34 glioma cell lines and orthotopic glioma models.
6-8-week-old FVB/N and nu/nu mice were used for orthotopic implantation of BRAF-2341 glioma cells, while age-matched C57BL/6 mice were used for orthotopic implantation of BRAF-M34 glioma cells. C57BL/6 mice at postnatal day 7 were used for orthotopic implantation of RCAS-BRAF murine glioma cells. Adult and postnatal mice were anesthetized with isoflurane inhalation (4% induction, 2% maintenance) and ice block, respectively. The head of the anesthetized mouse was fixed in a stereotaxic frame using a nose cone and ear bars. Eyes were moistened with water-based lubricant, and the fur was cleared over the head with an electric shaver. A sterile cotton tip soaked in betadine was used to swab and clean the surface of the incision site. A midline incision was made on the scalp, and a small hole was drilled into the skull to expose the brain surface at the following stereotaxic coordinates selected to target the striatum, relative to bregma (anterior-posterior–1.00 mm, medial-lateral–1.80 mm). Cells were gently drawn up into a blunt-tipped 26G needle attached to a 10μL syringe (Hamilton Company, Reno, NV). The syringe was then placed into a microinjection pump (UltraMicroPump III, World Precision Instruments, Sarasota, FL) attached to the stereotaxic frame and lowered slowly into the injection site at a depth of 3 mm for adult mice and 1 mm for postnatal mice. The microinjection pump controlled the injection of cells at a flow rate of 0.5 μL/min, after which the needle was left in place for 5 min to ensure complete diffusion of cells and avoid backflow. Following the slow withdrawal of the needle, the hole was closed with dental cement, the incision was sutured, and the mice were observed until full recovery from anesthesia on a heated pad. Mice were monitored weekly. Animals assessed for survival were monitored until they lost more than 15% of their original body weight and/or had clinical symptoms of tumor development (hydrocephalus, lethargy, hunched posture). BRAF-2341 and BRAF-M34 displayed characteristics of HGG, such as hypercellular proliferation of atypical glial cells, focal necrosis, high microvascular proliferation, and occasional mitotic figures. RCAS-BRAF showed consistent and invasive growth into various brain regions, including the ipsilateral hippocampus, thalamus, white matter, lateral septal complex, somatomotor isocortex, and contralateral hemisphere ( I). Histologically, RCAS-BRAF tumors exhibited hypercellular proliferation of malignant ovoid to spindled cells arranged in fascicles and sheets, with lower necrosis and microvascular proliferation compared to BRAF-2341 and BRAF-M34.

## Human studies
Tumor specimens and clinical information were collected according to protocols approved by the Research Ethics Board. Patients provided informed consent, and ethical approval was obtained from the Institutional Review Board at Stanford University. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) brain tumor tissue was obtained from patients with BRAFV600E-mutant gliomas. Clinically relevant dual MAPK pathway inhibitors were administered to a 13-year-old boy with BRAFV600E-mutant high-grade GBM, who eventually succumbed to the disease. The patient was initially treated with one cycle of doxorubicin/ifosfamide treatment with 65.20 Gy in 35 fractions of radiotherapy. The patient subsequently underwent dabrafenib and trametinib treatment until his death. Separate primary patient samples were also obtained from Children’s Hospital Colorado (Aurora, CO) in accordance with local and federal human research protection guidelines and Institutional Review Board regulations. Clinical and pathological features of patient 12 with BRAFV600E-mutant glioma were described in Schreck et al., 2021. Specifically, this young adult man diagnosed with high-grade GBM was initially treated with temozolomide with 60 Gy in 30 fractions of radiotherapy. The patient subsequently received 6 cycles of adjuvant temozolomide for 6 months. However, given his first local recurrence 3 months later, this patient then underwent dabrafenib and trametinib treatment for 13 months. All tumor specimens were given a sequential unique identifier to ensure complete deidentification.

## Cell lines and primary cultures
All cell lines and primary cultures were maintained in humidified cell culture incubators at 37°C under 5% CO2. SU-aGBM5 is a BRAFV600E mutant GBM cell line from a young patient obtained from Dr. Michelle Monje (Stanford University, CA, USA). Murine BRAFV600E mutant glioma cell lines (BRAF-2341, BRAF-M34) were derived from murine glioma, induced by injection of adenovirus-Cre into the brain of BRAF
CA/WT;Ink4a/Arf
flox/flox mice, as previously described. Cells were maintained in 50% Neurobasal-A medium without L-Glutamine (10888022; ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) and 50% D-MEM/F12 medium (11330-032; ThermoFisher Scientific), supplemented with 0.1mM MEM Non-Essential Amino Acids Solution (11140-050; ThermoFisher Scientific), 1 mM MEM Sodium Pyruvate Solution (11360-070; ThermoFisher Scientific), 1× GlutaMAX-I Supplement (35050-061; ThermoFisher Scientific) and 10 mM HEPES Buffer (15630-080; ThermoFisher Scientific). Gibco B27 Supplement without vitamin A (12587010; ThermoFisher Scientific) and N2 supplement (17502048; ThermoFisher Scientific) were also added to the medium. Cells were supplemented twice a week with 40 ng/mL FGF (100–146; Fujifilm Irvine Scientific, Santa Ana, CA) and EGF (100-26; Fujifilm Irvine Scientific), and 10 ng/mL PDGF-AA (100-16; Fujifilm Irvine Scientific), PDGF-BB (100-18; Fujifilm Irvine Scientific) and STEMCELL Technologies heparin (7980; ThermoFisher Scientific). BRAF-M34, RCAS-BRAF, and aGBM5 cell lines were cultured on laminin (L2020; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), while STN49 grew on pol-l-ornithine (P3655; Sigma-Aldrich), following manufacturer’s instructions. Lentivirus-luciferase modifications were performed as previously described. 

## Method details

## Drug preparation and treatment
For in vivo experiments, a fresh solution of the drug was prepared on each treatment day, by dissolving Dabrafenib (cat#S2807; Selleckchem, Houston, TX) and Trametinib (cat#S2673; Selleckchem) in an aqueous mix of 0.5% hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (HPMC, H7509-25g) and 0.2% tween-80 solution to a stock concentration of 5 mg/mL and 1 mg/mL, respectively. Stock solutions were then aliquoted and stored at −20°C freezer. For survival analysis, dabrafenib was given at 30 mg/kg and trametinib was given at 1 mg/kg. Drugs were delivered by oral gavage once daily. BioXCell anti-PD-L1 (clone 10F.9G2; ThermoFisher Scientific) was given at 20 mg/kg i.p. at day 1 and 8 mg/kg every 2 days thereafter, BioXCell anti-CTLA-4 (clone 9D9; ThermoFisher Scientific) was given at 8 mg/kg i.p. at day 1 and 2 mg/kg every 2 days thereafter.
For in vitro experiments, stock solutions of dabrafenib and trametinib were dissolved at 10 mM concentration in DMSO (3176-100 mL; ThermoFisher Scientific), aliquoted, and stored at −80°C freezer. For measuring viability and constructing dose-response curves, cells were dissociated with Accutase (NC9389010; ThermoFisher Scientific) and 104 cells were plated per well in a 96-well half-white plates (3688; ThermoFisher Scientific) using the corresponding vessel. After 24 h, a serial dilution of 10μM dabrafenib or trametinib was added in triplicate to the seeded cells. After 72 h, the cell viability was measured with CellTiter-Glo Luminescent Cell Viability Assay (G7570; Promega, Madison, WI). The percentage of surviving cells (normalized to DMSO control) was plotted as a function of log10 drug concentration. The sigmoidal curves were generated with GraphPad Prism software (GraphPad Prism version 10.0.0, GraphPad Software, Boston, Massachusetts USA, www.graphpad.com), whereby the IC50 concentrations were calculated.

## T cell depletion
For survival study using T cell-depleted tumor-bearing mice orthotopically implanted with BRAF-M34 glioma cells, 200μg of anti-CD4 (clone GK1.5, Bio X Cell) and anti-CD8a (clone 53–6.7, Bio X Cell) were administered via intraperitoneal injections 3 days before tumor cell implantation and then every 4 days thereafter until the survival endpoint.

## Magnetic resonance imaging
All MR studies were performed at 7T Bruker BioSpec system (Bruker, Billeria, MA) equipped with BGA-12S gradient insert and interfaced to ParaVision 360 V. 3.5. A 4-element receive-only mouse CryoProbe and 86mm volume coil were used for MR imaging. Gadobutrol solution (Gadavist; diluted 1:10 with saline; Bayer, Whippany, NJ) was administered intraperitoneally before MRI. Animals were anesthetized with 2.5% isoflurane mixed in air and O2 and maintained with 1–1.5% isoflurane during the imaging procedure. Core body temperature was maintained at 37°C using a warm water circulator pad and a temperature controller. The animal’s respiration was also monitored via a pneumatic pad placed under the animal (SA Instruments, Inc., Stony Brook, NY). T2w Turbo RARE sequence was used to obtain coronal (TR/TE = 2000/30 ms, FOV = 20 × 20 mm2, matrix = 256 × 256, slice thickness = 0.5 mm, RARE Factor = 4, NEX = 2, scan time = 4 min 16 s) and transverse (TR/TE = 2500/30 ms, FOV = 20 × 20 mm2, matrix = 256 × 256, slice thickness = 0.5 mm, RARE Factor = 4, NEX = 2, scan time = 5 min 20 s) structural MRI.

## Tissue collection and processing of mouse samples
Mice were intraperitoneally injected with ketamine (100 mg/kg) and xylazine (10 mg/kg) to induce deep anesthesia, and subsequently transcardiac perfusion was performed first with phosphate-buffered saline followed by 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA)/PBS or 10% neutral buffered formalin. Brains perfused with 4% PFA were then resected, post-fixed in 4% PFA/PBS for 2 h on ice, cryoprotected in 15% sucrose/PBS for 24 h and then 30% sucrose/PBS for at least 48 h, followed by embedding in Tissue-Tek O.C.T. Compound (Sakura Finetek USA, Inc., Torrance, CA). The embedded tissues were stored at −80°C until sectioned. 10μm-thick coronal sections of the brain were cut on a cryostat (Leica, Wetzlar, Germany), collected onto Superfrost Plus slides (Menzel Glaser, VWR) and air dried for 1h before storing at −80°C until stained. Brains perfused with 10% formalin were post-fixed in 10% formalin for 24 h at room temperature, then dehydrated in 70% ethanol. They were then embedded in paraffin and sectioned using Histo-Tech protocols (Histo-Tec Laboratory Inc., Hayward, CA; http://histoteclab.com/).

## Immunofluorescence staining on frozen tissue sections of mouse and human samples
Frozen 10μm sections on Fisherbrand Superfrost Plus Microscope Slides (ThermoFisher Scientific) were washed briefly in PBS and blocked with PBS containing 0.3% Triton X-100, 5–10% normal donkey serum, and/or normal goat serum for 1 h at room temperature (RT). The sections were then incubated with primary antibodies at RT overnight in a humidified chamber, washed briefly in PBS three times next day, followed by 1h incubation at RT with secondary antibodies, the slides were then washed three times with PBS, and cover slipped with a DAPI-containing mounting solution (VectaShield H20002; Vector Laboratories, Newark, CA) and subjected to fluorescence and confocal microscopic analysis. For multiplex immunofluorescence, some primary antibodies were incubated simultaneously. The following primary antibodies were used: chicken anti-Nestin (ab134017; Abcam, Waltham, MA), chicken anti-GFP (600-901-215; Rockland Immunochemicals, Pottstown, PA), chicken anti-PLP1 (AB15454; Millipore Sigma, Burlington, MA), goat anti-PDGFRα (AF1062; R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN), mouse anti-Cre recombinase (MAB3120; Millipore Sigma, Burlington, MA), mouse anti-BRAF V600E (ab228461; Abcam), mouse anti-NeuN (MAB377; Millipore Sigma, Burlington, MA), mouse anti-PD-L1 (329702; BioLegend, San Diego, CA), mouse anti-MHC I (17-5958-82; ThermoFisher Scientific), rabbit anti-CD4 (ab183685; Abcam), rabbit anti-CD68 (76437; Cell Signaling), rabbit anti-Iba1 (019–19741; Dako), rabbit anti-Olig2 (AB9610; Millipore Sigma, Burlington, MA), rabbit anti-Ki67 (ab15580; Abcam), rat anti-MHC II (NBP1-43312; Novus Biologicals), rat anti-CD133 (14-1331-82; ThermoFisher Scientific), rat anti-GFAP (13–0300; ThermoFisher Scientific), rat anti-MBP (ab7349; Abcam), rat anti-CD8a (50-112-9493; ThermoFisher Scientific), rat anti-PD-L1 (A14764; ThermoFisher Scientific), and rat anti-CD4 (100402; BioLegend). Secondary antibodies raised in donkey or goat and conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488, Alexa Fluor 555, Alexa Fluor 594, Alexa Fluor 647, or Alexa Fluor 790 were purchased from Jackson ImmunoResearch Labs (West Grove, PA) or Invitrogen (now ThermoFisher Scientific) and used at 1:200 dilution.

## Hematoxylin & eosin staining, immunohistochemistry and bulk RNA sequencing
Patient tissue was processed according to well-established histologic protocols, including fixation in 10% neutral buffered formalin, paraffin embedding, sectioning (5μm), and standard histochemical staining using hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). H&E-stained slides were scanned with a 20× objective on Aperio AT2 slide scanner (Leica Biosystems). Comprehensive diagnostic evaluation included a review by a board-certified pathologist specialized in anatomic pathology and neuropathology, as well as a senior fellow in neuropathology. Immunohistochemical staining of consecutive patient tumor sections was performed on a VENTANA Discovery ULTRA autostainer (Ventana). FFPE tissue sections were deparaffinized and rehydrated. Antigen retrieval was performed using CC1 buffer (05424569001; Roche) for 32 min at 91°C. Primary antibodies were applied at a dilution of 1:100 for 60 min: Anti-BRAF (mutated V600E) antibody clone VE1 (ab228461; Abcam), PD-L1 XP Rabbit mAb clone E1L3N (Cell Signaling, 13684). Detection was performed using the ChromoMap DAB Kit (05266645001; Roche). Slides were scanned with a 20× objective on the PhenoImager Fusion (Akoya Biosciences). Immunohistochemical staining of RCAS-BRAF mouse brain sections was performed by Histo-Tec. For bulk RNA sequencing, RNA extraction from paired FFPE-preserved specimens from patient 12, library preparation, and RNA sequencing was performed as previously described. 

## PD-L1 expression analysis in GBM cohorts
For PD-L1 expression comparisons in adult GBM, clinical pathology data were obtained from 3126 glioblastoma tissue specimens profiled at Caris Life Sciences. All samples were from adult patients (≥18 years of age). Each tumor was reviewed by board-certified pathologists and classified as a glioblastoma based on World Health Organization (WHO) classification guidelines. Given changes in the WHO classification of GBM, samples with mutations in IDH1 or IDH2 were excluded from analyses to conform with 2021 revisions to the WHO classification of brain tumors. Tumor specimens were collected via manual microdissection and harvesting targeted tumor tissue. Next-generation sequencing was performed on genomic DNA isolated from FFPE samples using either a custom-designed SureSelect XT assay (592 whole-gene targets, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) or whole-exome sequencing. All variants were detected with >99% confidence based on allele frequency and amplicon coverage, with an average sequencing depth across all amplicons >500×. DNA sequencing results are validated per Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) and Internal Organization for Standardization (ISO) requirements. MGMTp pyrosequencing and IHC for PD-L1 (SP142 clone) were performed on all samples. ArcherPlex Fusion profiling data were available for 69% of samples, and bulk whole-transcriptome sequencing data were available for 33% of samples.
For comparisons in A, PD-L1 expression was tested by IHC using SP142 antibody (Spring Biosciences). The staining intensity on the tumor cells was assessed on a semiquantitative scale: 0 for no staining, 1+ for weak staining, 2+ for moderate staining, and 3+ for strong staining. Tumors exhibiting ≥5% of tumor cells stained as 2+ or 3+ were regarded as being PD-L1 positive, as previously described. 
For comparisons in B, the number of CD274 (i.e., PD-L1) transcripts per million in the BRAF mutation/fusion group (n = 17) were compared to the number in the BRAF-WT group (n = 1022) using a Wilcoxon Rank-Sum test. This non-parametric test does not assume normality of the CD274 transcript counts, and has been shown to demonstrate asymptotic normality and be robust in the setting of small and unbalanced sample sizes. Specifically, the test tends to be conservative in the setting of unbalanced samples but retains greater statistical power than other common alternatives (e.g., median tests). See reference: Mann, H. B., & Whitney, D. R. (1947). On a test of whether one of two random variables is stochastically larger than the other. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 18, 50–60. https://doi.org/10.1214/aoms/1177730491.

## Differentiation assays
Differentiation assays were performed as previously published. Dissociated cells were plated in Lab-Tek II CC chamber slides (154941; ThermoFisher Scientific) coated with 10 μg/mL laminin or 0.01% poly-l-ornithine at 3 × 104 cells per well. Two different growth conditions were used for this assay: medium without growth factors and medium supplemented with 60 nM triiodothyronine (T3; Millipore Sigma) and 10 ng/mL CNTF (Peprotech, Cranbury, NJ), termed as “differentiation” medium. Fresh medium and drugs (0.7 μM dabrafenib and 0.3 μM trametinib) was added every 3 days, to promote oligodendrocyte differentiation. The duration of the treatment was 13 days, and the experiment was performed in two technical replicates. Cells were fixed with 4% PFA (EMD) for 10 min at RT and stained with primary antibodies overnight and secondary antibodies for 1 h before being mounted in Vectashield mounting medium. Patient-derived glioma cell lines (STN49 and aGBM5) were seeded in MaTek chamber slides at high density (300,000 cells/well). After 24 h of incubation, cells were treated either with 10 μg/mL bovine serum albumin (BSA, A841; Millipore Sigma) or 10μg/mL human recombinant galectin-3 (450-38; ThermoFisher Scientific) and incubated for 72 h.

## nELISA assay
The high-plex secretome was profiled by NomicBio (https://nomic.bio/), which is offered as a service by the company. However, this platform does not detect mouse targets. For this study, secreted cytokines from the human cell lines (STN49 and aGBM5) were screened with the nELISA platform (https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.04.17.535914). Briefly, cells from STN49 and aGBM5 were dissociated using Accutase, and 104 cells per well were seeded in 96-well plates (7200309; ThermoFisher Scientific). For this experiment, three different medium conditions were used (medium supplemented with/without growth factors and differentiation medium (see Differentiation Assays)). In addition, the medium was supplemented with dabrafenib and trametinib (0.7 μM and 0.3 μM, respectively) or DMSO (10μM) as a control. 50μL of medium from each culturing/drug combination was collected in triplicate on day 1, 3, 6, 9, and 13 post-therapy, and at the same time, fresh medium was added to the cells. Finally, the frozen medium containing cell-secreted cytokines and the control medium (freshly prepared without cell culturing) were submitted for nELISA measurements. Data was made available on the Nomic Data Portal (https://portal.nomic.bio/login), whereby the clustergram ( A) was downloaded from the custom data report. In this analysis, TIMP1 protein was identified as a stably expressed marker, remaining unaffected by medium or drug conditions. As a result, TIMP1 levels were subsequently used for the normalization of other marker expressions.
Raw nELISA levels (pg/mL) of Galectin-3 were divided by the corresponding TIMP1 (pg/mL) levels. Raw nELISA signals of IL-23 and IL-32 were normalized by the corresponding TIMP1 expression signals. Time course response curves were created in GraphPad Prism software v.10 (GraphPad Prism version 10.0.0, GraphPad Software, Boston, Massachusetts USA, www.graphpad.com), and two-way ANOVA (without repeated measures) was used for statistical analysis. Data is represented as means ± SEM of three technical replicates, and significance is represented as ∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗∗∗p < 0.001, and ∗∗∗∗p < 0.0001.

## Immunocytochemistry
Prior to staining, cells were permeabilized with 0.25% Triton X- in PBS (Ca2+/Mg2+) for 5 min at room temperature, washed with PBS, and blocked with 10% normal donkey serum (NC9624464; ThermoFisher Scientific) for 1 h at room temperature on a gentle shaker. After this step, the blocking solution was aspirated and 150μL of primary antibody cocktail was added to each well: chicken anti-Nestin (ab134017; Abcam), goat anti-Olig2 (AF2418; R&D Systems), rat anti-mouse PD-L1 (A14764; ThermoFisher Scientific), mouse anti-human PD-L1 (329702; BioLegend), and/or rat anti-MBP (ab7349; Abcam). Cells in the Galectin-3 experiment were incubated with the following primary antibodies: mouse anti-human PD-L1, rat anti-MBP, and rabbit anti-OPALIN (ab121425; Abcam).
The primary antibodies were incubated overnight at 4°C on a gentle shaker. On the next day, the primary antibody solution was aspirated, and the wells were washed twice with PBS, which was followed by 150μL of secondary antibody staining solution: donkey anti-chicken-488, donkey anti-goat-647, goat anti-rat-488, goat anti-mouse-594, whereas donkey anti-mouse 488, donkey anti-rat 594, goat anti-rabbit 647 secondary cocktail was used for cells treated with Galectin-3/BSA. After 1 h of incubation, cells were washed twice with PBS and mounted in Vectashield mounting medium containing DAPI.

## Confocal imaging and image processing
Stained 10μm thick coronal sections and cultured cells in chamber slides were imaged by laser scanning confocal microscopy (Zeiss LSM980), which was used to detect up to five fluorophores by laser excitation at 405, 488, 561, 639, and 730 nm wavelengths. Confocal images were acquired using a 20× objective. Images were imported into FIJI/ImageJ image analysis software for quantification of cellular density and fluorescence intensity in the regions of interest. All analyses were performed in a blinded fashion.

## Flow cytometry and MACS
Mouse brains with BRAF-2341 tumor cells were resected, and single-cell dissociates were obtained using 15 units/mL of Papain for 30 min at 37°C, and tissue was dissociated using a P1000 pipette, strained through a 70μm cell strainer over a 50 mL conical tube at room temperature. Cells were washed in 10 mL of ice-cold, sterile 1 × phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, Ca2+, Mg2+-free) and centrifuged at 1300 rpm for 10 min at 4°C. For flow cytometric analyses of CD133+ and Nestin+ cell frequency, cells were resuspended using PBS (Ca2+, Mg2+-free) + 0.2 mmol/L EDTA, resuspended in FACS buffer (PBS+EDTA+0.5% BSA) at 1E6 cells/100μL, and incubated with primary antibodies, which were chicken anti-Nestin (1:100; ab134017; Abcam) + goat anti-chicken-488 (1:500; ab150169; Abcam) and Prominin-1 biotin (1:100; 130-101-996; Miltenyi Biotec, San Jose, CA) + streptavidin-APC (1:500; 130-090-856; Miltenyi Biotec). Isotype IgG and single-channel antibodies were used as a control. Primary antibodies were incubated for 30 min on ice in the dark. Cells were washed twice in 1 mL of ice-cold 2% fetal bovine serum + PBS, secondary antibodies were added for 15 min, washed, and cells were resuspended in a FACS buffer containing Hoechst and strained immediately prior to analyses. Cells were analyzed by flow cytometry using the BD FACSCalibur (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ). The gating strategy for analyzing CD133 and Nestin positive cells involved multiple steps, including initial quality control gating to remove debris and dead cells based on their size and granularity (FSC-A vs. SSC-A), doublet discrimination (FSC-A vs. FSC-H) to exclude cell doublets and clumps, live/dead discrimination (PI or DAPI), and specific gating for CD133 and Nestin positive cells based on unstained controls and isotype controls that can help set the appropriate threshold for positivity. Raw data was processed and analyzed with FlowJo software (10.7.1; BD Biosciences).
Magnetic sorting was performed according to manufacturer’s instructions, with the modification that 107 cells were resuspended in 60 mL of ice-cold MACS buffer solution, incubated in 20μL of FcR blocking reagent for 10 min at 2-8°C, 20μL of anti-A2B5 (130-123-953; Miltenyi Biotec) were added per 107 cells, and incubated at 2-8°C for 15 min. Cells were washed twice and passed onto an LS column in an OctoMACS separator (Miltenyi Biotec). Columns were washed three times with 500 mL of MACS buffer and placed in a collection tube. A2B5+ cells were collected by firmly pushing the plunger into the column and immediately used for RNA extraction.

## Mass cytometry and analyses
FVB/N mice injected with BRAF-2341 glioma cells were treated as indicated for 2 weeks ( A). Tumor cells were isolated and subjected to mass cytometry (CyTOF) utilizing a 42-antibody panel (Weiss UCSF Mouse Neural Tumor CyTOF Antibody Panel). To isolate tumor cells, tumor-bearing mice were perfused with 5 mL Ca/Mg-free phosphate-buffered saline by transcardial perfusion. Brains were resected, and macroscopically visible tumor areas were cut from normal (non-infiltrated) brain tissue, and the tumor was further processed on ice using two # 11 scalpels in scissor-like motions into tumor pieces of 1 mm3. Tumor fragments were dissociated into single cells with an enzymatic cocktail of collagenase IV (LS004209; Worthington), soybean trypsin inhibitor (LS003587; Worthington), and desoxyribonuclease I (LS002007, Worthington) at 37°C for up to 45 min. Single cells were subjected to red blood cell lysis using ACD lysis buffer (1049201; Gibco), following manufacturer’s instructions. Viable cells were counted and stained with natural abundance cisplatin viability staining reagent (ALX-400-040; Enzo). Cells were frozen in 10% DMSO in 1e7 cells/mL aliquots in liquid nitrogen until ready for analyses.
1 mL of 1× Barcode Perm Buffer (Fluidigm) was added to isolated tumor cells, spun at 600× g for 5 min, vacuum aspirated to ∼50μL and 750μL 1× Barcode Perm Buffer was added again to cells. 100μL of resuspended barcode stocks (two sets of 20-plex barcodes SCAC) were added to corresponding cell tubes and mixed by pipetting. Cells were incubated for 30 min at room temperature on RotoMix shaker at max speed, spun down, the excess buffer was aspirated, and cells were washed three times in cell staining media (CSM), and finally, 100μL CSM was added to each cell tube. For each barcode pool, barcoded cells were combined and strained into appropriate 5 mL FACS tubes and the volume of pooled tubes was brought up to 5 mL with CSM. Pooled barcoded cells were spun at 600× g, for 5 min, the supernatant was aspirated, and cells were vortexed to disrupt pellets and resuspended at 47μL per 1E6 cells. 2 μL mouse Fc Block (clone 2.4G2; 0.5 mg/mL) per 1E6 cells were added to each tube, stained for 30 min at room temperature on RotoMix shaker at max speed. Cells were washed two times in 3 mL CSM, spun at 600× g for 5 min, excess CSM was aspirated, and the pellet was vortexed for 10 s to disrupt the pellet. Pellets were resuspended at 35μL per 1E6 cells. Surface antibody staining (Antibody Cocktail A) was performed first, with 15μL of Antibody Cocktail A per 1E6 cells added and mixed by pipet. Cells stained for 30 min at room temperature on RotoMix shaker at max speed and washed twice in 3 mL CSM, spun down at 600× g for 5 min, excess liquid aspirated, and pellet disrupted by 10-s vortex. Intracellular antibody staining (Antibody Cocktail B) was performed next by adding 3 mL Perm-S Buffer (Fluidigm) to the disrupted cell pellet and incubating it on ice for 30 min. Barcoded cells were spun at 600× g for 5 min and supernatant vacuum aspirated. Cell pellets were resuspended with Perm-S Buffer (Fluidigm) at 35μL per 1E6 cells and mixed by pipet. 15μL of Antibody Cocktail B was added per 1E6 cells, mixed by pipet, and stained for 30 min at room temperature on RotoMix shaker at max speed. Cells were washed first with 3 mL Perm-S Buffer (Fluidigm), spun at 600× g for 5 min, supernatant aspirated, and pellet vortexed for 10 s and washed a second time with 3 mL CSM followed by spin, aspiration, and vortex. Cells were then resuspended in 500μL CSM and transferred to 15 mL polypropylene conical tubes and treated with 4.5 mL Ir-intercalator cocktail. Cells were stored at 4°C overnight.
To prepare samples for CyTOF, 9 mL CSM was added per tube, cells were counted, then spun at 600× g for 5 min and vacuum aspiration left ∼100 μL residual volume. To each tube, 800μL MaxPar PBS (Fluidigm) was added, mixed, and transferred to an Eppendorf Protein Lo-bind 1.5 mL tube, spun at 600× g for 5 min, then vacuum aspirated to ∼100 μL residual volume. Cells were washed twice with 1.4 mL MilliQwater, spun at 600× g for 5 min and vacuum aspirated to ∼100 μL residual volume. The barcoded cells were then resuspended in 1 mL 1× Four-Element EQ beads (Fluidigm), strained through blue-cap FACS tubes, and cells were recounted. CyTOF was performed on 7.87E6 cells in Pool 1 and 1.23E7 cells in Pool 2. FCS files were concatenated into a single FCS file utilizing the FCS concatenation tool from Cytobank.
Data was normalized using the Premessa normalizer tool in R (https://github.com/ParkerICI/premessa). CyTOF data was debarcoded and the panels were renamed using the same Premessa tool as above in R. The normalized, debarcoded, and renamed FCS files were uploaded to Cytobank for further downstream analyses of the data, including isolation and clustering of CD45+ cells with Phenograph. The fcs file containing the CD45+ pool with Phenograph coordinates was downloaded from Cytobank and loaded to the Cytofkit2 ShinyAPP via R (https://github.com/JinmiaoChenLab/cytofkit2), whereby the clusters were annotated and visualized on heatmaps and t-SNE plots.

## cDNA synthesis and quantitative PCR
cDNA synthesis was performed using the iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit (Biorad). Quantitative RT-PCR was run using SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (ThermoFisher Scientific) using a cycling program of 10 min at 95°C followed by 40 cycles of 95°C for 15 s and 95°C for 60 s. All primer sequences are available in .

## RNA sequencing and analysis
RNA concentration was quantified by Nanodrop (Nanodrop Technologies, Wilmington, DE) and 0.4 μg of each sample was submitted to Novogene (Novogene Corporation Inc., Sacramento, CA) for RNA sample QC, library preparation and sequencing (Illumina NovaSeq6000, 20M paired reads). FASTQ files were uploaded to Galaxy (usegalaxy.org), an open-source, web-based platform for sequencing analysis where we performed quality control (FastQC), mapped the reads to hg19 or mm10 reference genome (STAR aligner), counted reads per annotated gene (FeatureCounts), and determined differentially expressed features (DESeq2). Pathway enrichment analysis was performed using gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) combined with pathway definitions from MSigDB, KEGG, and Reactome databases (clusterProfiler). GSEA was run using pre-ranked mode for all genes based on log2 fold change derived from the differential expression analysis. Pathways with a normalized enrichment score >1 or < -1 at FDR <10% were considered significant. Heatmaps were generated using the ComplexHeatmap package in R. 

## Single-cell library preparation and sequencing
C57BL/6 mice injected with RCAS-BRAF glioma cells were treated as indicated for 2 weeks. Brains collected after intracardiac perfusion with 20mL of PBS were dissociated into single-cell suspensions using the mouse tumor dissociation kit (130-096-730; Miltenyi Biotec) and the gentleMACS Octo Dissociator according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Single-cell libraries of dissociated single cells were prepared using the BD Rhapsody platform (BD Biosciences). Single-cell suspensions obtained from the brains of individual tumor-bearing mice were stained with oligonucleotide-conjugated Sample Tags using the mouse Single-Cell Multiplexing Kit (cat# 633793) following the manufacturer’s protocol (BD Biosciences). Sorted live cells from barcoded samples were counted and pooled at equal ratios and loaded onto a BD Rhapsody cartridge for capture. Cell capture and library preparation were completed using the BD Rhapsody Whole Transcriptome Analysis (WTA) Amplification Kit (cat# 633801). Briefly, cells were captured with beads in microwell plate, followed by cell lysis, bead retrieval, cDNA synthesis, template switching and Klenow extension, and library preparation following the BD Rhapsody protocol. The quality of the final libraries was assessed by using an Agilent’s Bioanalyzer high sensitivity analysis and concentrations were measured by a Qubit method. The final libraries were diluted and normalized to 4nM and then pooled for paired-end sequencing on NovaSeq 6000 sequencer (Illuminia, San Diego, CA) in Novogene (Novogene Corporation Inc., Sacramento, CA).

## Analysis of single-cell RNA sequencing data
Rhapsody data were processed using the Seven Bridges Genomics cloud platform (San Francisco, CA) and BD Rhapsody Sequence Analysis Pipeline (v2.0) to quantify transcript levels with default parameters against the GRCm38 genome for BD Rhapsody scRNA-seq data. The plug-in Lex BDSMK was run to separate the Sample Tags. After analysis, output files were imported into the R package Seurat (version 4) for downstream clustering analysis and visualization. Briefly, cells were filtered, normalized, and the top 2000 highly variable features and the top 20 principal components were selected for further clustering analysis. Fourteen clusters were identified with the default resolution, including tumor and immune cell clusters based on the expression of their specific markers using http://mousebrain.org/adolescent/genesearch.html and Ma et al. Gene Ontology (GO) pathway enrichment analysis for differentially expressed genes between groups was performed using the clusterProfiler package. For sub-clustering analysis of tumor cells, CD4 and CD8 T cells, TAMs/microglia and dendritic cells, cells from the clusters of interest identified in primary clustering were extracted, reclustered and annotated based on subtype marker genes. Heatmaps for genes of interest were generated using the ComplexHeatmap package. 

## Quantification and statistical analysis
All significance calculations were conducted using GraphPad Prism software. Statistical significance was determined using an unpaired, two-tailed Student’s t test or two-way ANOVA method when more than two groups were being compared. Survival was analyzed by the Kaplan-Meier method using log rank (Mantel-Cox) test. Quantitative data are reported as mean ± SEM, and any values of p < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. ∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗∗∗p < 0.001 and ∗∗∗∗p < 0.0001.

 

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S7 and Tables S1–S7

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2025.102183.