319nihpaProgress in retinal and eye researchProg Retin Eye ResPMC126462861264628612646286NIHMS21216144027401210.1016/j.preteyeres.2025.101359Genetics and current research models of Mendelian tumor predisposition syndromes with ocular involvement
LozanoLola P JensenRenato JennischMadeleine PandalaNarendra G JamshidiFarzad BoldtH Culver TuckerBudd A BinkleyElaine M aInstitute for Vision Research, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, 52242, USAbDepartment of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, The University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA, 52242, USAcDepartment of Ophthalmology, University of Pittsburgh/UPMC, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA*Corresponding author. Institute for Vision Research, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, 52242, USA. Elaine-binkley@uiowa.edu (E.M. Binkley)
224202510610135910135926112025This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).The publisher's version of this article is available at Prog Retin Eye Res

## Abstract
In this review, we aim to provide a survey of hereditable tumor predisposition syndromes with a Mendelian inheritance pattern and ocular involvement. We focus our discussion on von Hippel-Lindau disease, neurofibromatosis type 1, NF2-related schwannomatosis, tuberous sclerosis complex, retinoblastoma, and the BAP1 tumor predisposition syndrome. For each of the six diseases, we discuss the clinical presentation and the molecular pathophysiology. We emphasize the genetics, current research models, and therapeutic developments. After reading each disease section, readers should possess an understanding of the clinical presentation, genetic causes and inheritance patterns, and current state of research in disease modeling and treatment.
Keywords: Inherited intraocular tumor, Retinoblastoma, Uveal melanoma, Cancer predisposition syndrome, Mendelian inheritance, BAP1 tumor predisposition syndrome, Tuberous Sclerosis, Neurofibromatosis, von Hippel-Lindau

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptyesis-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednohas-published-versionnoIssue date 2025 May.

1.

## Introduction
While inherited intraocular tumors are rare, they can have a profound effect on vision and quality of life. Mendelian-inherited tumor predisposition syndromes with ocular involvement include von Hippel-Lindau disease, neurofibromatosis type 1, NF2-related schwannomatosis, tuberous sclerosis complex, heritable retinoblastoma and the BAP1 tumor predisposition syndrome. These syndromes can produce non-malignant intraocular tumors that are not life-threatening but that can cause vision loss depending on the tumor’s size, location, and secondary effects such as retinal detachment or compression of the optic nerve. Further, the tumors in retinoblastoma and uveal melanoma associated with the BAP1 tumor predisposition syndrome can be both vision and life threatening. Notably, all six of these syndromes share an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern with tumor formation following Knudson’s two-hit hypothesis. This concept proposes that pathogenic mutations in tumor suppressor genes may be inherited in an autosome dominant manner, but that a second, pathogenic mutation must occur spontaneously in a somatic cell type capable of forming tumors for a mass to form( ). An additional feature shared by the ocular tumors in many of these syndromes is the lack of a cure and poor visual outcomes due to the need for local tissue destruction with treatment by laser therapy, radiation, or enucleation.
Understanding the genetic underpinnings of each of these diseases can assist with tumor modeling in vivo and in vitro using patient-derived cells. Ultimately, these disease models can be used to help develop improved, targeted molecular therapies. Ideally these treatments will have minimal side effects for patients and target their unique genetic profile. This is critical since the type of second hit mutation, effector mutations necessary for tumor formation, and mutations in other genes can all effect genotype-phenotype relationships and responses to treatment.

2.

## von Hippel-Lindau disease
2.1.

## Introduction
Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease is an autosomal dominantly inherited cancer predisposition syndrome. It affects approximately 1 in 36,000 individuals( ). Patients usually inherit one mutant allele of VHL, a tumor suppressor gene, from either parent. Tumors form after the second, unaffected VHL allele is spontaneously lost or inactivated. Notably, tumors only form in certain cell types, resulting in the unique subset of organs affected by VHL-associated tumors. It is unknown why only certain cell types are susceptible to tumor formation after VHL loss of heterozygosity ( ; ). While most patients inherit a mutant VHL allele, spontaneous mutations in both alleles can occur in up to 20 % of cases ( ). Patients develop tumors in a subset of organs: hemangioblastomas in the retina, cerebellum, and spinal cord; clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC); neuroendocrine tumors in the pancreas and adrenal glands (i.e. pheochromocytomas); and endolymphatic sac tumors in the inner ear. Patients also form cysts in the liver, pancreas, kidneys, epididymis in males, and broad ligament in females ( ; ). However, the types of tumors that affect individual patients depends upon their germline VHL mutation. For example, patients with missense variants that cause a gain of function mutation, only form pheochromocytomas and none of the other VHL associated tumors. These genotype-phenotype correlations enable clinicians to divide VHL disease into subclasses that can provide patients with prognostic information. Section 1.6 explores these associations in greater depth( ; ; ). Regardless of disease subclass, retinal hemangioblastomas are the most common tumor, affecting over half of diagnosed patients. These tumors are frequently the first manifestations of the disease identified( ). Over 25 % of patients with these tumors have permanent vision loss and 20 % have vision less than 20/100 in at least one eye. Over half of patients have bilateral lesions and 1/3 have multiple lesions ( ). Pre-symptomatic treatment has the greatest chance of maintaining good vision( ).

2.2.

## Epidemiology
Although patients can be affected at any age, the average age of presentation is 26-years-old. Sex of the affected parent or the proband does not affect age of onset or disease susceptibility. Similarly, age of onset is not affected by whether the mutation is familial or sporadic. By age 65, the disease has near complete penetrance (>90 %) with cerebellar and retinal hemangioblastomas being the most common manifestations. Prior to surveillance and methods of early tumor detection and treatment, the median age of expected survival was 49 years. This shortened lifespan was principally due to renal cell carcinoma followed by cerebellar hemangioblastomas( ; ). The current life expectancy for an individual with VHL disease is greater than 60 years with the primary cause of death due to central nervous system (CNS) hemangioblastomas( ).

2.3.

## Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made based on patients having either 1) a family history of VHL disease and one characteristic tumor or 2) a negative family history and two characteristic tumors, at least one of which is a retinal or CNS hemangioblastoma ( )( ; ). Confirmatory tests can identify a family’s specific primary mutation which may provide prognostic information and alter therapeutic decisions (see .).
 
2.4.

## Ocular features
Retinal hemangioblastomas appear on exam as well-circumscribed, red masses associated with dilated feeder vessels and often with surrounding exudation( ). 85 % of tumors are located in the peripheral retina while 15 % are near the optic disc (juxtapapillary) ( ). When localized to the peripheral retina, they most commonly occur in the superotemporal region( ). Retinal hemangioblastomas originate within the inner retina ( ). They can be endophytic and extend into the vitreous cavity or exophytic affecting the outer layers of the retina and growing towards the subretinal space ( ). Endophytic tumors are more common and easier to identify on exam. Juxtapapillary tumors may mimic optic disc edema, juxtapapillary choroidal neovascular membranes, or juxtapapillary choroiditis. While these tumors are typically slow growing and do not have metastatic potential, they can cause blindness due to their location and secondary processes such as exudative and/or tractional retinal detachment, pre-retinal membrane formation, and vitreous hemorrhage( ). Decreased macular perfusion and vascular density of both superficial and deep capillary plexuses has also been noted in patients with VHL disease regardless of the presence of retinal hemangioblastomas( ; ). Decreased perfusion of the peripheral retina has been observed in patients with VHL disease-associated retinal hemangioblastomas and is associated with more severe disease and poor ocular prognosis( ).
 
2.5.

## Confirmatory tests
Genetic testing is recommended for individuals who meet the clinical diagnostic criteria and those with a positive family history of VHL disease, including pre-symptomatic children since early screening can reduce disease-associated morbidity and mortality( ). Recently, the guidelines have been updated to recommend genetic testing for VHL mutations in patients who have only one retinal hemangioblastoma since diagnosing patients with VHL disease early on can improve their quality of life by identifying tumors when they are smaller and more easily treated( ). Additionally, patients may be referred to genetic counseling for consideration of testing when they present with either a CNS hemangioblastoma, pheochromocytoma, or endolymphatic sac tumor. They may also be referred for testing if they present with ccRCC that was diagnosed before or at 46 years of age, have bilateral or multiple renal tumors, or if they have at least one close relative with ccRCC. Genetic testing is usually done with Sanger sequencing of the coding region and deletion/duplication analysis. Genetic testing for pathogenic VHL mutations is 95–100 % sensitive ( ; ; ).

2.6.

## Genetics
Seizinger et al. mapped VHL to the short arm of chromosome 3 in 1988 using genetic linkage analysis with polymorphic DNA markers ( ). In 1993, Latif et al. cloned the entire VHL gene, localized to 3p25( ). The VHL gene is 11,890 nucleotides in length and encodes for a 4.7 kb mRNA transcript which consists of 3 exons (and one cryptic exon)( ; ). This transcript produces various isoforms. Isoform I includes all 3 exons and produces the largest VHL protein (pVHL), known as pVHL30 of pVHL213. pVHL30 consists of 213 amino acids and is 24–30 kDa. Isoform II is created from alternative splicing which excludes Exon 2 and codes for pVHL172, which is 172 amino acids in length. Isoform III produces pVHL19 or pVHL160 by using a translation start site internal to the open reading frame at which a methionine is located at codon 54. pVHL19 is 160 amino acids in length and 19 kDa in size. VHL isoforms I and II have been identified in all tissue types analyzed to date. Additional abnormal isoforms occur from alternative splicing via a cryptic exon located within intron 1 of VHL( ; ; ) ( ).
 Types of disease-causing mutations occur at different frequencies: approximately 16–40 % are deletions or insertions, 30–52 % are missense mutations, and 24–30 % are frameshift or nonsense mutations ( ; ). Splice site mutations have also been identified and reported to occur at a rate of 7 %( ). Although mutation type and location are diverse, certain mutation hotspot locations exist. This is evidenced by higher mutation rates in certain locations and by the same mutation occurring independently in unrelated families( ). Mutational hotspots tend to fall within the two protein binding regions of pVHL: the alpha domain, which binds to Elongin C, and the beta domain, which binds to all three family members of the alpha subunit of hypoxia inducible factor (HIF1a HIF2a, HIF3a), collectively referred to as HIFa( ; ; ). Binding of pVHL to Elongin C results in the formation of a protein complex that acts as a ubiquitin ligase to tag hydroxylated HIFa for degradation by the proteasome.
As described in , different germline mutations have been shown to cause predictable phenotypes (e.g. spared or susceptible to forming renal cell carcinoma) that have allowed for further subclassification of disease. Regardless, patients with loss of function mutations in VHL are susceptible to forming retinal hemangioblastomas( ; ). Disease-causing missense mutations affect tertiary protein structure and lead to disrupted function or misfolding. Other types of mutations such as gene deletions, frameshift mutations, nonsense variants, and splice site mutations reduce expression of pVHL ( ). Patients with Type I disease usually have exonic deletions, truncating mutations, or missense mutations that lead to high VHL instability and high levels of HIFa. Patients with Type 2 usually have missense mutations which retain partial functionality of pVHL ( ).
 In general, patients with missense or partial truncating mutations tend to have higher rates of retinal hemangioblastomas as well as increased severity and worse prognosis of these tumors( ; ; ). Interestingly, missense mutations have a higher rate of juxtapapillary tumors than protein truncating mutations( ). In contrast, patients with complete deletions of VHL are least affected and have the best prognosis compared to other VHL mutations( ). The reason why a complete gene deletion would lead to a less severe ocular tumor phenotype is unknown. Mixed results have been found as to whether the location of the mutation correlates with incidence of retinal hemangioblastoma formation. While some studies have found no correlation (Webster, 1999), others have found missense mutations in the alpha domain to have higher rates of retinal hemangioblastomas than missense mutations in the beta domain and that these tumors are more frequently juxtapapillary( ; ). Missense mutations in the beta domain had a higher frequency of retinal hemangioblastomas in the periphery ( ).
Finally, it is believed that patients must undergo a somatic second hit in tumor susceptible-cell types to form a VHL disease-associated tumor. This is in accordance with Knudson’s two hit hypothesis of loss of heterozygosity in tumor suppressor genes ( ; ). This sporadic mutation in a somatic cell can be a point mutation, deletion, or even promoter methylation of the VHL gene( ).

2.7.

## Molecular physiology
The larger protein product of VHL (pVHL) exists mainly in the cytosol but can translocate to the nucleus ( ). The smaller protein product, pVHL19, is found in equal distribution between the nucleus and the cytosol( ). pVHL has a cellular half-life of approximately 4–6 h( ). As previously mentioned, pVHL is expressed ubiquitously in all tissues ( ).
 Both biologically active forms of pVHL contain the alpha and beta domains which play important protein binding roles and are hot spots for pathogenic mutations as previously mentioned( ; ). The alpha domain permits binding with Elongin C which facilitates the formation of a protein complex along with Elongin B, Cullin-2, and RBX1. This protein complex functions as a ligase which specifically polyubiquitinates hydroxylated HIFa. HIFa is bound to this complex by the beta domain of pVHL. This ubiquitination signals the HIFa protein for degradation by the proteasome. Importantly, hydroxylation of either or both of two proline residues on the N-terminal or C-terminal region of HIFa is necessary for pVHL to bind. This hydroxylation is accomplished in normoxic conditions by members of the prolyl hydroxylase (PHD) or EGLN family ( ; ). In conditions of hypoxia or with mutated pVHL, HIFa does not get degraded and can translocate to the nucleus where it acts as a transcription factor in a complex with HIF1b, also known as Aryl Hydrocardon Receptor Neuclear Translocator (ARNT). This complex induces the expression of genes containing Hypoxia Response Element (HRE) consensus sequences, such as erythropoetin (EPO), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), and glucose transporter 1 (GLUT1) ( ; ). Interestingly, HIF1a and HIF2a activate the transcription of a partially overlapping set of genes. Some of the genes that promote transcription are antagonistic to one another such as mTOR where HIF1a suppresses but HIF2a promotes its transcription. Experimental studies have shown evidence that HIF2a plays a greater role in tumorigenic cellular processes, at least in clear cell renal cell carcinoma ( ).
pVHL has other, HIF-independent roles that are not believed to play a large role in tumor suppressor activity, especially with respect to hemangioblastomas ( , ; ). These other activities include control of microtubule stability and inflammation, maintenance of primary cilium, establishment of extracellular matrix, and regulation of other signaling cascades (e.g. Wnt) ( ; ; ).

2.8.

## Management and treatment
It is recommended that individuals at-risk or diagnosed with VHL disease adhere to a lifelong surveillance recommendations. Specific ophthalmic surveillance recommendations have also been established (2020; ; ). Surveillance is organ-specific with screening at different ages and frequencies based upon the typical age of onset of each tumor type ( ; ; ). Adaptations to screening intervals may be necessary since the frequency of organ-specific tumors varies with genotype ( ). Surgical resection has been the traditional method of disease management for symptomatic CNS hemangioblastomas, pheochromocytomas, and renal tumors of sufficiently large size to pose a metastatic risk ( ). However, belzutifan, a HIF2a inhibitor, was approved by the FDA in 2021 for the treatment of VHL disease associated ccRCC, CNS hemangioblastomas, and pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors ( ). It has been shown to successfully decrease ccRCC tumor size in about half of patients and decrease the number of disease-related surgeries. While belzutifan is a promising therapeutic for patients with VHL disease, it can cause severe side effects such as anemia (90 %), fatigue (66 %), headache (41 %), and dizziness (39 %) ( ). Other oral medications have been approved by the FDA for the treatment of ccRCC associated with defects in VHL and are reviewed elsewhere ( ).
VHL disease-associated ophthalmic lesions can be seen on dilated funduscopic exam, and multimodal imaging can be used to follow lesions and plan treatment. Fluorescein angiography can help distinguish the feeder artery from the vein and identify small, subclinical tumors which display early and late hyperfluorescence ( ). Widefield angiography can aid in improved detection of peripheral tumors and decreased perfusion in the periphery of the retina ( ; ; ). Ocular coherence tomography with and without angiography (OCT and OCT-A, respectively) can also be used to identify tumors and associated exudation, macular edema, epiretinal membranes, or subretinal fluid ( ; ; ; ). On OCT, tumors appear hyperreflective. OCT-A can be useful for detecting small tumors and early exophytic tumors ( ).
Small (<500 μm), uncomplicated retinal hemangioblastomas may be observed in some cases, but ablative treatment is frequently initiated promptly unless the tumor is located near the optic nerve or macula. Treatment is often carried out with laser photocoagulation which is nearly always effective at treating tumors less than 1.5 mm but can treat tumors up to 4.5 mm. Peripheral tumors between 1.5 and 4.5 mm usually require multiple sessions of thermal laser photocoagulation. These larger tumors are frequently treated with trans-scleral cryotherapy. There is no consensus amongst experts on how to treat peripheral tumors greater than 4.5 mm in diameter. Some ophthalmologists find success with cryotherapy, brachytherapy, vitrectomy with endocryotherapy, or surgical excision. If also treating vasculature supplying the retinal hemangioblastomas, it is critical to ablate the feeding artery prior to the draining venule as ablating the venule first can lead to vitreous hemorrhage that limits the view to the tumor. Other treatment methods include photodynamic therapy, low dose external beam radiation/proton beam therapy, transpupillary thermotherapy, and intra-vitreal anti-VEGF or steroids as an adjunct to control associated exudation. Juxtapapillary tumors can be observed or treated but not entirely ablated with photodynamic therapy. To minimize exudation that can decrease central vision, combinations of photodynamic therapy, proton beam radiation, intravitreal VEGF antagonists, or corticosteroids can be used ( ). Anti-VEGF injections as monotherapy have had limited efficacy ( ; ). The HIF2a inhibitor, belzutifan, showed efficacy in controlling the ocular tumors in 16 eyes of patients examined as part of the phase II study for use in renal cell carcinoma. The response rate of retinal hemangioblastomas to belzutifan was 100 % (95 % CI, 79.4 %–100 %) and during the time of follow up, none of the tumors demonstrated progression, no new retinal hemangioblastomas developed, and in a subgroup of patients with retinal hemangioblastomas who underwent additional clinical testing, all tumors decreased in size by 15 % or more( ). Belzutifan and other systemic agents will likely play a role in management of retinal hemangioblastoma in the future ( ; ; ).

2.9.

## Current research models
No animal model currently recapitulates the human phenotype seen in VHL disease. Biallelic knockout of Vhl in mice is embryonic lethal secondary to cardiac malformations and lack of placental vasculogenesis ( ). Mice that are heterozygous for a mutant Vhl allele have been found to exhibit no phenotype or cavernous liver hemangiomas depending upon what wildtype background strain they were mated to, suggesting an effect of modifier genes in the background ( ; ; ). Importantly, additional genetic alterations may be necessary to form VHL disease-associated tumors as evidenced by dysregulation of HIF in primary cells lacking VHL but which failed to form tumors when these cells were injected into mice ( ). Different cell types that exhibit various phenotypes have been targeted for biallelic Vhl knockout using methods of genetic recombination for conditional inactivation (i.e. Cre-Lox). For example, driving Cre under the PEPCK promoter for phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase targets knockout of Vhl in renal proximal tubule cells and hepatocytes. The resulting phenotype causes occasional renal cysts, liver hemangiomas, and polycythemia( ). The remainder of this section will focus on models of retinal hemangioblastomas caused by mutations in VHL. We refer readers interested in learning more about animal models of systemic VHL disease to ( ).
The cell type of origin forming retinal hemangioblastomas in humans is unknown. At the tissue level, retinal hemangioblastomas are thought to be identical to CNS hemangioblastomas affecting the spinal cord and cerebellum ( ). Histologically, these tumors consist of polyhedral foamy stromal cells of unknown origin, endothelium-lined vascular channels with pericytes, and reactive spindle-shaped glial cells ( , , ; Grossniklaus et al., 1992; ; ). The foamy stromal cells are thought to be the neoplastic cells of hemangioblastomas as they demonstrate loss of heterozygosity while endothelial cells retain their heterozygosity ( ; ; ).
Recent work suggests that the tumorigenic cell is a common mesoderm progenitor cell known as the erythro-myeloid progenitor, or hemangioblast ( ; ; ; ; ; ). In a compelling study for this argument, analyzed 31 resected CNS hemangioblastomas from patients with molecularly confirmed VHL disease. They identified the tumorigenic cells as those having undergone loss of heterozygosity compared to peripheral mononuclear cells. These cells expressed mesoderm markers: brachyury, FLK-1/VEGF-2, and Scl/Tal1. Additionally, they expressed markers of hematopoietic stem cells: CD133, CD34, c-kit, erythropoietin and its receptor. They described the cell markers on these tumors but were also able to differentiate these cells in culture into erythrocytic, granulocytic, and endothelial progenitor cells. The authors concluded that the tumor cell of origin is a developmentally arrested hemangioblast, which is a multipotent embryonic precursor capable of making hematopoietic (erythroid and myeloid lineages) and endothelial cells ( ).
Based on these findings, the same group created a mouse model of VHL disease-associated retinal hemangioblastomas by using an inducible genetic method to cause conditional knockout of Vhl only in cells expressing Scl. Two-week old transgenic mice carrying the Scl-Cre-ERT2 construct were injected with tamoxifen to induce Vhl knockout in a cell specific manner. They found retinal vascular lesions that exhibited tortuous and dilated vasculature surrounded by clusters of foamy stromal cells. The authors named these cell clusters “tumorlets” for their resemblance of characteristic cells identified in human VHL-associated hemangioblastomas. Furthermore, these tumorlet cells demonstrated loss of heterozygosity at the Vhl locus. They also observed dilated vasculature supplying the CNS and a subpopulation of these mice had tumorlet cells around pathogenic blood vessels in the brainstem. These lesions were not observed outside the retina or CNS. The authors conclude that their mouse model supports their clinical findings that suggest loss of VHL arrests development of the hemangioblast cell type, a progenitor to erythron-myeloid cells including microglia ( ).
 developed another mouse model of retinal hemangioblastomas similar to those found in patients with VHL disease. An adeno-associated virus (AAV6) was used to deliver Cre recombinase via injection into the eyes of mice with Vhl alleles flanked by LoxP sites. This method enabled them to knockout Vhl only in cells in the retina. They observed vascular abnormalities in these eyes, such as leakage and hemorrhage, 8 weeks after virus injection. They also found hemangioblastomas in all three retinal vascular plexuses ( ). In this mouse model of retinal hemangioblastomas created by Dr. Michael B. Gorin and Dr. Anna Matynia, there is an increased presence of ameboid, or activated, inflammatory microglia, at the lesion sites based on immunohistochemistry staining of the retinas. While they saw proliferation of blood vessels in these lesions, Gorin concluded that microglia are more likely to be the tumorigenic cell type since VHL disease does not cause vascular tumors in any other areas aside from the retina, cerebellum, brainstem, and spinal cord. Based on these results, Gorin sees future clinical potential in microglia ablation and repopulation in affected patients ( ).
This is a plausible hypothesis since microglia are present in the CNS and this recapitulates the distribution of VHL disease-associated hemangioblastomas in the retina and along the spinal cord, brainstem, and cerebellum ( ; ; ; ; ). Furthermore, microglia originate from embryonic mesoderm which expresses Scl ( ; ; ; ; ; ). Given the restricted distribution of hemangioblastomas to tissues that contain microglia and expression of erythro-myeloid progenitor or hemangioblast markers, this points to a progenitor of microglia as the likely neoplastic cell. Since experimental studies suggest that loss of VHL arrests hemangioblast development yet hemangioblastoma tumors are restricted to neural tissue, it begs the question whether hemangioblasts destined to differentiate into microglia are the susceptible cell type.

3.

## Neurofibromatosis type 1
3.1.

## Introduction
Neurofibromatosis Type 1 (NF1, von Recklinghausen disease) is a fully penetrant, autosomal dominant disease that affects many organs in the body but has a predilection for neural-crest-derived tissues ( ; ). Its estimated frequency is 1 in 2500–5000 births and has an estimated prevalence of 1 in 3000–6000 individuals ( ; ). Most patients have one allele of the NF1 gene mutated but do not form the characteristic tumors until somatic loss of function in the second allele occurs. This is due to the role of NF1’s protein product, neurofibromin, as a tumor suppressor ( ; ). Although phenotypic severity is highly variable, patients with NF1 most often suffer from neurofibromas, nerve sheath tumors forming along the cranial, spinal, and peripheral nerves in addition to the skin; cafe-au-lait macules (CALMs); scoliosis and long bone dysplasia; and gliomas that can form along the optic pathway and affect vision or form in the brain along with glioblastomas. Patients can also have intellectual disability( ).

3.2.

## Epidemiology
Patients with NF1 are more susceptible to forming cancers of the brain, breast, blood, endocrine, and connective tissues compared to the general population. On average, the leading cause of death in these patients is malignancy and their lifespan is overall reduced by 8–21 years( ).
With respect to ocular pathway gliomas (OPGs), these tumors usually appear before 10 years of age (median age at diagnosis: 4.5 years old). Fifteen to twenty percent of children with NF1 develop OPGs and half of these patients go on to develop visual symptoms( ; ; ). The incidence of OPGs is higher in Caucasian versus Black or Asian patients and biological females are 5–10 times more likely to suffer vision loss( ; ; ; ). Other risk factors for vision loss due to OPGs includes tumor diagnosis before 2 years of age and location posterior to the optic chiasm( ; ; ). Interestingly, atopic conditions (allergies, asthma, and eczema) are associated with a decreased risk of OPGs( ).

3.3.

## Diagnosis
Patients receive a clinical diagnosis when they meet the criteria outlined in . Genetic testing can be carried out for patients who do not meet clinical diagnostic criteria or lack a family history but in whom there is high suspicion of disease. This can be useful for distinguishing whether a patient has NF1 or a similar condition such as Legius syndrome, which manifests with skin findings and cognitive disfunction similar to NF1 but lacks NF1-associated tumors. Discriminating between these two conditions can affect patient management, treatment, and prognosis( ).
 
3.4.

## Ocular features
NF1 is characterized by several ocular features including Lisch nodules ( ), orbital and eyelid neurofibromas, retinal microvascular changes, choroidal abnormalities, retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) dysfunction, and optic pathway gliomas( ). Pathologies affecting the posterior pole can impact patients’ vision. RPE dysfunction observed in patients with NF1 have been measured by electro-oculogram. These findings have been described as supernormal, characterized by an increased Arden Index which is the ratio between light-phase peak amplitude and dark-phase trough amplitude. This NF1-specific discrepancy in the Arden Index is mainly due to lower-than-normal values during dark trough amplitudes, implicating alteration in RPE polarization differences( , ). It is speculated that this RPE dysfunction is reflected by choroidal abnormalities visualized as bright patchy areas with infrared imaging ( ). In addition, NF1-associated choroid nodules are a frequent finding. In rare cases, patients with NF1 have demonstrated vasculopathy in the retina such as acute ischemia secondary to retinal vascular occlusion( ; ). These effects on intraocular vasculature may reflect NF1’s ability to cause pathologic changes in all layers of any arterial wall, effectively creating a vasculopathy( ).
 While the ocular findings described thus far result from neurofibromin haploinsufficiency, or the decreased amount of functional protein as a result of a germline mutation in a single NF1 allele, formation of optic pathway gliomas requires biallelic loss of function in NF1( ; ). Optic pathway gliomas are tumors that can arise anywhere along the optic nerves, chiasm, tracts, and radiations( ). However, 75–85 % occur before the optic chiasm( ). They are composed of multiple nervous system cell types including neurons and glia (astrocytes, microglia, oligodendrocytes) and their precursor cells ( ; ). Most of these gliomas are categorized as pilocytic astrocytomas, detectable by imaging as hyperintense signal on T2 -weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and iso-intense signal on T1-weighted MRI. Additionally, gliomas do not enhance after gadolinium injection and do not disrupt local tissue architecture( ; ). Symptomatically, optic pathway gliomas can cause proptosis and vision loss if located along the optic nerve. Tumors located along the optic chiasm can cause precocious puberty and accelerated growth due to effects on the hypothalamus causing endocrine dysfunction. They can also produce secondary effects observable on ophthalmic exam such as an afferent pupillary defect, papilledema, and strabismus( ; ; ).

3.5.

## Confirmatory tests
Genetic testing for mutations in NF1 is not routinely carried out since no treatment exists and disease-associated conditions are managed symptomatically. When testing is performed, >95 % of pathogenic mutations in NF1 are identified with the clinical standards for molecular diagnosis using short-read DNA sequencing and fluorescent in situ hybridization. However, detection of the remainder of mutations in NF1 is challenging due to the large size of the gene (287,190 base pairs, ~60 exons), lack of hotspots, variety of disease-causing mutations, and mosaic or segmental inheritance( ). However, recent advancements improving the accuracy in long-range sequencing methods have demonstrated its ability to correctly identify pathogenic mutations detected. Furthermore, long-read sequencing enables haplotype phasing without the need for genetic samples from parents, identification of complex mutations affecting allelic architecture (e.g. if multiple potentially pathogenic mutations lie in cis or in trans to one another), identification of variants within highly repetitive or low complexity intergenic regions, or alterations within the epigenome. Because of this additional information, long-read sequencing has been able to identify pathogenic mutations in patients who previously lacked a molecular diagnosis due the limitations of current clinical genetic testing methods ( ). Our group has implemented Oxford Nanopore Technology’s long-read adaptive sequencing to identify the pathogenic mutations specifically in DNA isolated from fibroblasts grown in cell culture derived from skin punch biopsy from patients with a clinical diagnosis of NF1. With a read depth between 35 and 100x, one NF1 patient was heterozygous for a C > T alteration that created a STOP codon at chromosome 17 position 31229061. The other NF1 patient was heterozygous for a G > GT insertion that caused a frameshift mutation at chromosome 17 position 31233203.

3.6.

## Genetics
NF1 is located on chromosome 17q11.2. It is 287,190 base pairs long with approximately 60 exons( ). It encodes an mRNA transcript of 12 kilobases( ). The identification of the locus of the NF1 gene and characterization of its protein product occurred at the end of the 20th century( ; ; ; ; ; ). While the mutation can be inherited, 50 % of cases are sporadic and patients can also be mosaic or segmental for the mutation( ; ). Over 7000 patients have undergone genetic testing and over 3000 germline mutations have been identified in NF1( ). NF1 syndrome exhibits a wide range of phenotypic variability which can be modulated by various factors including the nature of the inherited mutation and/or the second somatic mutation causing loss of heterozygosity, genetic modifiers, sex hormones, tumor microenvironment, and age and cell type suffering loss of heterozygosity( ). Primary NF1 mutations are loss of function and secondary, somatic mutations can be caused by genetic or epigenetic mutations that lead to undetectable NF1 protein levels in the affected cell type( ).
In general, few genotype-phenotype relationships have been established although there are several exceptions. For example, microdeletions, which excise NF1 with or without other neighboring genes, are associated with facial abnormalities, cognitive dysfunction, and increased cancer risk. On the other hand, missense mutations in codon 1809 or a 3-base pair in-frame deletion in exon 17 at codon 991 are associated with milder phenotypes with patients lacking both neurofibromas and optic pathway gliomas( ; ; ; ; ). Children with germline mutations in the 5’ end of the gene and with mutations affecting codons 844–848 are more likely to develop optic pathway gliomas ( ; ; ). Identical NF1 mouse models, differing only in the patient-specific NF1 mutation they carry, exhibit differences in optic pathway glioma formation and pathology, suggesting that there are likely more genotype-phenotype relationships between NF1 mutations and optic pathway gliomas that need to be investigated( ; ).

3.7.

## Molecular physiology
Neurofibromin, the protein product of NF1, is a ~220 kDa protein composed of 2818 amino acids ( )( ; ). It acts as a tumor suppressor protein that suppresses the RAS-MEK-ERK/MAPK and RAS-AKT-mTOR signaling pathways( ). It does this by converting RAS-GTP to its inactive RAS-GDP form via its GTPase-activating protein (GAP) or GAP-related (GRD) domain of its protein sequence( ). Loss of neurofibromin therefore leads to increased activity of these pathways which leads to increased cell survival and proliferation ( ). Neurofibromin also positively regulates cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) levels and Nf1-mutant mouse models have shown that subsequent decreases in cAMP lead to retinal ganglion cell death which can be rescued with drugs that increase cAMP levels ( ; ).
 Although neurofibromin is widely expressed in cells throughout the body, loss of neurofibromin has its largest effect in neural-crest derived cells such as Schwann cells and melanocytes ( ; ). While some manifestations of NF1 disease are caused by haploinsufficiency, loss of heterozygosity in NF1 is required for benign tumor formation, and additional genetic mutations are required for the tumors to acquire metastatic potential( ; ).

3.8.

## Management and treatment
As per the NF1-OPG Task Force and the American Academy of Pediatrics, children diagnosed with NF1 should undergo yearly ophthalmic screenings for optic pathway gliomas beginning at 8–9 months of age and continuing until the patient reaches 8-years-old( ; ; ; ). Development of these tumors after the age of ten years old is rare and therefore screenings should be done less frequently and is currently recommended that patients receive ophthalmic exams every 2 years until the age of 18-years-old. Ophthalmic exam should include a thorough physical exam, assessment of visual acuity, color vision, visual fields, ocular motility, and eye alignment( ). OCT can also be used to monitor changes in retinal nerve fiber layer thickness as a biomarker of retinal ganglion cell health( ). If patients develop vision loss or signs of neurologic dysfunction or precocious puberty, they should receive an MRI to evaluate for tumor in the posterior ophthalmic tract( ). If an optic pathway glioma is identified, it should be imaged every 3 months for a year to monitor progression( ).
As with the other manifestations of NF1, ocular findings are treated symptomatically. The goal of treating ocular tumors is to preserve vision. Chemotherapy (carboplatin and vincristine) are currently the standard of care and radiation therapy is contraindicated due to the elevated risk for NF1 patients to form additional malignancies( ). Second line chemotherapies include vinorelbine paired with temozolomide and bevacizumab paired with irinotecan( ). However, chemotherapy often does not stop or reverse vision loss( ).
Molecularly targeted therapies have begun to emerge albeit with mixed results( ). These include inhibitors of RAS targets such as proteins in the RAS-MEK-ERK/MAPK and RAS-AKT-mTOR pathways. MEK inhibitors like selumetinib and trametinib are currently being tested in clinical trials as they have been successful at decreasing optic pathway gliomas in animal models( ; ). Unfortunately, these drugs come with significant side effects. One of these side effects is known as MEK inhibitor-associated retinopathy (MEKAR) in which patients develop serous retinal detachments with visual symptoms similar to central serous chorioretinopathy ( )( ; ; ). In a prospective study of 51 patients with locally advanced or metastatic cancer treated with the MEK inhibitor binimetinib, 90 % developed MEKAR ( ). Other inhibitors of the RAS-MEK-ERK/MAPK pathway can also cause a MEKAR presentation (e.g. MAPK inhibitors like ulixertinib or FGFR inhibitors like infigratinib or erdafitinib)( , ; ). Most MEKAR cases occur in the first cycle of drug treatment and are found bilaterally, multifocally with a symmetric presentation, and have a predilection for the fovea( ). Importantly, this side effect can cause decreased visual acuity, however, in a large series of patients with this side effect no eyes had a loss of more than two lines of vision from their baseline and after the fluid resolved, no eyes were worse than one line from their baseline ( , ). Interestingly, a recent case series also documented a correlation between ocular hypertension and the use of three different MEK inhibitors in three patients being treated for metastatic cholangiocarcinoma or Langerhans cell histiocytosis, suggesting that MEK inhibitors, regardless of class, may cause elevated intraocular pressure( ). Each of these was successfully managed with the addition of topical therapy and patients did not require a dose hold of their systemic agent. ( ).
 Other experimental therapies to treat optic pathway gliomas specifically include targeting the tumor environment by decreasing the activity of microglia known to promote tumorigenesis with drugs like the antibiotic minocycline( ). These treatments are known as “ecological therapies” since they do not target the tumor itself. However, it has been emphasized that therapies aimed at preventing continued vision loss need to focus on keeping retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) alive and healthy which might involve increased cAMP levels in these cells with drugs like rolipram, a phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitor, or administering neuroprotective factors like brain-derived neurotropic factor (BDNF) or nerve growth factor (NGF). A small clinical trial found that NF1 patients with optic pathway gliomas receiving eye drops containing NGF had improved RGC function and improved vision compared to the group of patients receiving placebo eye drops( ; ; ). Other potential therapies that have been investigated in pre-clinical rodent models incorporate a personalized medicine approach. These candidate treatments include gene editing and cell-based methods that reprogram Muller glia into RGCs or delivering autologous stem-cell derived RGCs into the retina ( ; ; ; ). However, less work has been conducted on evaluating these methods of treatment.

3.9.

## Current research models
Given that NF1 is a rare disease and optic pathway gliomas are not typically excised, there is a relative lack of human specimens for research analysis( ). Thus, researchers have come to rely on animal models as a proxy of human disease. While mice homozygous for a null Nf1 allele die in utero due to cardiac malformation, those that are heterozygous survive into adulthood and resemble wildtype counterparts( ; ; ). No mouse model to date fully captures the clinical phenotype exhibited by human patients( ). The Cre-lox system has enabled the creation of mice with Nf1 knocked out in cell types of interest. These mice have become an effective tool for modeling these OPGs. Modeling these tumors helps us to understand optic pathway glioma pathophysiology and develop targeted treatment modalities( ).
One way these transgenic, conditional mouse models of NF1 have meaningfully contributed to our understanding of NF1-associated optic pathway gliomas is in helping identify the tumor cell of origin. Here we discuss one such model as an example of the research that identified neural precursor cells at the tumor origin cell type. Zhu et al., created a transgenic mouse model with Nf1 knocked out in cells expressing human glial fibrillary acidic protein (hGFAP), a marker of mature astrocytes and some neuronal progenitor cells. In these mice, gray and white matter in the brain showed astrocytosis in adults but that the proliferation of these cells was confined to the timing of glial development in early postnatal life when neurogenesis is completed (postnatal day 8). Thus, the authors conclude that Nf1 loss induces proliferation of glial progenitors, not astrocytes in their mature form. Furthermore, they found that older transgenic mice co-expressed GFAP and nestin, a marker of progenitor cells, in cells that morphologically resembled astrocytes. Based on this finding they conclude that Nf1 may play a role in maintaining mature astrocyte cell identity. They did not find any evidence of tumor formation in the brains of these mice. Conversely, they found that 6 out of the 29 mutant mice developed lesions along the optic nerves that resembled NF1 patient-derived optic pathway gliomas on histology. However, the mouse-derived tumors lacked Rosenthal fibers and granular bodies that are found in patient-derived tumors. The authors state that this does not discredit their model as pilocytic astrocytomas in patients display a vast range of histologic findings and that their mouse-derived tumors are representative of early gliomas. They also found that all mutant mice exhibited dysplasia and increased cellularity as 18 of these mice had enlarged diameter optic nerves. Interestingly, astrocytes from control optic nerves co-expressed nestin and GFAP whereas astrocytes in the optic pathway gliomas of mutant mice primarily only express GFAP. They also found a five-to-ten-fold increase in cell proliferation of glial progenitor cells but not mature astrocytes in the optic nerves of mutant mice. Finally, elevated MAPK was found in astrocytes and glial progenitor cells. It is interesting that loss of Nf1 in GFAP-expressing cells is insufficient to cause brain gliomas but is sufficient to cause optic nerve gliomas in about 20 % of these mutant mice( ).
Around the same time that the study discussed above was published, another report came out that also knocked out Nf1 in GFAP expressing cells albeit at a later time point (embryonic day 14.5 versus embryonic day 10.5)( ). This study found optic nerve hyperplasia only in Nf1 flox/- mice not Nf1 flox/flox mice. These results may be due to differences in experimental design (e.g. hGFAP-Cre vs GFAP-Cre) and/or may highlight that the disease phenotype may become less severe if genetic knockout occurs later in cellular development when the targeted cells are more mature. Other studies driving the expression of Cre recombinase under the promoters for neural progenitor cells (e.g. Blbp, Prom1, and Oligo2) have supported this general category of cells as the tumor origin cells( ; ; ; ; ). Conversely, inducing Cre expression under the Prom1 promoter at time points beyond postnatal day 1 did not result in optic glioma formation( ; ). Further supporting neural progenitors as the tumor origin cell type, the cells that form these experimental optic pathway gliomas originate from the subventricular zone of the third ventricle which is where neural progenitor cells normally reside and rapidly divide in early development to contribute to optic nerve formation( ; ).
In addition to optic pathway gliomas, mice also exhibit NF1-associated vision loss caused by Nf1 heterozygous retinal ganglion cell axon damage, apoptosis, and subsequent retinal nerve fiber layer thinning (RNFL)( ; ). This process is exacerbated in female mice by estrogen stimulating microglia which attack the RGCs( ). This death of heterozygous Nf1 RGCs and subsequent thinning of the RNFL and vision loss is attenuated in mouse models treated with Ras inhibitors or phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitors that increase cAMP levels( ; ; ). While decreased cAMP contributes to NF1’s effect on RGCs, these mouse models have also revealed that the local tumor environment also influences this aspect of pathophysiology and optic pathway glioma formation. For example, tumor formation and growth is dependent on microglia in the local environment. Microglia are recruited by Nf1 haplo-insufficient cells secreting chemokines and the microglia themselves secrete tumorigenic cytokines like Ccl5 and Cxcl12 ( ; ). Loss of Nf1 in glial cells is insufficient to cause tumor formation and relies upon a tumor microenvironment of Nf1 heterozygous cells like microglia( ; ; ; ; ). Furthermore, these microglia produce neurotoxins (e.g. IL-1b) which lead to RGC death, optic nerve damage, and decreased visual acuity( ). T cells recruited to the tumors by secretion of Ccl2 also contribute to tumor formation by producing Ccl4 which regulates microglia function and their production of Ccl5( ; ).
An interesting relationship has been found in mice between optic pathway glioma formation and Nf1 heterozygous RGCs. It appears that optic pathway glioma formation is dependent upon mutant Nf1-mediated hyperactivity of RGCs which causes them to stimulate tumorigenesis via 1) shedding of neuroligin-3, which acts as a glioma growth molecule, and 2) production of midkine, which activates T cells to produce Ccl4. Thus, optic pathway glioma growth has been prevented or halted with treatments that inhibit this RGC hyperactivity such as inhibiting potassium channels or raising mice in dark conditions ( ; ; ). Studies have shown inhibition of optic glioma growth in NF1 mouse models for the duration of treatment with drugs that inhibit the pathways downstream of Ras (MAPK, Akt-PI3K-mTOR, and cAMP)( ).
Finally, a minipig model of NF1 was recently created to more closely mimic human disease. These pigs were genetically engineered to carry a recurrent nonsense mutation found in a large group of unrelated patients affected with NF1 (p.Arg1947*). These minipigs develop optic pathway gliomas in addition to other characteristic features of NF1. They also demonstrate loss of heterozygosity in NF1 only in cell types susceptible for forming disease related manifestations (e.g. melanocytes for café-au-lait macules)( ).
Our lab has started to model optic nerve gliomas using pluripotent stem cells derived from patients with NF1. As previously described, fibroblasts are isolated from dermal biopsies from affected patients( ). These cells are reprogrammed into induced pluripotent stem cells, which are then differentiated into retinal organoids after passing quality control measures to ensure pluripotency and no chromosomal abnormalities. After more than 40 days, the retinal ganglion cells are disassociated and isolated using flow cytometry. These iPSC-derived RGCs stain positively for cell-specific markers like MAP2 and HuD ( and ). Our goal is to culture NF1 RGCs into engineered microphysiologic culture systems ( – ) with brain derived neurotrophic factor containing beads or brain organoids ( and ) at the opposite end to promote axon outgrowth. By adding iPSC-derived glial cells ( ) to the axonal compartment ( ) we hope to more closely model the optic nerve and evaluate the potential for optic pathway glioma formation in the dish.
 

4.

## NF2-related schwannomatosis
4.1.

## Introduction
NF2-Related Schwannomatosis (NF2, formerly Neurofibromatosis Type 2) is an autosomal dominant, inherited tumor predisposition syndrome that causes formation of several CNS tumors including vestibular schwannomas/acoustic neuromas, meningiomas, and ependymomas. Depending on the location of these tumors, they can cause loss of motor or sensory function and induce pain. NF2 has an incidence of 1:25,000–28,000 and a prevalence of 1:50,000–100,000( ; ). NF2’s protein product, merlin, acts as a tumor suppressor. Thus, a pathogenic mutation in the second allele is required for tumorigenesis. Half of patients inherit one mutated allele, and the other half possess a mutated allele via sporadic mutation that can affect all cells in the body or only some, causing a segmental or mosaic disease presentation( ). While bilateral vestibular schwannomas are the most common and characteristic disease manifestation affecting patients with NF2, patients can suffer from a range of ocular effects including retinal hamartomas, optic disc gliomas, and optic nerve sheath meningiomas which can lead to blindness ( ). Importantly, NF2 demonstrates strong genotype-phenotype correlations allowing research models of specific mutations( ). To date, however, no ocular models of NF2 disease exist.

4.2.

## Epidemiology
NF2 usually clinically manifests between 18 and 24 years of age, but patients have been diagnosed from birth to the seventh decade ( ). NF2 exhibits a penetrance of 95–100 % by 60 years with nearly all patients developing the pathognomonic bilateral vestibular schwannomas by the age of 30( ; ; ). The average lifespan of affected patients is 36 years( ). However, this varies widely due to a well-established correlation between genotypes and phenotypes, which enables prediction of disease severity and mortality (see ). Patients with early disease onset (e.g., in childhood) have worse prognosis indicated by increased NF2-specific morbidity, which correlates with disease-related mortality( ; ; ). Other risk factors that predict mortality include the presence of intracranial meningiomas and treatment at non-specialty centers( ).

4.3.

## Diagnosis
Patients are diagnosed based off the Manchester criteria ( ). Bilateral vestibular schwannomas are pathognomonic for NF2, and their presence is sufficient for diagnosis. The first NF2-associated ocular symptoms that usually manifest in patients are diplopia or decreased visual acuity( ). However, presymptomatic ophthalmic findings can aid in diagnosing NF2 in a patient with a family history or who is highly suspected of having NF2 but fails to meet diagnostic criteria. For example, juvenile posterior capsular and peripheral cortical lens opacities are present in ~80 % of affected patients but do not typically cause notable visual disturbances( ).
 
4.4.

## Ocular features
NF2 can cause ocular pathology that affects both the anterior and posterior segments. NF2 causes several types of ocular tumors: combined hamartoma of the retina and retinal pigment epithelium (CHRRPE), optic disc glioma, and optic nerve sheath meningioma (ONSM) ( )( ). In addition to tumors, common NF2-associated ocular features include posterior subcapsular and cortical cataracts and epiretinal membranes( ). Recent work using OCT imaging has suggested that posterior retinal tufts may also be more common in individuals with NF2( ).
 Posterior subcapsular lens opacity is the most common NF2-associated ocular feature( ). Additionally, epiretinal membranes due to NF2 have unique characteristics including histological composition of Muller cells and OCT showing anteriorly projecting edges and an irregular internal limiting membrane( ; ). Ocular manifestations of NF2 frequently present before other tumors and thus can be an important harbinger for systemic disease. It is important that ophthalmologists be aware of these associations as early molecular diagnosis can allow for appropriate screening and treatment of tumors. For example, the presence of retinal hamartomas is associated with more severe systemic disease( ; ; ). Bosch et al. studied 30 patients with NF2 and found that all patients who had CHRRPE, disc gliomas, and ONSM had childhood onset of the disease and significantly more ONSMs compared to patients affected by disease onset in adulthood. NF2-associated ocular tumors can also result in papilledema, optic atrophy, increased intracranial pressure, glaucoma, and ocular motility disorders. Tumors can also result in impairment of eyelid position due to facial nerve or oculomotor nerve palsy which can lead to keratopathy.

4.5.

## Confirmatory tests
NF2 is a clinical diagnosis, but patients can elect to undergo genetic testing. Blood can be analyzed with gene sequencing, gene array, chromosomal microanalysis, or whole exome sequencing. If a pathogenic variant is not identified on unaffected tissue, molecular analysis should be conducted on tumor tissue. Confirmation of the pathogenic variant can be performed by identifying the same variant in another type of affected tissue. Importantly, tumor-derived tissue should demonstrate pathogenic mutations on both alleles. Once these are identified, the presence of either mutation can be evaluated in non-affected tissue to assess for mosaicism( ). Next generation sequencing has a sensitivity of 90 % for identifying germline mutations but only a 25–60 % sensitivity for identifying spontaneous mutations due to somatic mosaicism( ).

4.6.

## Genetics
The locus of NF2 is 22q12.2( ) and the NF2 gene has 17 exons( ). As mentioned in the introduction, 50 % of patients with NF2 have a de novo mutation. Of those, 25–50 % have somatic mosaicism for the mutation. There is a strong genotype-phenotype correlation, and mutations can be categorized with the UK NF2 Genetic Severity Score into mild (2A), moderate (2B), or severe (3)( ; ). Truncating mutations and those affecting the amino-terminal portion of merlin are associated with severe disease referred to as the Wishart phenotype. Missense and splice site mutations, usually at the carboxy-terminal end, are associated with milder disease that has an onset in adulthood, known as the Gardner phenotype( ). Regardless of location within NF2, nonsense and frameshift mutations are associated with a severe disease phenotype( ). Truncating mutations in exons 2–13 cause more severe disease than other mutations( ; ). Missense and mosaic mutations are associated with decreased mortality and splice site mutations have variable effects on clinical presentations. Mutations between exons 8 and 15 lead to a milder phenotype than mutations closer to the 5’ end of the gene ( ; ; ). Large deletions are also associated with a milder phenotype( ). While truncating mutations can limit patients lifespan to the mid-forties, patients with splice site and missense mutations typically have lifespans into the seventies( ). Ocular NF2-manifestations also follow these genotype-phenotype correlations( ; ). We refer the reader interested in learning more about genotype-phenotype severity based on germline versus mosaic mutations to the review by ( ).

4.7.

## Molecular physiology
NF2 produces the membrane-cytoskeletal scaffolding protein, merlin (also known as schwannomin and neurofibromin 2), which is found mainly in Schwann cells at adherens junctions( ). Merlin is 595 amino acids long and has a molecular weight of 70 kDa ( ) ( ). Merlin has 10 isoforms with isoforms 1 and 2 being the most prevalent. Its presence changes depending upon the isoform, but it is primarily found in neurons, Schwann cells, meningeal cells, and lens cells( ). It acts as a tumor suppressor by regulating cell adhesion, inhibiting cell migration, and promoting apoptosis. It inhibits Rac and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling cascades, maintains TGFb receptor 2 (TbR2) expression, and increases the stabilization of adherens junctions. Importantly, merlin acts as a negative regulator of the Hippo signaling pathway by activating LATS2/2 kinases leading to inhibition of YAP/TAZ. The effects of Hippo pathway inhibition lead to decreased cell proliferation and increased apoptosis. The tumorigenic effect of loss of NF2 increasing Hippo signaling has been demonstrated in multiple models( ). Overall, merlin, inhibits the following pathways: PI3K, Raf/ERK, Wnt/b-catenin, RTKs (receptor tyrosine kinases), and mTOR( ).
 
4.8.

## Management and treatment
It is recommended that patients with NF2 be seen by a neuro-ophthalmologist once or twice a year( ). Diagnosed or at-risk patients should undergo annual neurologic and ophthalmologic exams. Patients should also receive hearing tests annually. From approximately age 10 until at least forty-years-old, patients should have an annual brain MRI( ). For patients of child bearing age preimplantation and/or prenatal genetic testing may be considered for family planning( ).
There is no cure for NF2 and patients are managed symptomatically (e.g., hearing aids and cochlear implants for bilateral vestibular schwannomas). If tumors are sufficiently large to cause symptoms, they can be surgically excised or undergo radiotherapy for tumors that are inoperable( ). Numerous drug therapies are currently under preclinical and clinical investigation. Both VEGF and its receptor (VEGFR) have been targeted in clinical trials with drugs like bevacizumab and axitinib, respectively. While both showed promising efficacy at decreasing schwannoma vascular supply, both are limited in their potential by route of administration, side effects, drug resistance, or toxicity. Clinical trials are currently underway to evaluate the efficacy of other targeted drugs to treat NF2-associated tumors including the MEK inhibitor, selumetinib; a histone deacetylease (HDAC) inhibitor, REC-2282; a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, brigatinib; and crizotinib, an inhibitor of Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase (ALK) and c-ros oncogene 1 (ROS1)( ; ). P21-activated kinases (Paks) are part of the Rac signaling cascade and inhibitors of these kinases in in vitro cell and in vivo mouse models of NF2 have been shown to decrease cell proliferation and mobility( ). Other drugs being investigated as potential treatments in preclinical models target molecules like TGFb receptor 1 kinase, the pathology-induced interaction between T-box Brain Transcription Factor 1 (TbR1) and Ras Kinase Inhibitory Protein (RKIP), CRL4DCAF1 ubiquitin ligase, mammalian Target Of Rapamycin (mTOR) and phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K), fatty acid synthase, and multiple tyrosine kinases including EphA2, Fer, and focal adhesion kinase 1 (FAK1)( ).

4.9.

## Current research models
Biallelic knockout of NF2 is embryonic lethal and mouse models heterozygous for NF2 mutations known to be pathogenic in humans do not recapitulate clinical features of NF2 in patients( ). Therefore, some groups have taken to overexpressing mutant forms of NF2 in mouse models. These mutant genes are driven under a Schwann cell-specific promoter and result in a Schwann cell hyperplasia and tumors, suggesting a role for a dominant negative phenotype with some mutations( ; ). Additional mouse models of NF2 have relied upon conditional knockout of NF2. Using the same Schwann cell promoter to drive knockout, the mice displayed characteristic clinical features such as Schwann cell hyperplasia and tumors, cataracts, and cerebral calcifications( ). Adenoviral delivery of Cre to meningeal cells also results in tumors that resembled human tumors on histologic examination( ). Another group drove NF2 knockout by expressing Cre under the promoter for Periostin, which is specific for Schwann cell progenitors. Their mice developed schwannomas localized to the dorsal root ganglion and proximal spinal nerves. On histologic analysis, these tumors resembled human NF2-associated schwannoma specimens. These tumors were also found to affect cranial nerves V (trigeminal), VII (facial), and VIII (vestibulocochlear). They did not evaluate the mouse eyes for ocular pathology( ).
While establishing cell lines from patient-derived tumors is challenging, one such line has been successfully established. HEU193 is an immortalized NF2-associated schwannoma cell line that has been shown to be tumorigenic when injected into mice( ; ). Additional patient-derived xenograft models of NF2-associated tumors have also been created. Patient-derived schwannomas, neurofibromas, and neuromas have grown when injected into nude or severe combined immunodeficiency mice( ; ; ; ). One group was able to successfully establish cell lines from their patient-derived schwannoma xenografts, but not from the patient-derived tumors themselves. Molecular and histopathological analysis revealed that these xenograft-derived cell lines mimicked their corresponding patient’s tumor characteristics( ).

5.

## Tuberous sclerosis complex
5.1.

## Introduction
Tuberous Sclerosis Complex (TSC) is a rare neurocutaneous syndrome and mTORopathy. It demonstrates a global prevalence of 1/6000–14,000 individuals. Familial autosomal dominant inheritance accounts for one-third of cases, with the remainder of cases due to de novo mutations. Mutations in TSC1 or TSC2 lead to overactivation of the mTOR pathway causing anomalous neural migration leading to seizures, neuropsychiatric disorders and cell proliferation forming tumors and hamartomas. Affected tissue include skin, teeth, bones, heart, lungs, kidneys, brain, and eyes. It is presumed that a second hit is necessary to form most TSC-associated tumors, including the main ocular feature, retinal astrocytic hamartoma( ). While most retinal hamartomas are benign, their location in the retina can lead to vision loss and some can become aggressive and necessitate enucleation. A recent gene therapy study in a mouse model of TSC demonstrated decreased brain pathology, which has potential implications for treating patients with symptomatic ocular features( ).

5.2.

## Epidemiology
The incidence of TSC is estimated to be approximately 1/5000–10,000 live births. TSC does not demonstrate a predilection for sex or ethnicity( ) and the age of onset is highly variable ( ). Patients diagnosed with TSC frequently live into adulthood however they do have a decreased expected lifespan relative to the general population. The most common cause of disease-related mortality is its effects on the kidneys which can lead to renal failure, hemorrhage, and renal cell carcinoma. Other documented causes of TSC-related mortality are mainly due to the effects on the cardiopulmonary system as well as epilepsy (e.g., status epilepticus and sudden infant death syndrome).( ).

5.3.

## Diagnosis
Definitive diagnosis is established by meeting genetic or clinical phenotype criteria ( ). Genetic diagnosis is established by the presence of a pathogenic or likely pathogenic mutation in TSC1 or TSC2, regardless of clinical phenotype. A definitive diagnosis established by clinical phenotype is confirmed by the presence of either 2 major features or 1 major and 2 minor features. Possible TSC is established if the patient has 1 major or 2 or more minor features( ).
 Cutaneous findings include hypomelanotic macules (“ash leaf” or “confetti lesions”), poliosis, facial angiofibomas, fibrous cephalic plaques on the scalp and forehead, shagreen patches on the trunk or lower back, and ungal fibromas affecting the nail cuticle. The oral cavity can be affected by dental enamel defects and gingival fibromas. Patients can also develop sclerotic bone cysts( ). CNS findings include cortical tubers (pathognomonic lesion characterizing TSC), subependymal nodules, and subependymal giant cell astrocytomas. These tumors can cause epilepsy, infantile spasms, and TSC-associated neuropsychiatric disorders like ADHD, anxiety, depression, aggression, intellectual disability, learning disorders, behavioral and interpersonal challenges( ). Pulmonary findings include lymphangioleiomyomatosis, especially in post-pubertal females due to increased levels of estrogen, which can lead to spontaneous pneumothorax. The lungs can also be affected by multifocal micronodular pneumocyte hyperplasia, which does not typically affect lung function ( ). Renal findings include cysts, renal angiomyolipomas, and rarely renal cell carcinoma. Renal involvement can lead to hypertension and renal failure( ). Patients can develop pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors, which are usually asymptomatic or nonfunctional( ). In utero, patients can develop cardiac rhabdomyomas that usually involute after birth. Adults can also be affected by cardiac arrhythmias, specifically Wolf-Parkinson-White syndrome( ).

5.4.

## Ocular features
Patients with TSC can develop retinal (astrocytic) hamartomas composed of astrocytes and blood vessels in the nerve fiber layer or at the optic nerve head ( )( ; ). It is presumed that a second hit mutation is necessary for tumor formation( ). These tumors are usually stable and visually insignificant but can cause decreased vision if located in the fovea or optic nerve( ; ). They can also rarely develop an exudative response with associated retinal detachment. Rare cases of aggressive, growing tumors have been documented and have resulted in the need for enucleation due to uncontrolled glaucoma and retinal detachment( ).
 Tumors form in about 50 % of patients and are bilateral in 30 % of cases( ). However, one study of 100 TSC patients identified ocular findings in 87 %( ). Retinal hamartomas are described in three categories: flat and translucent, nodular, or transitional. Flat lesions are the most common type, affecting 50–70 % of patients. They are usually found along the ends of the arcades and can be difficult to appreciate due to their translucent edges and light gray or yellow color. Nodular lesions occur in ~50 % of patients and are characterized by having well-defined edges, a raised surface, and calcifications. They have been described as “mulberry lesions”. Transitional lesions occur in ~9–12 % of patients and demonstrate a combination of features including translucent, flat edges with a raised central nodule. Other ocular findings include hypopigmented patches in the retina, iris, and ciliary body; iris and choroid colobomas; iris and ciliary epithelium hamartomas, and eyelid angiofibromas ( ; ).

5.5.

## Confirmatory tests
Genetic mutations are diagnosed in 85–90 % of cases with targeted gene sequencing, multiple gene panels, or whole genome or exome sequencing. The 10–15 % of cases without a pathogenic mutation identified are assumed to be due to somatic mosaicism, mutations in intronic regions, or in genes that mimic the disease( ; ; ).

5.6.

## Genetics
TSC1 is located on chromosome 9q34 and encodes for the protein TSC1 or hamartin. The gene is 53284 nucleotides long and encompasses 23 exons, of which exons 3–23 contain the coding sequence( ; ). A third of TSC mutations occur in this gene. Missense mutations account for only 6 % of pathogenic mutations in this gene and are usually found in exons 2,3,7, and 8. This is notable since exons 4–9 in the N-terminal domain are important for hamartin function and stability( ; ). Most pathogenic mutations in TSC1 are truncating variants (e.g., 57 % are indels, and the remaining 37 % are large deletions, rearrangements, nonsense or splice variants)( ; ). Most mutations tend to occur in exons 15 and 16. Mutations that delete multiple exons of the entire gene are rare( ).
TSC2 is located on chromosome 16p13.3 and encodes the protein TSC2 or tuberin( ). The gene is 40723 nucleotides long and contains 42 exons( ). Pathogenic variants in TSC2 account for two-thirds of mutations in affected patients. 26 % of the TSC2 mutations are missense variants with ~50 % affecting the functional domain( ). Other pathogenic mutations are small indels (38 %) or nonsense, splice variants, large deletions, or rearrangements (36 %)( ). Increasing phenotypic severity has been observed with truncating or missense mutations in the catalytic domain. Mutations in TSC2 are more often spontaneous compared to TSC1( ). Mutations in TSC2 are also more often large deletions or rearrangements compared to TSC1. Deletions of multiple exons or the entire gene account for 6 % of mutations ( ).
984 pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in TSC1 and 2832 in TSC2 have been identified by the Leiden Open Variation Database version 3( ). The disease has complete penetrance but with variable expressivity. Mutations in TSC2 have a greater association with retinal findings, focal seizures, infantile spasms, drug-resistant epilepsy with earlier seizure onset, TSC-associated neuropsychiatric disorders, cardiac rhabdomyomas, and renal cancer( ; ; ). The TuberOus Sclerosis registry to increase disease Awareness (TOSCA) is an international disease registry that aims to highlight genotype-phenotype correlations in patients with TSC( ). Variants in functional protein domains and coding regions are correlated with more severe phenotypes. Patients with unidentified mutations or mosaicism have milder phenotypes( ). Sporadic mutations are more highly associated with localization to TSC2 versus inherited cases that are split evenly between the two genes( ).

5.7.

## Molecular physiology
The protein products of TSC1 and TSC2, hamartin (1164 amino acids; 130 kDa) and tuberin (1807 amino acids; 200 kDa), respectively, interact and form the TSC tumor suppressor protein complex, which is an inhibitor of the mammalian/mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) ( – )( ; ; ). Within this protein complex, tuberin forms the catalytic partner while hamartin acts as a stabilizer. Pathogenic mutations in the genes encoding for these proteins can lead to disruption in complex function causing overactivation of the mTOR pathway which can lead to unregulated cell growth and metabolism( ).
 
5.8.

## Management and treatment
Once diagnosed, brain MRI and electroencephalography (EEG) are recommended to assess possible effects of TSC on neurologic structure and function. Subsequent brain MRIs are recommended every 1–3 years to evaluate for development or growth of brain tumors (e.g., cortical tubers, subependymal nodules, subependymal giant cell astrocytomas). Evaluation for TSC-associated neuropsychiatric disorders is recommended at different stages of development. It is recommended that patients undergo annual dermatologic exams and screening for hypertension and labs to evaluate renal function. Echocardiogram should also be performed at diagnosis and repeated every 1–3 years if cardiac rhabdomyomas are present and until they exhibit regression. It is recommended that all patients receive an electrocardiogram (EKG) every 3–5 years. Beginning at 18 years of age, it is recommended that all female patients and males of any age with symptomatic lung dysfunction undergo chest computed tomography (CT) to screen for lymphangioleiomyomatosis( ).
mTOR inhibitors like sirolimus and everolimus are FDA-approved for treating TSC patients. These drugs have been shown to decrease seizure activity and tumor size, including retinal astrocytic hamartomas. They have not demonstrated an effect on improving TSC-associated psychiatric disorders. Discontinuation of therapy leads to rapid tumor regrowth. Vigabatrin is an inhibitor of GABA transaminase which leads to increased GABA in the brain and has been effective at treating infantile spasms. However, its use is associated with permanent loss of peripheral vision( ). Aggressive astrocytic retinal hamartomas can be managed with photodynamic therapy, focal laser, intravitreal bevacizumab, and in some cases vitrectomy. Aggressive hamartomas that do not respond can lead to the need for enucleation ( ).

5.9.

## Current research models
Initial animal models centered on Eker rats which carry a spontaneous germline mutation in the rat homolog of TSC2, causing them to form bilateral renal tumors and subependymal nodules. The initial attempts at modeling TSC in mice was via knockout. However, biallelic loss of Tsc1 or Tsc2 in the germline is embryonic lethal prior to brain development, due to cardiac malformations and liver hypoplasia( ; ). Mice heterozygous for pathogenic mutations display much milder phenotypes compared to what is observed in affected humans( ). Interestingly, mice heterozygous for Tsc2 mutations develop tumors much earlier than mice heterozygous for a pathogenic mutation in Tsc1, which reflects the genotype-phenotype correlations in humans. These heterozygous mouse models display an increased number of astrocytes, which is compounded in mice that carry a pathogenic mutation in one allele of both Tsc1 and Tsc2. Conditional knockout of Tsc1 in astrocytes (generated via crossing of Cre and GFAP floxed mice) results in abnormal astrocyte size, proliferation (both in vivo and in isolated cell culture in vitro) and differentiation( ). In addition, abnormal neuronal excitability leading to an enlarge disorganized hippocampus, seizures, and death by 4 months of age was reported in this animal( ).
Another mouse model of central nervous system disease was created by delivery Cre recombinase packaged into an AAV and injected intracerebroventricularly into Tsc2-floxed mice at postnatal day 0–3. These mice demonstrated brain pathology reminiscent of human TSC and had early mortality with a mean lifespan of 58 days. The researchers sought to determine if gene therapy could rescue the phenotype by delivering a condensed sequencing for tuberin that produces a functional protein as determined by cell culture experiments. Delivering this AAV9 containing the condensed tuberin via intravenous injection at a single time point (postnatal day 21) led to near normal lifespan (mean age 462 days) ( ).
Blood or skin cells from affected patients can be reprogrammed into induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) and subsequently differentiated into cell types of interest for downstream experiments that can involve understanding how pathogenic TSC mutations affect the cell type or to test potential drug susceptibility. Importantly, using patient-derived cells allows for investigation into precision medicine as the patient’s genetic background is retained and allows for deeper insight into the differences in variable expressivity. Another benefit of using patient-derived iPSCs is that the pathogenic mutation can be corrected with CRISPR-mediated genome editing, allowing for isogenic controls to be generated, thus enhancing the confidence that any experimental findings are indeed due to the presence of the pathogenic TSC mutation. To date, neural progenitor cells and various neural cell types have been generated from patient-derived cells with a mutation already present or edited to contain a pathogenic mutation. Advances in cell culture techniques have enabled the development of three-dimensional brain organoids to model TSC-associated neurodevelopmental disorders ( ).

6.

## Retinoblastoma
6.1.

## Introduction
Retinoblastoma (RB) is the most common primary intraocular malignancy of childhood( ; ). Pathogenic mutations in one allele of RB1 are usually inherited and tumorigenesis occurs after somatic mutation in the second allele, again following Knudson’s two hit hypothesis. Unlike the neurocutaneous syndromes described above, RB tumors are malignant. It has an incidence of 1/16,000–20,000 live births globally with 200–300 new cases per year in the United States( ). With early diagnosis and successful treatment, affected patients have a high survival rate. Recent research efforts in RB have focused on liquid biopsies to identify biomarkers to help guide personalized medicine and determine an individual patient’s prognosis.

6.2.

## Epidemiology
Retinoblastoma does not demonstrate a predilection for sex or ethnicity. Most cases are diagnosed before the age of five and the median age of diagnosis is 2 years for unilateral disease and 1 year for bilateral disease. The global average incidence is 8200 new cases per year; 60 % are unilateral and 40 % are bilateral( ). Disease rates vary ~50-fold across countries, with India, China, and African countries reporting the highest incidence(2021 – 2022a).
The survival rate is 95 % with early diagnosis and prompt treatment. However, the survival rate is highly impacted by income. The survival rate in middle-income countries is 70 % and low-income countries ~40 %( ). Patients with heritable retinoblastoma are at risk for developing “trilateral retinoblastomas” which affects both eyes and the pineal gland. This group of patients is also at risk of second malignancies, the most common of which is osteosarcoma. Patients who develop osteosarcomas have a less than 50 % survival rate( ).

6.3.

## Diagnosis
Diagnosis is clinical and typically involves examination under anesthesia to assess the extent of tumor burden(2021 – 2022a). Multimodal imaging can aid in diagnosis and monitoring of response to treatment. Ophthalmic ultrasound can help assess tumor dimensions and intra-tumoral calcification. Serial fundus photographs can help monitor disease progression/recurrence/regression and treatment efficacy. OCT can also assist with monitoring disease status in some cases. MRI can demonstrate extraocular extension and is also used to monitor for trilateral disease in patients with heritable retinoblastoma( ). Tumor biopsy is contraindicated due to high risk of extraocular extension(2021 – 2022a). Therefore, research efforts are underway to identify biomarkers that can confirm the diagnosis and provide prognostic information that can guide treatment plans in eyes that are not undergoing enucleation. Cell free or circulating tumor DNA isolated from the aqueous humor has been used as a proxy of tumor biopsy to identify pathogenic mutations( ; ).

6.4.

## Ocular features
RB tumors can be endophytic (growing into the vitreous cavity), exophytic (growing into the subretinal space), or a combination of these two growth patterns ( )( ). These tumors appear as white masses in the eye often with foci of calcification. Patients can present with hypopyon, hyphema, iris heterochromia, cataract, glaucoma, and anisocoria( ). Leukocoria is present in 60 % of cases and patients also may present with strabismus, eye pain and redness, restriction of extraocular muscle movements, and reduced vision( ; ). Ultrasound can demonstrate areas of necrosis and calcification within the tumor. Vitreous seeding can be observed in endophytic cases(2021–2022b). Tumors can invade the optic nerve and brain via the subarachnoid space. Metastatic disease can involve the lymph nodes, liver, lungs, bones, and the brain( ).
 On histology, the cells forming RB tumors are characterized by basophilia, hyperchromatic nuclei, and scanty cytoplasm. Rosettes of a single row of columnar cells may be present around an empty lumen (Flexner-Wintersteiner rosettes) or around a lumen filled with eosinophilic processes (Homer Wright rosettes)(2021–2022b). The tumorigenic cells are termed retinoblasts and are thought to arise from cone photoreceptor precursor cells( ; ). This is supported by evidence on multiple fronts. It has been well established that the tumorigenic cells originate from the nucleated layers of the retina. These cells also stain positively for neuron-specific enolase, retinal S-antigen, and rhodopsin. Cells grown in culture express red and green pigments, cone cell alpha-subunit of transducin, and secrete interphotoreceptor retinoid-binding protein(2021–2022b). Recent work using single-cell RNA and ATAC sequencing, which assess the gene expression and chromatin structure of DNA in single cells, has shown the predominance of cone precursor cells in different stages of the cell cycle in RB tumor samples( ).
Multiple classification systems have been developed over time as treatment modalities and prognosis has changed. The Reese-Ellsworth classification system is of historical significance and predicted globe salvage after external beam radiotherapy (EBR). It is no longer used clinically as EBR is no longer a major treatment modality for RB due to the risk for secondary tumors and radiation-associated sequelae. The International Intraocular Retinoblastoma Classification is the most commonly used system today and predicts globe salvage following treatment with systemic chemotherapy and local consolidation. Other commonly used classification systems are the American Joint Committee on Cancer TNM system and the International Retinoblastoma Staging System (2021 – 2022a).

6.5.

## Confirmatory tests
All patients with retinoblastoma should undergo genetic testing to determine the nature of inheritance of the pathogenic mutation. DNA isolated from peripheral blood leukocytes can undergo various forms of genetic analysis including Next Generation Sequencing, Sanger sequencing, karyotyping, fluorescence in situ hybridization, multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification, and RNA analysis. Multimodal genetic analysis can successfully identify a pathogenic mutation in 96 % of familial cases(2021 – 2022a).

6.6.

## Genetics
RB1 is located on chromosome 13q14.2. The gene is 180 kilobases long and encompasses 27 exons. Its associated transcript is 4.7 kilobases ( ). Mutations can be inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion with somatic loss of function in the second allele causing tumorigenesis. Mutations can also occur sporadically with pathogenic variants (identical or different) on both alleles in a somatic cell type. Mosaic mutations can occur due to mutations acquired during development. Biallelic loss of RB1 is considered the inciting event or driver mutation. For tumor formation to occur, additional effector mutations or changes in epigenetic regulation are required in tumor suppressors or oncogenes. For example, amplification of the oncogenes OTX2, MYCN, MDM4, KIF14, DEK, and E2F3 or inactivation of BCOR, TP53, CDH13, GATA5, CHFR, TP73, IGSF4, and Cadherin-11 can occur ( ; ). Overexpression of KIF4 and E2F3 are associated with tumor progression( ). Additionally, while 98 % of sporadic cases of retinoblastoma are due to biallelic mutations in RB1, 2 % are due to amplifications of MYCN. These tumors characteristically develop in only one eye and are diagnosed in patients <6 months of age( ). Recurrent mutations in BCOR and CREBBP have also been described in a rare sample of tumors( ). Mutations in other tumor suppressors and oncogenes can modify RB presentation. For example, a gain at 6p is found in 60 % of retinoblastoma cases. Frequently reported variants include loss at 13q, 16q14, and 16q22 and gain at 1q31, 6p22, 2p24–25, and 13q32–34( ; ). We refer the reader to Table 1 in for an overview of relevant changes in genetic, transcriptomic, epigenetic, and proteomic changes in observed in RB( ).
98 % of bilateral cases are heritable( ; ). However, inherited mutations can cause up to 15 % of unilateral cases. Additionally, bilateral cases often develop a germline mutation during spermatogenesis and thus are localized to the paternal copy of RB1( ). These patients are also at a 6 % risk of developing second malignancies such as pineoblastoma, osteosarcoma, soft tissue sarcomas, and melanomas. 95 % of retinoblastoma cases are sporadic and typically present with unilateral tumors( ).
RB is caused by a large variety of RB1 mutations (more than 50 % of mutations being reported only once), from missense to promoter hypermethylation to chromosomal rearrangements( ). Approximately 2500 pathogenic variants have been reported( ). Interestingly, most inherited cases are due to mutations that are nonsense or frameshift variants causing loss of function( ). 85 % of the documented pathogenic variants are single nucleotide variants or indels( ). While RB demonstrates 90 % penetrance, this percentage changes based on the mutation type. In-frame, missense, and spice-site variants as well as indels in the RB1 promoter or exon 1 are associated with low penetrance. Conversely, nonsense or null mutations are associated with high penetrance ( ). Mutational hotspots have been localized to important pocket domains in the RB protein. Mutations in exons 12–18 affect pocket A, mutations in exons 18–19 affect the spacer region, and mutations in exons 19–23 affect pocket B.

6.7.

## Molecular physiology
Rb protein (pRB) is 928 amino acids long and has a molecular weight of 106 kDa. It possesses a pocket structure made up of two smaller pockets, A and B, which are separated by a spacer region ( ). This combined A/B region in pRB enables it to function as a tumor suppressor. The C-terminal domain regulates the cell cycle at the G1-S checkpoint mainly by binding to the transcription factor E2F, thereby preventing the expression of genes necessary for cell cycle progression. The N-terminal domain has a role in binding to chromatin remodeling proteins which act in an epigenetic way to regulate cell cycle progression( ). Loss of Rb leads to dysregulation of the Rb, p53, Ras/MAPK, Wnt, and Notch signaling pathways which can lead to epithelial-to-mesenchymal activation, a more undifferentiated stem-cell like state, increased cell proliferation, and metabolic changes that sustain the energy needs of cancerous cells( ). P107 and p130 are the two other members of the RB protein family and function similarly and alongside pRb to inhibit E2F( ).
 
6.8.

## Management and treatment
Enucleation remains a treatment for eyes classified with severe disease. Intravenous chemotherapy with carboplatin, etoposide, and vincristine can be used along with local consolidation with laser, cryotherapy, or plaque brachytherapy for globe salvage( ). Intra-arterial chemotherapy (IAC) is another widely used treatment modality allowing for globe salvage. Chemotherapeutic agents administered via IAC include melphalan, topotecan hydrochloride, carboplatin, and methotrexate. Intravitreal chemotherapy with either melphalan and topotecan can be used in cases of vitreous seeding. External beam radiation is no longer used as a primary treatment modality due to the risk of developing non-ocular second malignancies in inherited RB by five-fold( ; ). We refer the interested reader to Table 2 in for an overview of research into these advanced therapeutics ( ) and to Kim, Berry, and Murphree’s chapter on retinoblastoma management for further discussion of clinical management( ).
After treatment, patients require surveillance for recurrence and the development of new tumors. Most patients undergo ophthalmic exams under anesthesia every 4–8 weeks until 3-years of age( ). Family members of a patient with RB should undergo regular ophthalmic exams during childhood unless genetic testing has ruled out the presence of a pathogenic RB1 mutation( ).
Liquid biopsy is a prolific emerging approach in RB research. It refers to the isolation and use of tumor-derived biomaterials like circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA), cell-free DNA (cfDNA), proteins, extracellular vesicles, and dead cells themselves. It has been favored over solid tumor biopsy in retinoblastoma given the high risk for tumor seeding with biopsy. In the case of RB, liquid biopsies from the aqueous humor (AH) have shown promise in identifying RB1 mutations and somatic copy number alterations. Liquid biopsy from serum is also under investigation. AH-derived survivin and TGF-b1 are highly specific, sensitive, and accurate for early detection of RB. NSE and protein concentrations are helpful in monitoring treatment response when isolated from AH. We refer the interested reader to for an overview of liquid biopsy in retinoblastoma( ).

6.9.

## Current research models
There are several commercially available cell lines of retinoblastoma isolated from mouse and human tissue which have been used to characterize the pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of therapeutic agents used to treat RB( ). The immortalized Y79 cell line demonstrates an aggressive phenotype whereas the WERI cell line forms solitary tumors and is commonly used in xenografts( ). Animal models of RB are limited and the field has thus relied on patient-derived models such as 3D organoids and xenografts of patient tumors into immunodeficient animals. 3D organoids can be created from culturing untreated patient-derived tumors that retain the tumor’s molecular and cellular profile, such as cone photoreceptor gene expression and activated EMT pathway( ). Rozanska et al. created disease models using a pRB1-null human embryonic stem cell line and induced pluripotent stem cells derived from a patient with biallelic pathogenic mutations in RB1, which were then differentiated into retinal organoids. These models demonstrated an increase in the number of proliferating cone precursors at the expense of other retinal cell types and displayed features similar to RB tumors such as rosette-like structures, tumorigenicity, and positive response to chemotherapy( ). 3D organoid models such as these can be used to study RB pathogenesis and progression and can provide additional information on personalized medicine for the individual that the organoid was derived from. Tumorspheres are another patient-derived cell culture model which can be developed from a single tumor cell or a mixture of cells. They are easier to maintain than organoids and are used for high-throughput drug screening. Orthotopic xenografts have been injected into the retina or vitreous humor and recapitulate rosette histology and show tissue invasion( ). However, the small size of mouse eyes requires technical proficiency that might not always be available. Heterotopic xeno-engraftments into the subcutaneous space of the flank have thus been used as another route to model these tumors in mice, albeit in a different anatomic location than where tumors form in patients. These tumors can grow to a larger size for analysis and expansion into other animals ( ; ).
Mice heterozygous for Rb1 knockout develop pituitary adenomas and thyroid carcinomas but do not develop retinal tumors( ). Rb mutant mosaic mouse models also fail to develop retinoblastomas( ). Knockout of Rb in mice does not lead to retinal tumor formation as another member of the Rb protein family, p107, is upregulated in a compensatory mechanism. This compensation is not observed in humans which is why humans are susceptible to RB and mice are not. Knocking out both genes results in embryonic lethality due to defects in erythropoiesis and neurogenesis. Therefore, Cre-Lox methods to conditionally knockout Rb and other tumor suppressor genes in a cell type-specific manner have been used to try to model RB( ; ). What is known at the Rb1/p53/p107 knockout mouse model of RB has become a staple in RB research. It was developed in 2004 by Zhang et al. who used the Cre-Lox system to create a mouse with biallelic knockout of Rb1 and p53 and heterozygous knockout of p107 in bipolar cells. The resulting animals formed bilateral intraocular tumors that invaded the deep retina and formed rosettes on histologic analysis( ; ). generated mouse models conditionally deficient in combinations of the Rb protein family (Rb, p107, p130). They found that mice with horizontal interneurons that were Rb−/−; p107+/−; p130−/−, developed metastatic retinoblastoma. They also found that horizontal cells with one copy of either Rb or p130 in a background where the other Rb protein family genes were knocked out was sufficient to prevent clonal expansion and tumor formation. Their main conclusion from this model was that differentiated horizontal cells can re-enter the cell cycle with permitting mutations and form retinoblastoma in mice( ). The LHbTAG mouse model of RB has been relied upon for testing safety and efficacy of therapeutic agents. It was created by introducing the simian virus T-antigen driven by the human luteinizing hormone b-subunit promoter into fertilized single-cell oocytes. The resulting mice developed disease similar to trilateral retinoblastomas with both eyes exhibiting multifocal retinal tumors and tumor development in the pineal gland. The retinal tumors showed invasion of the brain via the optic nerve. On histology, the retinal tumors displayed rosettes with a high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio. However, these tumors arise from Mueller cells and thus do not stain positively for opsin like more than 95 % of human-derived retinoblastoma tumors do. Attempts to more closely resemble human disease by driving antigen expression under retina-specific promoters has produced the same phenotype with unifocal tumors which may more closely model sporadic disease( ).
Larger animal models are typically employed in research on therapeutics. For example, the New Zealand white rabbit is often used for evaluating safety and side effects of intravitreal chemotherapy. Periocular chemotherapy is evaluated in mouse, rabbit, and pig. While there is no porcine model of RB, pigs are frequently used for toxicity testing of intra-arterial chemotherapy. Rhesus macaques have also been used to test this mode of therapeutic delivery since the weight and size approximate a human 2-year-old. To date, rabbits are the best animal model for testing the safety and efficacy of burgeoning intra-arterial chemotherapy since their anatomy makes this route of administration feasible and also has a well-established retinoblastoma tumor xenograft model( ; ; ).

7.

## Uveal melanoma of BAP1 Tumor predisposition syndrome
7.1.

## Introduction
Uveal melanoma is the most common primary intraocular malignancy affecting adults. Tumors form in structures comprising the uveal tract: the iris, ciliary body, and choroid. While most cases occur due to somatic mutations, uveal melanoma can occur as part of an autosomal dominant cancer predisposition syndrome caused by mutations in the BRCA-1 associated protein 1 (BAP1) gene. The BAP1 tumor predisposition syndrome (BAP1-TPDS) was identified in the 2010s( ; ). In addition to uveal melanoma, patients are at risk for developing cutaneous melanoma, melanocytic BAP1-mutated Atypical Intradermal Tumor (MBAIT), mesothelioma, and renal cell carcinoma( ). Given its relatively recent discovery and rare occurrence, molecular understanding of BAP1-TPDS is still evolving. Since BAP1 is a known tumor suppressor protein, the second allele must undergo somatic mutations in susceptible cell types for a tumor to manifest. Syndrome penetrance is incomplete and there is high intrafamilial variable expressivity( ). No clear genotype-phenotype relationship exists between the type or location of mutation and the organ affected by tumors ( ).

7.2.

## Epidemiology
Uveal melanoma mainly affects white adults with an age-adjusted incidence of 5.2 cases per million people in the United States. Multiple studies support a higher incidence in males after adjusting for age( ). It has been found that about 2–5 % of uveal melanoma cases have affected family members, suggesting a heritable component ( ). used a mathematical model to determine the prevalence of BAP1-associated uveal melanoma in the US population of white individuals and found this to be 2.8 % (95 % CI, 0.88 %–4.81 %)( ). Uveal melanoma is the most common tumor found in patients diagnosed with BAP1-TPDS with a median age of onset at 51 years( ). This is notably younger than the median age of onset (62 years) for sporadic uveal melanoma cases ( ). Additionally, these BAP1-TPDS patients suffer from more aggressive uveal melanoma phenotypes( ; ). Nonspecific to BAP1-TPDS, uveal melanomas with BAP1 mutations, somatic or germline, lead to increased risk of metastasis and decreased lifespan (mean survival 4.74 years versus 9.97 years) ( ; ; ). Patients diagnosed with BAP1-TPDS have a 29 % risk of developing uveal melanoma( ; ). Interestingly, only 25 % of familial cases of uveal melanoma are associated with BAP1 mutations, suggesting that other genes are responsible for cancer predisposition, such as GNAQ, GNA11, EIF1AX, SF3B1, and MBD4( ; ; ; ). Only iris uveal melanoma are associated with ultraviolet light exposure. Other risk factors for uveal melanoma include nevi of the skin and iris, light skin and eye color, and diagnosis of ocular or oculodermal melanocystosis( ).

7.3.

## Diagnosis
Uveal melanoma is a clinical diagnosis. Tumors are diagnosed using several ophthalmic techniques and imaging modalities including slit lamp exam, indirect ophthalmoscopy, gonioscopy, transillumination, fundus photography, optical coherence tomography, and both A and B-scan ultrasound( ).

7.4.

## Ocular features
The tumor cell of origin is the extracutaneous melanocyte within the uveal tract( ). Histologically, uveal melanomas are composed of 1) spindle cells that form bundles and whorls, 2) epithelioid cells that are polyhedral in shape and have prominent nucleoli and large cytoplasm, and 3) a mixture of spindle and epithelioid cells. 80 % of uveal melanomas exhibit melanin pigment deposited throughout the cell cytoplasm( ). Features from enucleated tumors that result in poor prognosis include extrascleral extension, ciliary body involvement, high number of mitoses, epithelioid cells, macrophage infiltration of tissue, and closed vascular loops( ).
A retrospective study of 507 patients with uveal melanoma found that uveal melanomas associated with BAP1-TPDS appear earlier than patients without a germline BAP1 mutation (51 vs 62 years of age), have higher rates of metastasis (71 % vs 18 %), are typically larger (mean diameter of 15.9 mm vs 12.3 mm), and are more likely to involve the ciliary body (75 % vs 21.6 %). However, upon multivariable analysis, germline BAP1 mutations were not a significant independent risk factor for metastasis( ; ).

7.5.

## Iris melanomas
Four percent of uveal melanoma cases occur in the iris ( – ) ( ; ). Clinical features suggesting iris melanoma include nodularity, vascularity, angle extension, and growth over time( ). These are most commonly located in the inferior iris and can grow exophytically (in the anterior chamber), endophytically (towards the lens), or have bilateral growth in both directions resulting in secondary glaucoma or cataracts. ( ).
 
7.6.

## Ciliary body melanomas
Tumors in the ciliary body account for 6 % of uveal melanoma ( )( ; ). Tumors can be isolated to the ciliary body or have overlapping involvement of the iris and ciliary body (iridociliary) or the ciliary body and choroid (cilio-choroidal). Because of their location behind the iris, these tumors are often asymptomatic until much later in the disease course when they can result in blurred vision due to secondary cataract or vitreous hemorrhage. Tumors in the ciliary body are associated with a higher metastatic risk( ).

7.7.

## Choroidal melanomas
Most uveal melanomas involve the choroid (~90 %) ( ) ( ; ). These tumors can be pigmented or amelanotic, and have a characteristic domed, mushroom, or collar button shape. Small tumors (less than 2.5 mm) can be difficult to distinguish from atypical nevi. Risk factors suggesting concern for malignant transformation include subretinal fluid, lipofuscin, thickness more than 2 mm, visual symptoms, low internal reflectivity and/or vascularity on ultrasound, and documented growth. Tumors that develop a break in Bruch’s membrane can present with vitreous hemorrhage. ( ; ).

7.8.

## Confirmatory tests
As above, diagnostic biopsy is not performed in most cases of uveal melanoma as the diagnosis is usually made clinically, however, in atypical cases biopsy may be performed prior to treatment. Pathologists evaluate cell morphology, presence of melanin and positive staining of immunohistochemistry markers such as HMB45 and MelanA( ). Prognostic biopsy can be performed at the time of treatment (enucleation or radiation with either brachytherapy, protons, or photons) and prognostic tests such as cytogenetic analysis, DNA sequencing, BAP1 nuclear staining, and gene-expression profiling can provide prognostic information that will inform future care( ).
Germline BAP1 testing should be performed for patients presenting with two or more BAP1-TPDS-associated cancers. Individuals with a history of two or more of these cancers in a first or second-degree relative (with the exception of only multiple cases of cutaneous melanoma as this occurs frequently in the population) should consider undergoing genetic testing to understand their risk of BAP1-TPDS and enable life planning( ). Patients carrying pathogenic mutations should receive annual ophthalmic screenings and should be encouraged to alert family members of their mutation status and recommend that they also undergo genetic testing (see )( ).
 
7.9.

## Genetics
The vast majority (~80–90 %) of uveal melanomas have activating mutations in either GNAQ or GNA11( ; ; ). Mutations in either of these G-protein alpha subunits lead to loss of their GTPase activity and thus cause constitutive activation of the G-protein’s downstream targets, such as protein kinase C (PKC) and the downstream Raf-MEK-ERK (MAPK) pathway, which ultimately causes increased cellular proliferation( ; ). It also constitutively activates the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)-protein kinase B (AKT) and YAP1 pathways( ). Pathogenic activation mutations in either of these oncogenes affects codon 209 in the majority of cases (95 %) or codon 193 in the minority of uveal melanomas (5 %)( ). Mutations in GNAQ or GNA11 occur in early tumorigenesis and do not affect patient prognosis( ; ). On the other hand, uveal melanoma has also been associated with mutations in other genes that affect prognosis such as BAP1, SF3B1, EIF1AX, PALB2, MLH1, SMARCE1, NF1, MBD4( ; ; ). Mutations in these genes have various disease and survival associations. EIF1AX mutations are associated with disomy 3, disomy 8q, lower metastatic risk, longer disease-free survival and lack of ciliary body involvement. Mutations in SF3B1 are associated with disomy 3, younger age at diagnosis, intermediate risk, late metastasis, and worse metastatic free survival in the long-term despite favorable prognosis in the first few years after diagnosis. Notably, mutations in SF3B1 but not EIF1AX, in disomy 3 tumors are shown to predict of metastasis ( ; ).
Uveal melanomas frequently demonstrate cytogenetic mutations, predominantly monosomy 3, 8p and 8q, abnormalities of chromosome 6, deletion of chromosome 1, and loss of 9p( ). Clinically, chromosomal abnormalities with the greatest impact on poor prognosis are loss of 1p or 8p, gain of 8q, and monosomy of chromosome 3( ; ). Gains in chromosome 6p resulted in a more favorable prognosis( ). Tumors that have two normal copies of chromosome 3 often have mutations in SF3B1 or EIF1AX compared to tumors lacking a copy of chromosome 3 (i.e. monosomy 3), which frequently have pathogenic mutations in their single copy of BAP1( ; ; ). This supports the finding that mutations in SF3B1, EIF1AX, and BAP1 (which is located on chromosome 3) occur in an almost mutually exclusive manner ( ; ).
It is estimated that 32–50 % of primary uveal melanoma tumors carry inactivating mutations in the BAP1 tumor suppressor gene resulting in poor prognosis( ; ). Unsurprisingly, >80 % of cases of metastatic uveal melanoma have somatic BAP1 mutations( ). BAP1 mutations causing BAP1-TPDS are heterogenous, and cases have documented all manner of mutations (e.g. small and large deletions, indels causing frameshift mutations, and missense and nonsense mutations). However, genetic characterization of cells isolated from characteristic BAP1-TPDS tumors have demonstrated that most mutations are chromosomal deletions and 70 % of germline mutations lead to protein truncation. There does not seem to be a genotype-phenotype correlation between mutation type and organ susceptibility to tumor formation. In general, missense mutations seem to affect catalytic function of pBAP1 and truncating mutations affect the nuclear localization signal and protein binding functions. ( ).

7.10.

## Molecular physiology
Tumor formation is usually initiated by an activating mutation in GNAQ/11 which leads to increased proliferation by means of upregulating the MAPK, PKC, and Trio-Rho/Rac pathways( ; ; ; ). These mutations are also found in benign nevi and do not appear to be sufficient for malignant transformation alone. While most of the aberrant cells are eradicated via apoptosis, some can accumulate additional mutations that lead to low risk of metastasis (<10 %) via gain of chromosome 6p and EIF1AX mutations or lead to high risk of metastasis (>50 %) via loss of chromosome 3 or BAP1 mutations ( ).
BAP1 acts as a tumor suppressor through its enzymatic role as a nuclear-localized hydrolase, which removes ubiquitination and assists in regulation of genes involved in cell cycle control, differentiation, and DNA repair( ; ; ). Notably, studies have shown that these tumor suppressor functions of BAP1 appear to be independent of BRCA1( ). The gene is located at 3p21.1 and the protein product is 729 amino acids long. The protein has 3 domains: the catalytic N-terminal domain and the middle and C-terminal domains, which bind with other proteins such as BRCA1 ( )( ; ).
 
7.11.

## Management and treatment
Uveal melanoma due to BAP1-TPDS should be managed by an ocular oncologist usually in conjunction with metastatic surveillance by a medical oncologist and treated as a high-risk tumor. The patient should undergo hepatic surveillance every 3–6 months and chest-imaging every 6–12 months( ; ).
The primary tumors can be treated with good control rates using several techniques including iridocylectomy for iris tumors, transpupillary thermotherapy or photocoagulation for small tumors, and enucleation or radiation with either brachytherapy, protons, or photons for large tumors( ). However, about 40–50 % of patients with uveal melanoma, regardless of BAP1-TPDS status, develop metastasis( ). The most frequent site of metastasis is the liver (93 %), followed by the lungs (24 %), bone (16 %), and soft tissue (11 %)( ).
Since metastasis can develop more than 15 years after the initial diagnosis of the primary tumor, long-term surveillance is recommended. Patients with tumors who have been classified as low-risk of metastasis based on anatomic and molecular characteristics are recommended to undergo imaging every 12 months only if signs and symptoms warranting evaluation are present. Patients with tumors classified as intermediate or high risk of metastasis should undergo hepatic imaging with MRI or ultrasound for no less than 10 years. Additional testing should be conducted when patients present with clinically relevant signs and symptoms. Biopsy of lesions suspicious for metastasis is recommended ( ).
Metastatic disease can be treated with several regimens, but survival after the development of metastasis has historically been poor with most patients succumbing to disease within 1 year of diagnosis( ). Local resection of hepatic metastasis with or without subsequent ablation or localized chemotherapy to the affected organ (e.g., liver) has been tried. Immune checkpoint inhibitors that have efficacy in cutaneous melanoma such as antagonistic anti-CTLA4 and anti-PD-1 antibodies in conjunction with epigenetic modulators to increase immune signaling have demonstrated a mild effect on treating metastatic disease but come with high toxicity and severe adverse events( ).
Tebentafusp is the first systemic drug approved by the FDA (2022) for use in treating metastatic uveal melanoma in patients positive for HLA-A*02:01. Tebentafusp is an immune-mobilizing monoclonal T cell preceptor against cancer (ImmTAC) that recruits and activates T cells when it binds to the T cell receptor targeting a uveal melanoma antigen. In qualifying patients, it has proven to increase overall survival compared to patients receiving other chemotherapy or immune checkpoint inhibitors (e.g., dacarbazine, pembrolizumab, ipilimumab); median overall survival was 21.7 months in tebentafusp group versus 16.0 months in group receiving other agents( ; ).
Since GNAQ/11 is difficult to inhibit pharmacologically, downstream targets such as MEK have been the subject of efforts to treat metastatic disease( ). While MEK inhibitors (e.g. selumetinib) have been efficacious in treating patients with cutaneous melanoma, they have had limited efficacy for metastatic uveal melanoma( ). Patients with metastatic uveal melanoma typically develop resistance to the drug-induced cell death and proliferation arrest. Cheng et al. used in vitro and in vivo studies to show that this resistance is mediated by paracrine secretion of two growth factors from tumor microenvironment fibroblasts, NRG1 and HGF, which lead to activation of ERBB3 and cMET, respectively, and downstream activation of Akt in tumor cells. Based on these findings it is suggested that dual treatment with a MEK and c-MET and/or ERBB3 inhibitor may increase treatment efficacy in patients with metastatic uveal melanoma ( ).
Another downstream target of GNAQ/11 is being investigated for its therapeutic potential is PKC. While PKC inhibitors have shown promise in initial treatment, tumors often develop resistance yielding these therapies ineffective. Combined use of PKC inhibitors with c-MET or MEK inhibitors have shown a synergistic therapeutic effect in both in vitro and in vivo studies. Cell culture of melanoma lines carrying pathogenic mutations in GNAQ or GNA11 and treated with either of two PKC inhibitors showed decreased activation of these pathways only in cell lines carrying mutations in either of these oncogenes. Treating these lines with either of two MEK inhibitors decreased the proliferation in all lines regardless of mutations in these oncogenes, indicating that in lines with mutations in these oncogenes, these mutations are causing the increased cell phenotype by activating the MAPK pathway first via activation of PKC. Pharmacologic inhibition of PKC however was not sufficient to suppress MAPK activation completely. However, dual treatment with PKC and MEK inhibitors showed in vitro and in vivo efficacy by means of sustained MAPK inhibition and increase apoptosis in the cell culture assays and by tumor shrinkage greater than vehicle control or monotherapy in the mouse xenograft in vivo experiments. These results highlight the unique susceptibility of GNAQ/GNA11 mutant uveal melanoma cells to treatment with a synergistic combination therapy ( ).
Human data have supported these findings. A phase I clinical trial observed that the next generation PKC inhibitor, darovasertib, showed a response in 6 out 66 patients( , ). Enhanced response is expected and demonstrated in preliminary data that added the c-MET inhibitor, crizotinib( ; ). A recent case report further supports this hypothesis. A functionally monocular patient was administered darovasertib and crizotinib as a 6-month neoadjuvant treatment. This decreased the maximal tumor thickness by 84 % allowing for plaque brachytherapy and globe salvage. This is the first neo-adjuvant therapy to demonstrate efficacy in this disease( ). We refer readers who desire a more in-depth review of current progress in treating local and metastatic uveal melanoma to the review by ( ).

7.12.

## Current research models
Culturing and establishing cell lines from uveal melanoma tumors has proven exceedingly difficult for unknown reasons. When cell lines are established, they tend to from tumors that were atypical in some way (e.g., irradiated then recurred) and so their reliable identity of a uveal melanoma is questioned. Some of the most commonly used uveal melanoma cell lines include Mel202, Mel270, Mel285, Mel290, and 92–1. Some findings that shed light on the lack of these lines ability to recapitulate uveal melanoma include their lack of pathogenic mutations in GNAQ/11, chromosome 3 monosomy, or melanocyte markers as well as preserved BAP1 expression. It is hypothesized that the cells composing these lines may be tumor fibroblasts and/or tumor cells that have a growth advantage in cell culture over other cells in the mixed population that may have some of these characteristic markers of uveal melanoma. Some cell lines carry BRAF mutations, which are characteristic of cutaneous melanoma and may suggest the tumor was secondary to metastasis. Some efforts at establishing uveal melanoma cell lines have met success and recapitulate genetic hallmarks (e.g. aberrations in chromosomes 1, 3, 6, 8, and 16; and mutations in BAP1, GNAQ, GNA11, SF3B1, and EIF1AX). For example, the MP46 and MP65 cell lines are deficient in BAP1 protein and carry mutations in GNAQ and GNA11, respectively. Additional work is needed to establish more cell lines that display other traits of uveal melanoma such as mutations in GNAQ/11, chromosome 3 monosomy, and expression of melanocyte markers. These cell lines will play a crucial role in accurately testing therapeutics ( ). 3D spheroids created from cell lines and primary tumor samples that recapitulate molecular characterization of the original tumor they were derived form have become an additional method of early-stage drug screening with the goal of improving personalized treatment of individual patients. These structures are believed to more closely model tumor biology and its microenvironment by facilitating cell-cell adhesion( ).
Multiple cell lines derived from primary or metastatic human uveal melanoma tumors have been established for xenograft transplantation and are known as patient-derived xenografts (PDX). In general, these cell lines more accurately represent uveal melanoma when transplanted into animal eyes than other, more accessible and affordable cell lines commonly used in early models of uveal melanoma such as the Greene melanoma line derived from cutaneous melanoma in hamster and the B16 melanoma line derived from cutaneous melanoma in C57BL mice. In xenograft models, the desired tumor cells are inoculated into extraocular tissues or inserted into the eye via intravitreal, anterior chamber, and suprachoroidal injections. In addition to forming intraocular tumors, many of these models develop metastasis to regions including lung and liver( ).
While in vitro models of melanoma are crucial to developing and testing more targeted treatments, they are further limited in their inability to model uveal melanoma within a biologic context of the eye and as part of an entire organism. Available cell lines derived from primary uveal melanoma tumors are expensive and have limited accessibility due to the rarity of the disease and decreased rate of enucleation since the advent of treatment with plaque brachytherapy. In vivo animal models can overcome this limitation, allowing the biomedical community to better understand the disease and treatment specifics unique to uveal melanoma. Even more powerful is the pairing of patient-derived uveal melanoma cells and animals by transplanting xenografts. Current animal models of primary or metastatic uveal melanoma have been generated via xenografting, transgenic manipulation, or tumor induction (i.e., creation of genetic mutations via carcinogenic compounds or radiation, or delivery of a gene of interest via retroviral infection or DNA microinjection). Targeted gene expression approaches are often preferred as they allow for examination of how human-specific mutations affect disease development and progression( ). While rodents or zebrafish are the most commonly used models, spontaneous uveal melanoma has been studied in higher order species such as cats and dogs( ; ).
Transgenic animal models of uveal melanoma have been created by conditionally driving the expression of the transgene in a target tissue by means of cell type-specific promoters such as tyrosinase promoters driving mutant Ras expression in melanin producing cells( ; ; ), RET expression in melanocytes( ; ; ), and activated GNA11/GNAQ in melanocytes( ; ; ). The models are limited by their variation in phenotype and lack of tumors consistently originating in the uvea ( ).
Uveal melanoma animal models incorporating Bap1 mutations have also been created. Concomitant loss of Bap1 in a mouse model with the activating allele GNA11Q209 in melanocytes led to increased tumor proliferation and size in cutaneous melanomas with no effect on uveal tumors despite confirmation of Bap1 knockout in cells from the uveal tract( ). Similarly, homozygous loss of Bap1 or deficiency of Bap1 due to heterozygous mutations in mice harboring the activating allele of GNAQQ209L in melanocytes did not affect Uveal melanoma tumors. However, the heterozygous Bap1 mutants permitted liver lesions to grow and increased the proportion of large lung lesions ( ; ). Interestingly, GNAQQ209L mice with homozygous Bap1 loss decreased the number and size of lung lesions, which is consistent with other studies of human uveal melanoma cells where BAP1 knockout leads to arrested growth and decreased movement. The authors of this study also compared the transcriptome of uveal melanoma cells to the gene expression of cells from human uveal melanoma tumors with BAP1 mutations. The authors identified 270 genes that were differentially expressed in the same direction in both the human and mouse cells. Gene ontology analysis revealed that the Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) pathway was most significantly affected followed by the Apical Junction (AJ) complex pathway. The EMT pathway is a hallmark of cancer and induces changes that increase cell mobility and remodeling( ).

8.

## Conclusion
Patients affected by heritable tumor predisposition syndromes face the dual challenge of both vision loss and formation of life-threatening tumors. There is a great need for improved targeted treatments to preserve patients’ vision, improve their quality of life, and in some cases, prevent premature death. This review has provided an overview of intraocular tumors inherited in cancer predisposition syndromes and the current state of research into their basic pathophysiology and potential therapeutic targets. Understanding the clinical presentation of these syndromes and their genetic and molecular mechanisms is critical to developing accurate disease research models which will hopefully lead to better treatments in the future.

## Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the members of The University of Iowa Institute for Vision Research for their discussion and support. Data presented herein were obtained at the Bioinformatics Division and the Genomics Division of the Iowa Institute of Human Genetics (RRID: SCR_023422) which is supported, in part, by the University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine. We would especially like to thank Dr. Henry Keen for his assistance. We would also like to thank the patients and families whose participation in research studies serves as the impetus for this work.

## Funding
This work was supported by the Gilbert Family Foundation and the MSTP training grant T32 GM139776.

## Footnotes
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Lola P. Lozano: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Conceptualization. Renato Jensen: Writing – review & editing, Conceptualization. Madeleine Jennisch: Writing – review & editing. Narendra G. Pandala: Visualization, Data curation. Farzad Jamshidi: Writing – review & editing. H. Culver Boldt: Writing – review & editing. Budd A. Tucker: Writing – review & editing, Visualization, Supervision, Resources, Funding acquisition. Elaine M. Binkley: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Supervision, Resources, Funding acquisition.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare no relevant conflicts of interest.

## Data availability
Data will be made available on request.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Data Availability Statement
Data will be made available on request.