J Cell BiolJ. Cell Biol482jcellbiolThe Journal of Cell Biology0021-95251540-8140The Rockefeller University PressPMC2119541PMC2119541.121195412119541767883710.1083/jcb.120.3.799931471321ArticlesInteraction of astrochondrin with extracellular matrix components and its involvement in astrocyte process formation and cerebellar granule cell migration
1219931203155641799814010819930105200821102019https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date (see http://www.rupress.org/terms). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 4.0 Unported license, as described at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/).We have recently characterized a chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan from the murine central nervous system which is expressed by astrocytes in vitro and carries the L2/HNK-1 and L5 carbohydrate structures. In the present study, we provide evidence that its three core proteins of different size are similar in their proteolytic peptide maps and thus designate this group of structurally related molecules astrochondrin. During development, astrochondrin and the L5 carbohydrate were hardly detectable in the brain of 14-d-old mouse embryos by Western blot analysis. Expression of astrochondrin and the L5 epitope was highest at postnatal day 8, the peak of cerebellar granule cell migration and Bergmann glial process formation, and decreased to weakly detectable levels in the adult. Immunocytochemical localization of astrochondrin in the cerebellar cortex of 6-d-old mice showed association of immunoreactivity with the cell surface of astrocytes, including Bergmann glial processes and astrocytes in the internal granular layer or prospective white matter. Endfeet of astrocytes contacting the basal lamina of endothelial and meningeal cells and contact sites between Bergmann glial processes and granule cells also showed detectable levels of astrochondrin. Furthermore, granule cell axons in the molecular layer were astrochondrin immunoreactive. In the adult, astrochondrin immunoreactivity was weakly present in the internal granular layer and white matter. Both Fab fragments of polyclonal antibodies to astrochondrin and monovalent fragments of the L5 monoclonal antibody reduced the formation of processes of mature GFAP- positive astrocytes on laminin and collagen type IV, but not on fibronectin as substrata. Interestingly, the initial attachment of astrocytic cell bodies was not disturbed by these antibodies. Antibodies to astrochondrin also reduced the migration of granule cells in the early postnatal mouse cerebellar cortex. In a solid phase radioligand binding assay, astrochondrin was shown to bind to the extracellular matrix components laminin and collagen type IV, being enhanced in the presence of Ca2+, but not to fibronectin, J1/tenascin or other neural recognition molecules. Furthermore, astrochondrin interacted with collagen types III and V, less strongly with collagen types I, II, and IX, but not with collagen type VI. The interaction of astrochondrin with collagen types III and V was saturable and susceptible to increasing ionic strength, and could be competed by chondroitin sulfate, heparin, and dextran sulfate, but not by hyaluronic acid, glucose-6-phosphate, or neuraminic acid.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlyyespmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-SA
 Interaction of Astrochondrin with Extracellular Matrix
Components and Its Involvement in Astrocyte Process
Formation and Cerebellar Granule Cell Migration
Andrea Streit, Christiane Nolte, Thomas P,
aisony,* and Melitta Schachner*
Department of Neurobiology, University of Heidelberg, 6900 Heidelberg 1, ER.G.; and *Department ofNeurobiology,
Swiss Federal Institute ofTechnology,H6nggerberg, 8093 Ziirich, Switzerland
Abstract. We have recently characterized a chondroi-
tin sulfate proteoglycan from the murine central ner-
vous system which is expressed by astrocytes in vitro
and carries the L2/HNK-1 and L5 carbohydrate struc-
tures. In the present study, we provide evidence that
its three core proteins of different size are similar in
their proteolytic peptide maps and thus designate this
group of structurally related molecules astrochondrin.
During development, astrochondrin and the L5 carbo-
hydrate were hardly detectable in the brain of 14-d-old
mouse embryos by Western blot analysis. Expression
of astrochondrin and the L5 epitope was highest at
postnatal day 8, the peak of cerebellar granule cell mi-
gration and Bergmann glial process formation, and
decreased to weakly detectable levels in the adult. Im-
munocytochemical localization of astrochondrin in the
cerebellar cortex of 6-d-old mice showed association
of immunoreactivity with the cell surface of astrocytes,
including Bergmann glial processes and astrocytes in
the internal granular layer or prospective white matter.
Endfeet of astrocytes contacting the basal lamina of
endothelial and meningeal cells and contact sites be-
tween Bergmann glial processes and granule cells also
showed detectable levels of astrochondrin. Furthermore,
granule cell axons in the molecular layer were astro-
chondrin immunoreactive. In the adult, astrochondrin
immunoreactivity was weakly present in the internal
granular layer and white matter.
Both Fab fragments of polyclonal antibodies to astro-
chondrin and monovalent fragments of the L5 mono-
clonal antibody reduced the formation of processes of
mature GFAP-positive astrocytes on laminin and colla-
gen type IV, but not on fibronectin as substrata. Inter-
estingly, the initial attachment of astrocytic cell bodies
was not disturbed by these antibodies. Antibodies to as-
trochondrin also reduced the migration of granule cells
in the early postnatal mouse cerebellar cortex.
In a solid phase radioligand binding assay, astrochon-
drin was shown to bind to the extracellular matrix
components laminin and collagen type IV, being en-
hanced in the presence of Ca2 but not to fibronectin,
J1/tenascin or other neural recognition molecules. Fur-
thermore, astrochondrin interacted with collagen types
III and V, less strongly with collagen types I, II, and
IX, but not with collagen type VI. The interaction of
astrochondrin with collagen types III and V was satu-
rable and susceptible to increasing ionic strength, and
could be competed by chondroitin sulfate, heparin, and
dextran sulfate, but not by hyaluronic acid, glucose-
6-phosphate, or neuraminic acid.
These observations indicate that astrochondrin may
contribute to morphogenetic processes in the develop-
ing central nervous system by supporting the interac-
tion of astrocytes with extracellular matrix components,
such as laminin and certain collagen types, thus influ-
encing their capacity to extend their processes, possi-
bly by interacting with the basal lamina of meninges
and blood vessels. These interactions appear to be, at
least in part, dependent on the L5 carbohydrate epitope.
TROCYTES participate in numerous processes essen-
tial for the morphogenesis and functional mainten-
ance of the central nervous system (for reviews see
Dr. Streit's present address is Department of Human Anatomy, University
of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QX.
Dr. Nolte'spresent address isSeheringAG,BiochemischePharmakologie,
Miiller Str. 170-178, 1000 Berlin 65 ER.G.
Vernadakis, 1988; Jessen and Mirsky, 1990; Hertz et al.,
1990). In the developing vertebrate brain, radial glial cells
constitute one of the first cell types to form a characteristic
cellular element destined to guide migrating neuronal cell
bodies to their target positions (Rakic, 1972). These radial
glia abut with their endfeet upon the pial surface on one side
and the ventricular lumen on the other, thus forming a spatial
roster for the assembly of functional neuronal units (Rakic,
9 The Rockefeller UniversityPress, 0021-9525/93/02/799/16 $2.00
The Journal of Cell Biology,Volume 120, Number3, February 1993799-814 799
1990). Similarly, astrocytes send out star-shaped processes
to appose their endfeet onto the abluminal side of capillaries
or onto the pia mater, all in close association with the basal
lamina of endothelial and meningeal cells. Such contacts ap-
pear to be instrumental in the determination of tight junc-
tions between endothelial cells (Janzer and Raft, 1987) and
are characterized by intramembranous specializations in the
plasma membrane of astrocytes (Landis and Reese, 1982).
Astrocytic endfeet also appear in close association with
myelinated axons at the node of Ranvier (for review see
Black and Waxman, 1988) and thus have been implicated in
the development and maintenance of internodal specializa-
tions, possibly by topically restricted expression of recogni-
tion molecules in the extraceUular matrix (French-Constant
et al., 1986). A metamorphosis in glial morphology is not
only observed during development, when radial gila trans-
form into astrocytes, but also after damage to the adult ner-
vous system. Astrocytic gliosis is accompanied by extensive
process outgrowth and changes in the disposition of the cyto-
skeleton (Bignami and Ralston, 1969; Latov et al., 1979;
Janeczko, 1989; Davis et al., 1990).
These observations have elicited an interest in the cellular
and molecular determinants underlying the elaboration of
astrocytic morphology in the context of their interactions
with the surrounding target structures. Growth factors have
been found to alter the morphological appearance of astro-
cytes in vitro (Toru-Debauffe et al., 1990), possibly by
influencing intracellular messenger systems including pro-
tein kinase C (Harrison and Mobley, 1990) and cAMP
(Cavanaugh et al., 1990). Also neurons have been shown to
influence the morphology and proliferative behavior of as-
trocytes in vitro (Hatten, 1985; Nagata and Schachner,
1986; Gasser and Hatten, 1990; Rogister et al., 1990). Fur-
thermore, neurons influence the expression of cell surface
components on astrocytes (Nagata and Schachner, 1986) and
may thus determine their communication with the cellular
and acellular environment. The expression of extracellular
matrix components, such as the glia-associated glycoprotein
tenascin, appears to correlate with characteristic morpho-
logical features of astrocytes (Gierson et al., 1990).
Recently, we have characterized a chondroitin sulfate pro-
teoglycancontaining three core protein moieties which is ex-
pressed by cultured astrocytes and not by other neural cell
types in the murine central nervous system (Streit et al.,
1990). This proteoglycanwas isolated by virtue of its expres-
sion of the novel L5 carbohydrate epitope recognized by
the monoclonal L5 antibody. This antibody recognizes an
N-linked carbohydrate structure additionally, but much less
prominently, present on other molecules in the central ner-
vous system, such as the recognition molecules L1 or Thy-1
(Tiveron et al., 1992). Although the latter molecules carry
the L5 carbohydrate, astrochondrin is the only L5-positive
molecule expressed by astrocytes (Streit et al., 1990). The
L5 epitope itself appears to play an important role during
early neurogenesis in chicken (Roberts et al., 1991). More-
over, the L5 expressing chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan was
shown to be a new member ofthe L2/HNK-1 familyof recog-
nition molecules (Kruse et al., 1984, 1985; Schachner et al.,
1990). These observations encouraged us to investigate the
functional properties of this proteoglycan in the interactions
between differentneural cell types and their surrounding ma-
trix. Here, we show that the three core proteins of the pro-
teoglycanare structurally closely related to each other on the
basis of similar proteolytic peptide maps. Furthermore, we
provide evidence that the proteoglycanis involvedin cerebel-
lar granule cell migration and process formation of astro-
cytes on specific substrata, such as lamininand collagen type
IV. Independently, binding assays demonstrate a specific in-
teraction between the proteoglycan and these extracellular
matrix components. Immunoelectron microscopic investiga-
tions show a distinct localizationof the proteoglycan in close
contact with the basal lamina of meningeal and endothelial
cells, thus colocalizing with laminin and collagen type IV.
Because of its unique association with astrocytes and since
it contains chondroitin sulfate as glycosaminoglycancompo-
nent we have named it astrochondrin.
Materials and Methods
ExtraceUular Matrix Components and
Adhesion Molecules
Collagens I, II, HI, IV, V, VI, and IX, were purified as described by Fahrig
et al. (1987) and kindly provided by Dr. K. Kfihn (Max-Planck-Institute for
Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). Collagen G (Seromed, Heidelberg,
Germany) consists of collagen types I (90%) and HI (10%). Englebreth-
Holm sarcoma laminin and human plasma fibronectinwere purchased from
Bethesda Research Laboratories (Galthersburg, MD). Rat chondrosarcoma
chondroitinsulfate proteoglycan (ICN, Rediochemicals, Irvine, CA), hepa-
rin (No. 375095; Calbiochem-BehringCorp., San Diego, CA), chondroitin
sulfate (No. 230687; Calbiochem-Behring Corp.), dextran sulfate (No. D
4911; Sigma Chemical Co.), hyaluronic acid (No. H 4015; Sigma Chemical
Co.), glucose-6-phosphate (Sigma Chemical Co.) and neuraminic acid
(Sigma Chemical Co.) were obtained commercially. The cell adhesion mol-
ecule L1 (Rathjen and Schachner, 1984), the neural cell adhesion molecule
(N-CAM) l (Him et al., 1981), the myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG)
(Fahrig et al., 1987), the adhesion molecule on glia (AM(M3) (Antonicek
et al., 1987), Jl/tenascin (Faissner et al., 1988), and J1-160/180(Kruse et
al., 1985; Posheva et al., 1989) were purified from mouse brain by im-
munoaffinity chromatography as described. AMOG was a kind gift from
Dr. H. Antonicek, J1/tenascin from Dr. K. Husmann and J1-160/180from
Dr. B. Furl (Department of Neurobiology, Swiss Federal Institute of Tech-
nology, Ztirich). Astrochondrin was purified from early postnatal mouse
brain by sequential immunoaffinity chromatography on a monoclonal L5
antibody column after removal of L1 (Rethjen and Schachner, 1984) and
syneuran (Faissner et al., 1992) followed by anion exchange chromatogra-
phy (Streit et al., 1990).
Antibodies
Polyclonal antibodies to glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) were pur-
chased from DAKOPATTS(Copenhagen, Denmark). Polyclonal antibodies
to astrochondrin were raised in rabbits (Streit et al., 1990) and purified by
protein A affinity chromatographyusing fast protein liquid chromatography
(FPLC) (Pharmacia/LKB; Upsala, Sweden). Fab fragmentswere generated
according to Porter (1959). Fig. 1 shows the specificity of the polyclonal
astrochondrin antibodies for the proteoglycan purified by the L5 mAb
column (Fig. 1 A); there is no reaction detectable with other, I..5negative
proteoglycans. When Western blots of total brain homogenates digested
with chondroitinase ABC were probed with the antibodies, only the three
core proteins described for astrochondrin (Fig. 1 B, lanes 2 and 3) could
be identified again showing their specificity for the proteoglycan. Polyclonal
antibodies to astrochondrinonly react with cultured astrocytes and not with
neurons or oligodendrocytes as shown by immunoprecipitation of radioac-
tively labeled cells (Fig. 1 C).
Monoclonal L5 antibody (Streit et al., 1990) was purified from the as-
cites fluid of nu/nu mice carrying L5 hybridoma cells or from the superna-
1. Abbreviations used in this paper: AMOG, adhesion molecule on glia;
BrdU, bromodeoxyuridine; CTB, cytotactin binding; FPLC, fast protein
liquid chromatography; GFAP, glial fibrillaryacidic protein; MAG, myelin-
associated glycoprotein; MI, migratory index; N-CAM, neural cell adhe-
sion molecule.
The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 120, 1993 800
Figure 1. Characterization of polyclonal antibodies to astrochon-
drin. (A) Using polyclonal antibodies to astrochondrin in Western
blot analysis of the protein fractions binding (lane 1) and not bind-
ing (lane 2) to the L5 monoclonal antibody column. Only the pro-
teoglycan binding to the L5 column is reactive. (B) Crude total
brain homogenates from 8 (lanes 1 and 2) and 15 (lane 3) d-old
mice were used for Western blot analysis before (lane 1) and after
treatment with chondroitinase ABC (lanes 2 and 3) and assayed
with polyclonal antibodies to astrochondrin. The antibodies only
recognize the three core proteins described for astrochondrin (ar-
rows). (C) Immunoprecipitation of [35S]methionine labeled astro-
cytes (lane 1), oligodendrocytes (lane 2), and neurons (lane 3)
using polyclonal antibodies to astrochondrin. Astrochondrin is only
detectable in astrocyte cultures. The faint band detected in oligo-
dendrocytes is due to the presence of precursor cells and few con-
taminating astrocytes. Molecular weights of standard protein mix-
tures are indicated at the left margins.
tant of hybridoma cells cultured in I% Nutridoma (Boehringer Mannheim
Biochemicals, Indianapolis, IN) by affinity chromatography on a mouse
anti-rat kappa chaincolumn (Bazin, 1982). Monovaientfragmentswere ob-
tained from the L5 IgM antibodies by tryptic digestion as described by
Matthew and Reichardt (1982). The rat mAb 412 to the L2/HNK-I carbohy-
drate epitope was obtained by immunization of Lou x Sprague Dawley FI
hybrid female rats with crude membrane fractions of early postnatal mouse
cerebellumfollowing the procedures described by Kruse et ai. (1984). Poly-
clonal antibodies to mouse liver membranes (LiMner et al., 1982) and to
L1 (Rathjenand Schachner, 1984) were generatedin rabbitsby Dr. V. Kiine-
mum and A. Spitzauer at the Department of Neurobiology (University of
Heidelberg).
Alkaline phosphatase-coupled antibodies to rabbit IgG (Promega Bio-
tec, Madison, WI) or mouse IgM (Dianova, Hamburg, Germany)were used
as secondary antibodiesfor Western blotanalysis. For indirectimmunofluo-
rescence, primary antibodieswere visualizedby FITC-conjngated swine an-
tibodies to rabbit IgG (Dakopatts) or FITC-conjngated goat antibodies to
rat Ig (Cappel Laboratories, Cochranville, PA) or TRITC-conjugated goat
antibodies to mouse Ig (Dianova). For immunoelectron microscopy, pri-
mary antibodieswere visualizedby HRP-coupled protein A (SignmChemi-
cal Co.) at a concentration of 0.75 #g/ml.
PeptideMapping
Immature cerebellar astrocytes were metabolically labeled with [35S]me-
thionine followed by immunoprecipitationwith polyclonai antibodies to as-
trochoMrin as described previously (Streit et al., 1990). Collected im-
munoprecipitates were washed twice with 50 mM Tris-acetate, pH 8.0,
containing 1 mM ovomucoid (Sigma Chemical Co.) and 1 mM PMSF and
digested with chondroitinase ABC (Boehringer Maanheim Biochemicals)
in the same solution for 3 h at 37~ using 10 mU per precipitate. Then,
I vol of 40 mM sodium phosphatebuffer, pH 7.2, containing I% 2-mercap-
toethanol, 100 mM EDTA was added and digestion with peptide N-glyco-
hydrolase F (25 mU/precipitate; BoehringerMannheim Biochemicais) was
carried out overnight at room temperature. Subsequently, samples were
separated by 6% SDS-PAGE and radioactive bands visualized by autora-
diography. After exposure, the three core protein bands (380, 360, and 260
kD) were cut out and proteolysis of the gel slices with Staphylococcus
aureus "r protease (0.1-2/~g; Boehringer Mannheim Biochemicais) was
performed according to Cleveland et al. (1977) using 15% slab gels and
SDS-PAGE. The resulting peptides were then visualized by autoradiog-
raphy.
WesternBlot Analysis
For Western blot analysis, total brains of 14-d-old NMRI mouse embryos
(El4), and cerebrum and cerebellumof 1-, 5-, 8-, and 15-d-old (Pl, PS, P8,
and PI5) and adult (olderthan 6 wk) NMRI mice were used. Tissue extracts
were prepared by homogenization in 50 mM Tris-acetate, pH 8.0 (1 rni per
gram wet weight of tissue), containing trypsin inhibitors from soybean aM
turkey egg white (10 #g/mi each) and iodoacetamide (0.1 raM). As shown
previously (Streit et al., 1990) buffers containing detergents or chaotropic
agents were not necessary for optimal recovery of the proteoglycan. Ho-
mogenates were shaken at 4~ for 1 h and centrifuged for 10 rain at 200 g
and4~ Proteinconcentrationsin the supernntantweredeterminedaccord-
ing to Bradford (1976). In some cases homogenates were digested with
choMroitinaseABC (BoehringerMannheimBiochemicals;20 mU per 100
#g protein) for 5 h at 37~ Equal amounts ofpretein (100 #g per lane) were
separated by SDS-PAGE on 6% slab gels followed by transfer to nitrocellu-
lose filters according to Kyhsc-AMersen (1984) as described previously
(Streit et ai., 1990). Alkaline phosphatase coupled secondary antibodies
(Dianova) or nsI Protein A (Amersham Corp.) were used for detection.
Cell Culture
Highly enriched cultures of GFAP-positive, mature astrocytes were ob-
tained from brains of 14- to 16-d-old mouse embryos (Trotter et al., 1989).
Cells from 10 to 12 brains were plated into two T75 poly-L-lysine-conted
tissue culture flasks in Eagle's Basal Medium containing 10% horse serum
(culture medium). After 4 to 5 d in culture, neurons were removed by im-
munocytolysis with mAb M5 (Keilhaner et ai., 1985) and guinea pig com-
plement. After another 5 d, loosely attached macrophages were removed
by gently shaking the flasks. Oligodendrocytes and glial precursor cells
were then removed by vigorously shakingthe flasks for ,-15 s. The removal
of ceils was followed microscopically. The procedure resulted in confluent
astrocyte monotayer cultures with a purity of ~176% GFAP-positive cells.
Astrocytes were maintained in culture medium for another 2 to 5 d before
they were taken as single cell suspensions for the cell-to-substratum adhe-
sion assays. Gliai precursor cells appearing during this period were shaken
offimmediately before the preparation of singlecell suspensions. Oligoden-
drocytes were prepared according to the procedure described above, har-
vested by shakingand plated on poly-L-lysine-coated Petri dishes. Purifica-
tion of small cerebellar neurons from 6-d-old mice was carried out as
described (Kellhauer et ai., 1985). Astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and neu-
rons were metabolically labeled with [35S]methionine and processed for
immunoprecipitation with polyclonai antibodies to astrochondrin as de-
scribed previously (Streit et al., 1990).
Cerebellar microexplant cultures were prepared from 6-d-old mice
(Fischer et al., 1986). For antibody perturbation experiments, Fab frag-
ments of polyclonal antibodiesto astrochondrinwere used at concentrations
between 150-500 t~g/mland monovalent IgM fragments of monoclonai [,5
antibody at 100-300 #g/ml. Fab fragments of polyclonal antibodies to
mouse liver membranes reacting with the cell surface of all cell types were
used as control antibodies at the same concentrations. Antibodies were
added to the cultures 4 or 16 h after seeding the microexplants onto cover-
slips.
Migration of granule cells in cerebellar folium explant cultures was de-
termined as described by LiMner et al. (1983, 1986) with the following
modifications: Premigratory proliferatingceils were labeled with bromode-
oxyuridine (BrdU; Del Rio aM Soriano, 1989) instead of labeling with
[3H]thymidine. Explants of cerebellar cortex folia from 10-d-old C57BL/
J6 mice were labeled in vitro with 5 mM BrdU (No. B 5200; Sigma Chemi-
cal Co.) for 90 min in serum-fr~ defined culture medium. The explants
were then washed thoroughly with defined medium and five to seven folia
were maintainedfor 3 d in 3 ml medium withor withoutadditionofantibod-
ies. Frozen sections O0-~mthick) were cut in sagittal orientationand fixed
for 30 rain at room temperature in PBS, pH 7.3, containing 0.5% parafor-
maldehyde. The sections were processed at room temperature as follows:
after several washes in PBS they were treated for 20 rain at room tem-
perature with 4 N HCI in PBS containing 0.5% Tween 20 for denaturation
of DNA and permeabilization, washed several times in PBS, foLlowedby
a 35-rain incubation step with mouse mAb against BrdU (Sigma Chemical
Co.) diluted 1:100in PBS containing 0.5% BSA and 0.5% Tween 20. After
washing in PBS, sections were blocked with PBS containing 1% horse se-
rum and 0.1% BSA (blockingbuffer) for 10 rain, washed in PBS, incubated
Streit et al. Astrochondrin in Process Formation and Cell Migration 801
with TRITC-coupled goat anti-mouse immunoglobulin antibodies diluted
1:100 in blocking buffer, and finally mounted in PBS containing 90%
glycerol and 2 % Nal. The spatial distribution of BrdU-labeled cells was de-
termined by automated image analysis using an IBAS system (Kontron; Karl
Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) (Husmann et al., 1992). Briefly, micro-
scopic images of the immunostained frozen sections of cerebellar folia were
recorded with a video camera. For quantitative comparison of the distribu-
tion patterns of labeled cells under various experimental conditions, the
mean values of the distances of labeled cells (tzm from pial surface) of every
histogram were calculated and designated as migratory index (MI). Inhibi-
tion of cell migration was calculated as follows:
% inhibition = (MI [control]) - (MI [experimental])/(MI[control]) * 100.
For each experimental value, three independent experiments were carried
out in triplicates.
Cell-to-Substratum Adhesion Assay
Collagen type IV, fibronectin, and laminin were each coated onto tissue cul-
ture Petri dishes as single spots in a 2 ~1 droplet at a concentration of 20
/~g/ml in HBSS overnight at 37~ in a CO2 incubator. The droplets were
then removed by aspiration. The Petri dish was blocked with 3% heat-
inactivated BSA in HBSS for 1h at 37~ and afterwards washed three times
with HBSS. Astrocytes were harvested from cell monolayers after mild
trypsin treatment (20/~g/ml trypsin, 0.2 % EDTA in HBSS for 5 min at room
temperature), suspended in modified Sato medium (Trotter et al., 1989) in
the presence or absence of antibodies and added to the test plates at a density
of 2.5 * 105 cells/ml. For antibody perturbation experiments, Fab frag-
ments of polyclonal antibodies to astrochondrin were used at concentrations
between 125-500/~g/rnl. Fab fragments of polyclonal antibodies to mouse
liver membranes reacting with the surface of astrocytes were used as control
antibodies at the same concentrations. 30 min after plating, the non-
attached cells were removed by washing twice with HBSS. The remaining
cells were again incubated in Sato medium in the presence or absence of
antibodies. The number of attached cells was evaluated by phase contrast
microscopy after 5 h. Cells were then further maintained in culture and
fixed after 24 h in PBS containing 4 % paraformaldehyde for 10 min at room
temperature and stained with 0.2% toluidine blue in 2.5% Na2CO3. Cell
process formation was evaluated microscopically: cells with processes
longer than two thirds of the cell diameter were counted as process bearing
cells. Cells with round, flattened morphology (cf. Fig. 9f) and with trian-
gular morphology (cf. Fig. 9 h) were counted as non-process bearing cells.
The percentage of process bearing cells (between 50 and 80% of all adher-
ent cells) in the absence of antibodies or in the presence of Fab fragments
of antibodies to mouse liver membranes was set to 100% and inhibition of
process formation in the presence of antibodies to astrochondrin was calcu-
lated in relation to this value.
lmmunocytochemistry
Light Microscopy. Animals were sacrificed by cervical dislocation. Cere-
bella were quickly frozen in isopentane cooled by liquid nitrogen. Cryosec-
tions, 10-t~mthick, were mounted on poly-L-lysine-coatedglass coverslips
and allowed to dry for at least 1 h at room temperature. Indirect immuno-
fluorescence was carried out as described previously (Goridis et al., 1983).
For immunocytology of cultured cerebellar microexplants, cultures were
fixed and permeabilized in ice-cold 96% ethanol, and indirect immunofluo-
rescence was carried out as described (Schnitzer and Schachner, 1981).
Specificity of the immunoreaction was verified by incubation of sections or
cultures with 1% BSA containing 0.1% horse serum instead of primary anti-
bodies.
EM. Animals were deeply anaesthetized by imraperitoneal injection of
3% chloral hydrate (aqueous solution, 0.01 mg/g body weight) and perfused
intracardially with a solution of4 % paraformaldehyde and 0.1% glutaralde-
hyde in 0.12 M Palay buffer (Palay and Chan-Palay, 1974). Cerebella were
post-fixed in fixation solution without glutaraldehyde for "r h at 4~ and
embedded in 5% Agar-Agar (Difco Laboratories, Detroit, MI) diluted in
PBS, pH 7.3. Sections, 50-70-/~m thick, were cut on a vibratome and rinsed
for up to 2 h in PBS containing 0.1% BSA. Pre-embedding staining, using
primary polyclonal antibodies and peroxidase-coupled protein A, was per-
formed as described (Martini and Schachner, 1986; Nolte et al., 1989). In
brief, vibratome sections were incubated first in 0.1 M NalO4 (10 min) and
then in 1% NaBI-I4 (15 min), and finally in 5% DMSO (30 min) at room
temperature. Sections were incubated with polyclonal antibodies to as-
trochondrin overnight at 4~ washed, incubated with peroxidase-coupled
protein A for at least 2 h at room temperature, and washed again. After fixa-
tion with 0.1% glutaraldehyde for 15 rain, sections were immersed in 0.02 %
3,3'-diaminobenzidine-4HCl (Sigma Chemical Co.) in 0.04 M Tris buffer,
pH 7.6, for 30 min, then in the diaminobenzidine solution containing 0.01%
H202, also for 30 min, all at room temperature. Sections were post-fixed
in 2 % OsO4, dehydrated in acetone, and embedded in Spurr (Piano, Mar-
burg, Germany). Ultrathin sections were analyzed by EM (EM 10C; Carl
Zeiss).
Solid Phase Radioligand Binding Assay
Iodination ofpurified astrochondrin was performed according to the method
of Salacinski et al. (1981) as described (Streit et al., 1990). Radioligand
binding assays were also carried out as described (Fahrig et al., 1987).
Briefly, individual wells of flexible microtiter plates (No. 3911 Falcon,
Cockeysville, MD) were incubated overnight at 4~ with different proteins
at concentrations of 20 #g/ml in 0.1 M NaHCO3, pH 8.2 (coating buffer).
Plates were then treated with coating buffer containing 1% BSA for 1 h at
room temperature and afterwards washed three times with hypotonlc (10
mM K2HPO4/KH2PO4, 15 mM NaC1, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% BSA, pH 7.4)
or isotonic incubation buffer (10 mM K2HPOjKH2PO4, 150 mM NaCI,
1 mM EDTA, 0.1% BSA, pH 7.4). For experiments carried out in the pres-
ence of Ca2+, 1 mM CaCI2 was added to the incubation buffers that con-
tained no EDTA. Wells were incubated with 125I-labeled astrochondrin
(usually 50,000-70,000 cpm) diluted in the appropriate incubation buffer for
4 to 5 h at room temperature and washed five times in incubation buffer.
Bound radioactivity was counted immediately after cutting the bottom of
the plastic wells. Coating efficiencies of the different proteins were deter-
mined as described (Fahrig et al., 1987) and found to be similar (,~i0%
of the total input) for all collagen types and recognition molecules. Values
of saturation curves in the binding assay were plotted according to Scatchard
(1949) and could be approximated with one linear function by linear re-
gression. Binding of 125I-labeled astrochondrin to BSA (unspecific back-
ground) was subtracted from experimental values unless indicated.
When binding assays were carried out in the presence of glycosaminogly-
cans or monosaccharides, these substances were mixed with 125I-labeled
astrochondrin immediately before the assay at concentrations indicated in
the figure legends.
The percentage of maximal binding was determined as follows: maximal
binding in each experiment was set to 100% and the other values calculated
in relation to this value. Mean values of different experiments carried out
in triplicates were calculated and are shown +SD.
Results
Relationship between the Three CoreProteins of the
Condroitin Sulfate Proteoglycan
We previously demonstrated that digestion with chondro-
itinase ABC of the L5 carbohydrate expressing proteoglycan
isolated from mouse brain generated three core proteins of
different molecular size (Streit et al., 1990). To distinguish
whether these core proteins are structurally related to each
other, proteolyticpeptide maps were generated from biosyn-
thetically labeled proteoglycan derived from astrocyte cell
cultures (Fig. 2). After treatment with chondroitinase ABC
and N-glycohydrolaseF and digestion with V8 protease, the
three core proteins yielded similar peptide maps. Whereas
the peptide patterns of 260- and 360-kD core proteins were
very similar, the 380-kD core protein not only yielded corre-
sponding, but also different peptide bands. Three peptides
with apparent molecular weights of *19, 17, and 7.5 kD were
found to be identical in all the core proteins (Fig. 2, filled
arrows).The 380-kD protein contained additionallyone ma-
jor peptide of ~ 30 kD (Fig. 2, lanes 3 and 4), also occurring
as an intermediate product in digestion of the 360-kD mole-
cule (Fig. 2, lane 6). Moreover, the similarity between the
different protein bands is underscored by the fact that 40.5-
and 24-kD fragments appear during digestion of both the
The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 120, 1993 802
Figure 2. Peptide mapping of the core proteins of astrochondrin.
Immunoprecipitates of astrochondrin with polyclonal antibodies
from 35S-labeledcultures of immature astrocytes were digested
with chondroitinase ABC and peptide N-glycohydrolaseE The in-
set shows the pattern of the deglycosylated core proteins in 6%
SDS-PAGE. Numbers refer to the molecular weights of protein
bands after chondroitinase treatment only as originally described
in Streit et al. (1990). Proteolytic digestion of the deglycosylated
380 kD (lanes 1-4), 360 kD (lanes 5-8) and 260 kD (lanes 9-12)
components was carried out with 0.1 #g (lanes 2, 6, and 10), 1 l~g
(lanes 3, 7,and 11)and 2/~g (lanes 4, 8, and 12) V8 protease. Lanes
1, 5, and 9 show the core proteins before treatment with V8 pro-
tease. Filled arrows mark peptides identical in all three core pro-
teins, open arrows those which are similar in the 360- and 260-kD
proteins only. Molecular weights of two different standard protein
mixtures are indicated at the left margin.
380- and the 360-kD core proteins (Fig. 2, lanes 3 and 6).
The peptides with the apparent molecular weights of rvl0,
12, and 22.5 kD (Fig. 2, open arrows) derived from the 360-
and 260-kD components were not present in the 380-kD
component. Thus, the three proteins show considerable
similarities in their proteolytic peptides and appear to be
comprised of closely related molecules for which we pro-
pose the name of astrochondrin, reflecting its unique local-
ization on astrocyte cell surfaces and the presence of chon-
droitin sulfate as glycosaminoglycan component. It is worth
emphasizing here that in accordance with our previous ob-
servations (Streit et al., 1990) immunofluorescence labeling
of cerebellar cell cultures (not shown) and immunoprecipita-
tion of biosynthetically labeled cultures of purified small cer-
ebellar neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes using
polyclonal antibodies to astrochondrin demonstrated that the
proteoglycan is expressed by astrocytes only (Fig. 1 C).
Immunochemical and Immunocytochemical Detection
of Astrochondrin during Development
To gain first insights into the role of astrochondrin in the cen-
tral nervous system, its expression at differentdevelopmental
stages was investigated immunochemically and immunocy-
tochemically. Western blot analysis of crude homogenates of
murine cerebellum and cerebrum of differentdevelopmental
stages (from embryonic day 14 until adult; Fig. 3) using
polyclonal antibodies to astrochondrin showed that at em-
bryonic day 14, astrochondrin was hardly detectable. As-
trochondrin expression increased during the first postnatal
week, with a peak at approximately day 8, and then de-
creased to low levels in the adult. At all developmental
stages, expression of astrochondrin was more prominent in
Figure3. Western blot analysis ofastrochondrin expression during
development in crude homoganates of cerebellum (/), cerebrum
(2), or total embryonic brain (E/4). Homogenates were prepared
from 14-d-old mouse embryos (E/4), 1 (P1), 5 (PS), 8 (PS), and
15(P15)-d-oldand adult (A)mice and assayedwith polyclonalanti-
bodies to astrochondrin. Molecular weight markers are indicated
at the right margin.
the cerebellum than in the cerebrum. Identical results were
obtained with monoclonal L5 antibody (not shown).
Immtmoprecipitations with polyclonal antibodies to as-
trochondrin from detergent lysates of biosynthetically la-
beled immatm'e and mature astrocytes (not shown) demon-
strated that all three core proteins are present in both cell
populations suggesting that no major changes in the expres-
sion of the core proteins occur during development.
To investigate the cellular and subcellular localization of
astrochondrin in situ, immunocytochemical studies were
carded out in histological sections of postnatal mouse cere-
bellum at the light and electron microscopic level. Indirect
immunofluorescence was performed with monoclonal L5
antibody and polyclonal antibodies to astrochondrin on fresh
frozen sections of 6- and 14-d-old adult mice (not shown).
Both antibodies showed almost identical staining patterns at
these stages. In agreement with the immunochemical data,
the most distinct and highest immunoreactivity was observed
at postnatal day 6. At this stage, the antibodies reacted most
prominently with the developing molecular layer in a homo-
geneous distribution. Immunoreactivities for both antibod-
ies were also detectable in the external and internal granular
layers, with the latter being more intensely stained by the an-
tibodies than the external granular layer. The internal granu-
lar layer showed labeling around granule cell bodies. The
staining pattern was often punctate in the outer margin of the
external granular layer. At day 14, immunoreactivitybecame
very weak in the molecular layer when compared to earlier
stages and was hardly or not at all detectable in the adult
cerebellum. In the adult, only the internal granular layer and
the white matter were very weakly labeled with both anti-
bodies.
Immunoelectron microscopic analysis using polyclonal
antibodies to astrochondrin in the cerebellum of 6-d-old
mice showed immunoreactivity at the cell surface of astro-
cytes including those of the radial Bergmann glial processes
in the external granular and molecular layers (Fig. 4, A and
Streitet al. Astrochondrinin ProcessFormationand CellMigration 803
Figure4. Immunoelectronmi-
croscopic localization of as-
trochondrin in the cerebel-
lar cortex of 6-d-old mice
using polyclonal antibodies.
(A) External granular layer.
Bergrnarmglial fibers (Bg) are
positive for astrochondrin at
contact sites with each other
and with granule cells (g),
(solid arrowheads). Contact
sites between granule cell
bodies and their axonai pro-
cesses do not showdetectable
levels of immunoreactivity
(empty arrowheads). (B) Ex-
ternal granular layer. Astro-
cyticendfeet(as) abuttingonto
the basement membrane (bin)
at the pial surface are weakly
antigen-positive (solid arrow-
heads). The basement mem-
brane itself does not show
detectable levels of immuno-
reactivity(emptyarrowheads).
(C) Molecular layer. The cell
surfaces of parallel fibers are
immunoreactive (solid arrow-
heads), whereas contact sites
between dendrites (d) appear
negative (emptyarrowheads).
Bergmann glia fibers (Bg)ex-
press the proteoglycan at con-
tact sites (solid arrowheads).
Bars, 0.2 #m.
C). Endfeet of astrocytes contacting blood vessels or endfeet
of Bergmann glia abutting onto the pia mater were as-
trochondrin positive (Fig. 4 B). The basal lamina juxtaposed
between glial endfeet and pia did not show detectable im-
munoreactivity (Fig. 4 B). Within the external granular
layer, astrochondrin was not detectable on somata or proces-
ses of granule cells where then contacted each other (Fig. 4
A, empty arrowheads). Contact sites between granule cells
and Bergmann glial processes, however, were astrochondrin
positive (Fig. 4 A, solid arrowheads). In agreement with the
observations at the light microscopic level strong immunore-
activity in the molecular layer was seen at the cell surface
of parallel fibers (Fig. 4 C). In the molecular and internal
granular layers, astrochondrin was detectable at the surface
of neurons only where they were contacted by an astrocytic
process or by the astrochondrin-positive parallel fibers (Fig.
4, A and C). In the adult cerebeUar cortex, hardly any im-
munoreactivity was observed by immuno EM neither in as-
sociation with the surface nor intracellularly.
Astrochondrin Is Involved in Cerebellar
Granule Cell Migration
To gain insights into the functional roles of astrochondrin in
the early postnatal morphogenesis of the cerebellar cortex,
antibody perturbation experiments were performed in differ-
ent cell culture systems. Since astrochondrin was most prom-
inently expressed in the cerebellum and its expression
peaked at the beginning of the second postnatal week, the de-
velopmental stage at which cerebellar granule cell migration
along astrochondrin-positive Bergmann glial fibers takes
place, we first tested whether astrochondrin may be involved
in this migration process. In tissue pieces of 10-d-old mouse
cerebellum maintained in vitro for 3 d, the dislocation of
bromodeoxyuridine-labeledneurons from the external to the
internal granular layer can be determined quantitatively. In
this assay system, the IgG fraction of polyclonal antibodies
to astrochondrin inhibited granule cell migration by 28 +
6.7% (Figs. 5 and 6). This value has previously been ob-
TheJournalofCellBiology,Volume120,1993 804
Figure5. Effectsofpolyclonal
antibodies to astrochondrin
on the migration of cerebellar
granule cells. Sagittalsections
of cerebellar folium explants
were immunocytochemically
stained with antibodies to
bromodeoxyuridine used to
poise-label dividing cells. (A)
Explant maintained in the ab-
sence of antibodies. (B) Ex-
plant maintained in the pres-
ence of polyclonal antibodies
to astrochondrin (IgG frac-
tion, 500 #g/ml). (C) Explant
maintained in the presence of
monoclonal antibody 412 to
the L2 carbohydrate epitope
(IgG fraction, 500 /~g/ml).
Bar, 50/~m.
served with polyclonal antibodies to L1 (both IgG fraction
and Fab fragments). No inhibition was observed when ex-
plants were maintained in the presence of monoclonai anti-
body 412 to the L2/HNK-1 carbohydrate structure (IgG
fraction).
Astrochondrin Is Involved in Astrocytic
Process Formation
Astrocyte Outgrowth in CerebeUarMicroexplant Cultures.
Since Bergmann glial cells continue to divide and elaborate
radially oriented processes abutting with their endfeet onto
the meninges early postnatally, the question arose whether
astrochondrin is involved in astrocyte-mediated cell interac-
tions other than cerebellar granule cell migration. Thus, the
cellular outgrowth pattern of cultured microexplants from
early postnatal mouse cerebellum was investigated in the ab-
sence and presence of polyclonal antibodies to astrochondrin
and monoclonal L5 antibodies. These microexplant cultures
provide an in vitro assay system to monitor migration of cell
bodies and process outgrowth of neurons and astrocytes.
When microexplants were plated onto glass coverslips
coated with poly-D-lysine, the characteristic outgrowth pat-
tern described by Fischer et al. (1986) could be observed.
Microexplants attached to the substratum within the first 2 h.
Neurites started to leave the explant after 24 h. Neuronal cell
bodies migrated out of the explant core and neurites began
to fasciculate in the periphery after 48-72 h. Astrocytes sent
out processes more slowly than neurons and rarely left the
explant core. When Fab fragments of polyclonal antibodies
to astrochondrin (250/~g/ml) or monovalent fragments of
polyclonai antibodies to astrochondrin (250 #g/mi) or
monovalent fragments of the monoclonal L5 antibody (300
#g/ml) were added to the cultures 16 h after plating, the out-
growth of astrocytic processes was found to be modified
(Fig. 7), as visualized by immunocytochemical staining with
antibodies to GFAP, a marker for mature astrocytes. Forma-
tion of processes was markedly reduced (Fig. 7, b, e, c, and
f) when compared to the controls, in which either no anti-
bodies or Fab fragments of polyclonal antibodies to mouse
liver membranes (250 #g/ml) had been added (Fig. 7, a and
d). Furthermore, *20% of all explants maintained in the
presence of antibodies to astrochondrin or monoclonai L5
antibody showed strong fasciculation of neurites in the vicin-
ity of the explant core (Fig. 7 c).
When microexplants were plated on coverslips coated with
laminin, the outgrowth of neurites and astrocytes as well as
their migration out of the explant core were enhanced in time
and space when compared to poly-D-lysine as substratum.
Therefore, Fab fragments of polyclonal antibodies to as-
trochondrin or mouse liver membranes and monovalent frag-
ments of monoclonal L5 antibody were added to the cultures
z
25
I0
m
5-
.jl
~[ ML
f
IGL J
14 42 70 98 126 154 182 210 238
Position (p.m)
Figure6. Relativedistribution ofbromodeoxyuridinepulse-labeled
cells with respect to their distance fromthe pial surface. Cerebellar
foliumexplantspulse labeled with bromodeoxyuridine were main-
tained for 3 d in vitro in the absence (weakline)or presence (solid
line)ofpolyclonal antibodies to astrochondrin. The position of the
bromodeoxyuridine-labeled cells in sagittal sections is plotted as a
function of distance from the pial surface (in #m). In the presence
ofantibodiesto astrochondrin (IgG fraction, 500 #g/ml), migration
of pulse-labeled cells was inhibited by 28 + 6.7% when compared
with controls. The histogram showsmean values ofthree indepen-
dent experiments carried out in triplicate. EGL, external granular
layer; IGL, internal granular layer; ML, molecular layer; N, num-
ber of labeled cells expressed in percentage.
Streit et al. Astrochondrin in Process Formation and Cell Migration 805
Figure7.Elfectofmonoclonal
L5 antibody and polyclonal
antibodies to astrochondrin
on theoutgrowthpattern ofas-
trocytes in culturesofcerebel-
lax microexplants on poly-o-
lysine. Microexplants from
cerebellaof6-d-oldmice were
platedon poly-o-lysine-coated
coverslips. Fab fragments of
polyclonalantibodiesto mouse
liver membranes (a and d;
500 t~g/ml) or to astrochon-
drin (b and e; 250 #g/ml) or
monovalentIgM fragments of
monoclonal L5 antibody (c
andf; 300/~g/ml) were added
16 h later. After 72 h in vi-
tro, explants were stained by
indirect immunofluorescence
with antibodiesto GFAPto vi-
sualizemature astrocytes, a-c
show corresponding phase
contrast micrographs to fluo-
rescence images d-f, respec-
tively. Bar, 50 #m.
already 4 h after plating. After 48 h of culture, GFAP-
positive astrocytes were monitored in their outgrowth pat-
tern (Fig. 8). As on poly-o-lysine, monoclonal L5 antibody
and polyclonai antibodies to astrochondrin reduced the for-
marion of astrocytic processes, whereas they did not inter-
fere with neurite outgrowth or migration of neuronal cell
bodies.
The outgrowth pattern of microexplants plated on mono-
layers of mature astrocytes as substratum closely resembled
that observed on laminin. Addition of monoclonal L5 anti-
body and polyclonal antibodies to astroehondrin 4 h after
plating did not reveal an altered pattern of neurite outgrowth
after 48 h as visualized immunocytochemicaUy by antibod-
ies to the neural recognition molecule L1 (not shown). The
outgrowth pattern of astrocytes could not be monitored in
these cultures, since explant-derived astrocytes could not be
distinguished immunocytochemically from the astrocyte
monolayer underneath.
These observations indicate that both monoclonal L5 anti-
body and polyclonal antibodies to astrochondrin interfere
with the outgrowth pattern of astrocytes in cerebellar micro-
explant cultures suggesting that astrochondrin and the L5
carbohydrate domain may be involved in formation of astro-
cytic processes. On astrocyte surfaces astrochondrin rep-
resents the only L5-expressing molecule so the target of both
polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies is the proteoglycan
only. Since neurons achieve L5-positivity only after several
days in culture and do not express astrochindrin in vitro,
modification in neurite outgrowth pattern in the presence of
the antibodies may thus be secondary to the inhibition of as-
trocyte outgrowth.
Astrocyte Adhesion and Process Formation. We next in-
vestigated the influence of polyclonal antibodies to as-
trochondrin on astrocyte adhesion and process outgrowth in
cell-to-substratum adhesion assays. As substrata, fibronec-
tin, laminin, collagen type IV, and astrochondrin were cho-
sen and coated on tissue culture Petri dishes as individual
spots. Mildly trypsinized single cell suspensions of mature
astrocytes expressing astrochondrin at the cell surface were
plated onto these substrates in the absence or presence ofFab
TheJournalofCellBiology,Volume120,1993 806
Figure8. Effect of monoclo-
nal L5 antibody and polyclo-
nal antibodies to astrochon-
drin on the outgrowth pattern
of astroeytes in cultures of
cerebellar microexplants on
laminin. Microexplants from
cerebella of6-d-old mice were
plated on coverslips coated
with 20 #g/ml laminin. Fab
fragments of polyclonal anti-
bodies to mouse liver mem-
branes (a and d; 500 #g/ml)
or to astrochondrin (b and e;
250 #g/ml) or monovalent
IgM fragments of monoclonal
L5 antibody (c andf; 300 #g/
ml) were added 4 h later. Af-
ter48 h in vitro, explantswere
stained by indirect immuno-
fluorescence with antibodies
to GFAP to visualize mature
astrocytes, a-c show corre-
sponding phase contrast mi-
crographs to fluorescence im-
ages d-f, respectively. Bar,
50 ~m.
fragments (250 #g/ml) of polyclonal antibodies to astrochon-
drin or mouse liver membranes. Cell adhesion and process
formation were evaluated after 5 and 24 h. Astrocytes at-
tached well to laminin, fibronectin and collagen type IV
within 30 to 45 min, whereas astrochondrin itself proved to
be a very poor substratum and almost no cells adhered. Anti-
bodies to astrochondrin did not interfere with the initial
adhesion of astrocytes to any of these substrata.
After 5 h in culture, astrocytes had begun to extend pro-
cesses almost equally well on the three substrata in the ab-
sence or presence of antibodies to mouse liver membranes
(Fig. 9, a and c, for collagen type IV) and formed a network
of processes after 24 hours (Fig. 9, e, g, and i, for collagen
type IV, laminin and fibronectin, respectively). In the pres-
ence of polyclonal antibodies to astrochondrin, astrocytes
remained without processes 5 h after plating (Fig. 9, b and
d, for collagen type IV) and, after 24 h, hardly formed any
processes but showed a round, somewhat flattened morphol-
ogy on collagen type IV (Fig. 9f) and a triangular morphol-
ogy on laminin (Fig. 9 h). Formation of cell processes was
markedly reduced on both substrata in the presence of anti-
bodies to astrochondrin, with the inhibition being more
prominent on collagen type IV (*80%) than on laminin
(ru40 %) (Fig. 10 A). The extent of inhibition of process for-
mation depended on the antibody concentration (Fig. 10 B).
When fibronectin was used as substratum, no differences in
morphology could be observed between astrocytes cultured
in the presence or absence of polyclonal antibodies to liver
membranes or to astrochondrin (Figs. 8, i and j and 10 A).
These observations indicate that astrochondrin may be in-
volved in the formation of astrocytic processes by interaction
with the extracellular matrix components laminin and colla-
gen, but not fibronectin.
Binding ofAstrochondrin to ExtraceUular
Matrix Components
Since these cell biological studies suggested that astrochon-
drin interacts with particular extracellular matrix compo-
nents we addressed the question, whether the purified mole-
Streit et al. Astrochondrin in Process Formation and Cell Migration 807
Figure 9. Effect of polyclonal antibodies to astrochondrin on pro-
cess formationofmature astrocyteson the substrata laminin, colla-
gen type IV, and fibronectin. Collagen type IV (a-f), laminin (g
and h), and fibronectin (i andj) were coated onto Petri dishes as
individual spots and single cell suspensions of mature astrocytes
were added in the presence ofFab fragments ofpolyclonalantibod-
ies to mouse liver membranes (a, c, e, g, and i) or to astrochondrin
(b, d, f, h, andj). Astrocyte morphology was evaluatedeither 5 h
(a-d) or 24 h (e-j) afterplating the cells. Cells were either immu-
nocytochemically labeled with antibodies to GFAP (c and d) or
stained with toluidine blue (a, b, and e-j). Bars, 50 #m.
cule could directly bind to these components in a solid phase
radioligand binding assay. Under hypotonic conditions (10
mM phosphate buffer, 15 mM NaC1, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1%
BSA, pH 7.4) astrochondrin could be shown to interact with
collagen types I, II, III, IV, V, IX, and G, and laminin (Fig.
11 A) with different efficiencies, but not with collagen type
VI and BSA. Interaction was most pronounced with collagen
types III and V, with up to 40 4- 5 % of the added astrochon-
drin being bound. Astrochondrin bound 30- to 40-fold more
efficiently to the collagens type HI and type V than to BSA.
When the proteoglycan concentration was reduced (from
70,000 to ~10,000 cpm) binding of up to 80% of the total
input and a 50- to 60-fold better binding to collagens type
III and V than to BSA was found, suggesting that not only
a subset of molecules, but all components of astrochondrin
are able to interact with these collagens. Binding of as-
trochondrin to collagen types IV or IX and laminin was
stronger in the presence of 1 mM Ca2+ (10 mM phosphate
buffer, 15 mM NaCI, 1 mM CaC12, 0.1% BSA, pH 7.4)
than in its absence. Under these conditions, astrochondrin
bound up to sevenfold better to collagen types IV and IX
("o30% of the total input) and 3.5-fold better to laminin
(~15% of the total input) than to BSA. These results indi-
cate that divalent cations are promoting the interactions be-
tween astrochondrin and collagen types IV and IX or lami-
nin. Binding of astrochondrin to the other collagens was
not markedly different in the presence or absence of Ca2+
(Fig. 11 B).
Under isotonic conditions (10 mM phosphate buffer, 150
mM NaC1, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% BSA, pH 7.4) binding ofas-
trochondrin to extracellular matrix components was gener-
ally reduced, remaining pronounced for collagen types 1II
and V with 7-12% of the input being bound (,,ol0-fold above
binding to BSA; Fig. 11 C). Considerable binding of as-
trochondrin to laminin and collagen type IV under isotonic
conditions could only be observed in the presence of 1 mM
Ca2+(10 mM phosphate buffer, 150 mM NaC1, 1 mM Ca2+,
0.1% BSA, pH 7.4; Fig. 11 D) with values being approxi-
mately five- to sevenfold higher than binding to BSA
(3.5-5% of the total input). Under none of the conditions
tested, astrochondrin was found to bind to the adhesion mol-
ecules L1, N-CAM, MAG and AMOG and to the extracellu-
lar matrix components J1/tenascin, J1-160/180, and fibronec-
tin (Fig. 11, A-D).
To analyze the specificity of the interaction between as-
trochondrin and collagentypes 11/and V, increasing amounts
of astrochondrin were allowed to bind to hypotonic (Fig. 12)
and isotonic (not shown) buffers. Under both conditions,
saturation could be achieved, suggesting a specific and finite
number of proteoglycan binding sites. Scatchard plot analy-
sis (Scatchard, 1949) of these data (Fig. 12, A and B, insets)
yielded linear plots for collagen types HI (r = 0.94) and V
(r = 0.93) indicating that these collagens contain a single
class of binding sites for astrochondrin.
To investigate whether the binding of astrochondrin to col-
lagen types III and V is dependent on ionic interactions, the
influence of different concentrations of NaC1 on binding
efficiencies was determined (Fig. 13). Binding was highest
at 15 mM NaC1 in 10 mM phosphate buffer, 1 mM EDTA,
0.1% BSA, pH 7.4 (30% of the total input of astrochondrin),
decreasing to a constant level of 5 to 7 % of the total input
at 75 mM NaC1 in the same buffer.
To further characterize the properties of the collagen bind-
ing site, we studied the effect of polyanionic carbohydrates
and charged monosaccharides on the binding of astrochon-
drin to collagen (Fig. 14). Collagen types HI and V were in-
cubated with ~2q-labeled astrochondrin in the presence of
increasing concentrations of glucose-6-phosphate (10-7-10-3
M), neuraminic acid (10-7-10-2 M), hyaluronic acid (1-3 x
109 ng/ml), dextran sulfate (10-1~ -~ M), heparin (10-~~
10-3 M), and chondroitin sulfate (10-1~ -3 M) (10 mM
phosphate buffer, 15 mM NaC1, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% BSA,
pH 7.4). Glucose-6-phosphate, neuraminic acid, and hyal-
uronic acid did not alter the binding of astrochondrin to all
collagen types tested (not shown), whereas dextran sulfate,
heparin and chondroitin sulfate were potent inhibitors (Fig.
14, A and B). At half maximal binding, the astrochondrin-
The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 120, 1993 808
Figure 10. (A) Quantitative
evaluation of the effects of Fab
fragments of polyclonal anti-
bodies to astrochondrin (250
#g/ml) on process formation
by astrocytes on collagen IV,
laminin and fibronectin as
shown in Fig. 9. The percent-
age of process bearing ceils in
control experiments was set to
100%. Bars represent mean
values of three independent
experiments carried out in du-
plicates * SD. (B) Inhibition
of astrocytic process forma-
tion as a function of concentration of Fab fragments of polyclonal antibodies to astrochondrin. Mean values from one representative experi-
ment carried out in duplicates are given. In three independent experiments, SDs were <5 %. ([]) Collagen IV; ([]) laminin; ([]) fibronectin;
(o) collagen IV; (~7) laminin.
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
100
90
t0
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
tO0
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
100
90
80
70
89
50
40
30
20
10
0
hypotonic conditions
tltl i
I I I i ~ i i i I
B [ II Ill IV V Vl 1X G L F LI M N A T Jl
B hypotonic conditions, calcium
B I II III IV V Vl IX G L F LI M N A T Jl
C isotonic conditions
I
i
B I II Ill IV V Vl IX G L F LI M N A T Jl
D isotonic conditions, calcium
B I II I1| IV V Vl IX G L F LI M N A T Jl
collagen type III interaction was inhibited ~30 times better
by dextran sulfate than by chondroitin sulfate and heparin
(Fig. 14 A). In contrast, when binding of astrochondrin to
collagen type V was measured, concentrations of all three
polyanions were similar at half maximal inhibition values
with chondroitin sulfate and heparin being two- to fivefold
more potent inhibitors than dextran sulfate.
Discussion
In this study we present evidence that the differently sized
core proteins of the astrocyte-derived chondroitin sulfate
proteoglycan (Streit et al., 1990) are structurally related to
each other. At the moment we cannot distinguish whether the
three components are generated by posttranslational modifi-
cations or whether they are transcribed from different mes-
senger RNAs. Furthermore, pulse chase experiments ruled
out the possibility that the two lower molecular weight pro-
teins are derived by proteolytic cleavage of the 380-kD com-
ponent (Streit, A., and M. Schachner, unpublished obser-
vations). Since the peptide maps were generated from
deglycosylated astrochondrin, it does not seem likely that the
core proteins represent differentially N-glycosylated forms
of a single protein backbone (see also Streit et al., 1990). Be-
cause of the characteristic expression of the proteoglycan by
astrocytes and the structural similarities between the in-
dividual core components, we propose to designate this
Figure 11. Binding of astrochondrin to extracellular matrix compo-
nents and neural recognition molecules as determined by the solid
phase radioligand binding assay. The interaction of ~25I-labeledas-
trochondrin with collagen types I (I), II (lI), III (IIl), IV (/V),
V (V), VI (VI), IX (/X), and G (G), the extracellular matrix
components laminin (L), fibronectin (F), J1/tenascin (T), and J1-
160 (J1) and the neural recognition molecules L1 (L/), MAG (M),
N-CAM (N), and AMOG (A) was investigated in hypotonic (15 mM
NaCl; A and B) and isotonic (150 mM NaC1; C and D) 10 mM
phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, in the presence (1 mM CaC12; B and D)
or absence (1 mM EDTA; A and C) of Ca2+. Mean values are
from three (C and D) and four (A and B) independent experiments
carried out in triplicates * SD. In each experiment maximal bind-
ing was set to 100%. Binding of ~25I-labeledastrochondrin to BSA
(B) was not subtracted.
Streit et al. Astrochondrin in Process Formation and Cell Migration 809
~ 5
.a
collagen Ill
/
, , --i
50 tO0 1.50
added (epm x tq000)
O.9
o.8 1
0.7
0.6
0.5 |
O.4
0.3
O.2
~ -
o.u
0 5 lo
bound (cpm x I(~000)
200 25O
B collagen V
/
o
./
i
50
0-
0.9
0,2
0.1
0.0
0 bouSdn 0 t 5
(cpm 9 IODOO
100 150 200 250
added {epm x 10.005)
Figure 12. Binding of astro-
chondrin to collagen types III
(A)and V (B) as a function of
astrochondrin concentration
under hypotonic conditions
(see legend to Fig. 9) as de-
terminedbythe solidphase ra-
dioligandbindingassay.Mean
valuesfrom one representative
experimentcarried out in trip-
licates + SD are given. Or-
dinate: Amount of |2SI-labeled
astrochondrin (cpm) bound.
Abscissa: input of t2SI-labeled
astrochondrin (cpm). (Insets)
Corresponding Scatchard
plots.
group of chondroitin sulfate carrying molecules astro-
chondrin.
Astrochondrin, expressed and released by astrocytes in
vitro and associated with their cell surface (Streit et al.,
1990), is involved in granule cell migration and the interac-
tion of astrocytes with certain extracellular matrix compo-
nents. In particular, process formation on the extracellular
matrix substrata laminin and collagen type IV, but not
fibronectin, is influenced by antibodies to astrochondrin in
vitro. In cerebellar microexplant cultures, antibodies to as-
trochondrin interfered with astrocytic process formation,
whereas they did not affect neurite outgrowth patterns on
different substrata. In a cell-to-substratum adhesion assay
antibodies to astrochondrin inhibited process formation of
astrocytes.
To our knowledge, astrochondrin is the first nervous sys-
tem-derived chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan shown to be
involved in astrocyte process formation. It is noteworthy that
astrochondrin does not mediate the initial attachment of as-
trocytes to laminin or collagen type IV. Thus, adhesion and
process outgrowth can be separated into two distinct events
suggesting that distinct molecular mechanisms are involved.
It is interesting in this context that a fibroblast derived hepa-
ran sulfate proteoglycan was shown to be essential to induce
30
20
10
i , , , , ~ i T
20 40 60 00 100 120 140 160
concentration NaCl [mM]
Figure 13. Binding of astrochondrin to collagen types III and V as
a function of NaCI concentration in 10 mM phosphate buffer,
1 mM EDTA, 0.1%BSA, pH 7.4, as measured by the solid phase
radioligand binding assay.Mean valuesof two independent experi-
ments carried out in triplicates + SD are given. (D) Collagen III;
(o) collagen V.
formation of focal contact points, but not to initiate cell at-
tachment in vitro (Woods et al., 1986). At the moment how
astrochondrin affects astrocyte process outgrowth is still un-
clear. Located on their cell surface it could help to stabilize
cell-substrate contact by interacting with the respective ex-
tracellular matrix components. Also, astroehondrin might
interact with cell surface molecules, such as receptors for ex-
traceUular matrix constituents, thereby modulating their
functional activities. On collagen type IV, astrochondrin ap-
pears to be the predominant mediator of astrocyte process
outgrowth, since outgrowth is almost completely inhibited
by astrochondrin antibodies. The fact that process formation
is only partly inhibited by astrochondrin antibodies when
cells are maintained on laminin might reflect the fact that as-
trocytes use more than one mechanism for process outgrowth
on this substrate, only one of which is dependent on as-
trochondrin.
In agreement with our observations on the functional
properties of astrochondrin, binding of astrochondrin to col-
lagen type IV and laminin, but not to the extracellular matrix
component fibronectin could be observed under hypotonic
and isotonic conditions. This interaction was promoted in
the presence of Ca2+. Since the interaction of astrochondrin
with collagen types III and V was least susceptible to the
different binding conditions, this interaction was studied in
more detail and shown to be specific: both collagens show
a single, saturable class of binding sites for astrochondrin
which can be competed by excess of astrochondrin (A.
Streit, unpublished observations). Binding of astrochondrin
to collagen types III and V was diminished by increasing
ionic strength suggesting that it partly depends on ionic inter-
actions. Such interactions were shown to be crucial for bind-
ing of glycosaminoglycans to collagens (Lindahl and H66k,
1978; H66k et al., 1984; Ruoslahti, 1988). It appears that
the extent and pattern of sulfation of the glycosarninoglycan
moiety does not play an important role in astrochondrin-
collagen interactions as has been suggested for other proteo-
glycan-collagen interactions (e.g., Koda et al., 1984; for re-
view see Ruoslahti, 1988). In our study, chondroitin sulfate
and heparin are approximately equally potent competitors
for the interaction of astrochondrin with both collagens, al-
though heparin contains clusters of highly sulfated regions,
which potentially occur also in dextran sulfate (see Koda et
al., 1984), while sulfate groups are more uniformly dis-
tributed along chondroitin sulfate (Lindahl and H66k,
The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 120, 1993 810
,oo I
90 J
BO
60
x
"~ 50
E
~ 40
20
10
0
II
A collagen 11I
\ 5:o
vjv--~ ~7 o~O--O
, , , , ,
-10 -9 -B -7 6 -5 -4 -3
log concentration (M]
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
-11
o 9 ~,
-10 9 -8 -7 -fi -5 -4 -3
log concentration [M]
Figure 14. Bindingof astro-
chondrin to collagen types III
(.4)and V (B) in the presence
of heparin, chondroitin sul-
fate, and dextran sulfate as
determinedby the solid phase
radioligand binding assay in
10 mM phosphate buffer, pH
7.4, containing 15 mM NaC1
and I mMEDTA.Meanvalues
from triplicate measurements
of one representative experi-
mentare given;maximalbind-
ingwas setto 100%and other
bindingefticienciescalculated
in relation to this value. Standard deviation for each value was less than 3% of maximal binding. Ordinate: % maximal binding of the
u~I-labeledastrochondrin. Abscissa: concentrationof polysaccharidesincubatedwith astrochondrinbeforeaddition to the substrata. (o)
Heparin; (o) chondroitin sulfate; (~7)dextran sulfate.
1987). Collagens have been reported to contain specific
binding sites which are selective for polysaccharides with
regions of extensive sulfation interrupted by non- or low-
sulfated regions (Lindahl and H66k, 1978). Chondroitin sul-
fatechains apparently use differentbinding sites on collagens
(H66k et al., 1984; Lindahl and H66k, 1978). It is therefore
possible that inhibition of astrochondrin-collagen interac-
tions by heparin and dextran sulfate is due to steric hindrance
rather than to competition for specific binding sites. The na-
ture of the interaction of astrochondrin with laminin is not
yet known. Several heparin binding sites have been de-
scribed for laminin (for review see Martin and Timpl, 1987),
but it is not clear whether also chondroitin sulfate or chon-
droitin sulfate proteoglycans use these or other sites.
The relation of astrochondrin to other chondroitin sulfate
proteoglycans in the nervous system (Hoffmanand Edelman,
1987; Stallcup and Beasley, 1987; Faissner et al., 1991;
Zaremba et al., 1989; Margolis and Margolis, 1989; Oohira
et al., 1989; Herndon and Lander, 1990) is not known. It is
possible that astrochondrin constitutes a subpopulation of
proteoglycans from rat brain (Margolis et al., 1976; Gowda
et al., 1989), since both carry the L2/HNK-1 and L5 carbo-
hydrateepitopes (Margolis, R. U., A. Streit, and M. Schach-
ner, unpublished observations; Streit et al., 1990). Further-
more, subpopulations of the glia-derived chondroitin/dermatan
sulfate proteoglycan syneuran (Faissner, A., A. Lochter, A.
Streit, and M. Schachner, manuscript submitted for publica-
tion) and astrochondrin share the L5 carbohydrate and the
dermatan sulfate epitope DS-1 (Faissner, A., A. Streit, and
M. Schachner, unpublished observations). Whereas astro-
chondrin is expressed by cultured astrocytes, the cytotactin
binding (CTB) proteoglycan (Hoffman and Edelman, 1987;
Hoffman et al., 1988) is expressed by neurons. Since as-
trochondrin could not be found to bind J1/tenascin-the
mouse homolog of cytotactin (Grumet et al., 1985; Faissner
et al., 1988)-CTB proteoglycan appears to show different
binding properties from astrochondrin (Hoffmanet al., 1988).
The core proteins of CTB proteoglycan, astrochondrin and
syneuran, however, share immunogenic determinants (Hoff-
man, S., G. M. Edelman, A. Streit, A. Faissner, and M.
Schachner, unpublished observations). No immunochemical
relationships between astrochondrin and the chondroitin sul-
fate proteoglycans CAT 301 (Zaremba et al., 1989) and NG2
(Stallcup and Beasley, 1987) were observed (Hockfield, S.,
W. B. Stallcup, A. Streit, and M. Schachner, unpublished
observations). Furthermore, NG2 interacts specifically only
with collagen type VI but not with other types of collagen
(Stallcup et al., 1990), whereas astrochondrin binds to dif-
ferent collagen types but never to collagen type VI.
Studies on the role of proteoglycans in the nervous system
mainly focused on outgrowth and guidance of axons and pro-
posed differentmodes oftheir action. However, less attention
has been paid to their role in glial development. While as-
trochondrin takes part in promoting process extension of as-
trocytes, several other chondroitin and keratan sulfate pro-
teoglycans have been shown to be inhibitory for either
neurite outgrowth (Verna et al., 1989; Muir et al., 1989;
Snow et al., 1990, 1991; Fichard et al., 1991; Cole and
McCabe, 1991; Oohira et al., 1991) or neuronal cell migra-
tion (Tan et al., 1987; Perris and Johansson, 1987, 1990;
Perris and Bronner-Fraser, 1989). Furthermore, also chon-
droitin sulfate proteoglycans from non-neural tissue, e.g.,
decorin (Schmidt et al., 1987), appear to decrease cell adhe-
sion (Lark et al., 1985, Culp et al., 1978), and several
models for the interaction between these various molecules,
cell surface receptors, such as integrins, and the extracellu-
lar matrix have been proposed (for review see Ruoslahti,
1988, 1989). Additionally, these molecules modify cell mo-
tility and invasive behaviour of metastatic cells (Schrappe et
al., 1991; Faassen et al., 1992), processes which seem to be
proportional to the expression of chondroitin sulfate pro-
teoglycans (Iozzo, 1985). On the other hand, chondroitin
sulfate proteoglycans (Iijima et al., 1991) and differenthepa-
ran sulfate proteoglycans have been implicated in neurite
outgrowthpromotion (Lander et al., 1983; Dow et al., 1988;
Riopelle and Dow, 1990). Moreover, there is evidence that
proteoglycans, such as syndecan as a cell surface receptor
for extracellular matrix components (for review see Jalkanen
et al., 1991), CD44 as a ligand for extracellular matrix and
cell surface molecules (for review see Jalkanen et al., 1991)
or heparan sulfate proteoglycans as components of adher-
ons (Schubert and LaCorbiere, 1985; Cole et al., 1985;
Schubert et el., 1983), play a role in mediating cell adhesion
(see also Couchman and H66k, 1989; Wight, 1989) and
some of them are probably also involved in signal transduc-
tion (see Jalkanen et al., 1991). Recently, fibronectin type III
and EGF-like repeats or immunoglobulin-like domains,
known to be important in other groups of molecules involved
Streit et al. Astrochondrin in Process Formation and Cell Migration 811
in cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions have been described
for several proteoglycans, e.g., syndecan (Saunders et al.,
1989), the large fibroblast-derived proteoglycan versican
(Zimmermann and Ruoslahti, 1989), decorin (Krusius and
Ruoslahti, 1986), the aggregating cartilage proteoglycan
(Doege et al., 1987), and the basement membrane heparan
sulfate proteoglycan (Noonan et al., 1988; Kallunki and
Tryggvason, 1992). It will be interesting to elucidate the
contribution of these domains to the various functional prop-
erties of proteoglycans.
The biological significance of the functional properties of
astrochondrin in vitro is underscored by its increased expres-
sion in the developing cerebellar cortex during the first two
postnatal weeks. In this period, important morphogenetic
events, such as cerebellar granule cell migration and out-
growth of newly generated radial Bergmann glial processes,
take place. Immunohistochemical data show that astrochon-
drin is localized at the cell surface of endfeet of astrocytes
and Bergmann glia in apposition to the basal lamina of blood
vessels and meninges. This spatially and temporally specific
expression of astrochondrin in close association with its cel-
lular and acellular binding partners is likely the basis for
these interactions. Thus, astrochondrin may be responsible
for the successful interaction of astroglia with endothelial
cells, thereby constituting a prerequisite for the induction of
the blood-brain barrier by astrocytes (Janzer and Raft,
1987). Furthermore, astrochondrin expressed by Bergmann
glia is involved in granule cell migration, perhaps in combi-
nation with laminin, which has been reported to be tran-
siently expressed by astrocytes and Bergmann glia in vitro
and in vivo (Liesi et al., 1983; Liesi 1985a, b; Selak et al.,
1985). It is not known how astrochondrin may mediate gran-
ule cell migration, since it is not detectably involved in neu-
rite extension or dislocation of neuronal cell bodies in
microexplant cultures. Nevertheless, astrochondrin may be
important for the extension of Bergmann glial processes to-
wards the pial surface-a prerequisite for the migration of
granule cells. The biological significance of the transient ex-
pression of astrochondrin on the cell surface of parallel fibers
during the period of active axon outgrowth is presently un-
known, since astrochondrin is not expressed by neurons in
vitro (Streit et al., 1990). It is possible that neurons have lost
the ability to synthesize astrochondrin in vitro or that as-
trochondrin is released by astroglia and absorbed to the ax-
onal cell surface by its receptor(s) in vivo. It is noteworthy
in this context that also the astrocyte-associated extraceUular
matrix molecule J1/tenascin (Kruse et al., 1985; Faissner et
al., 1988) is detectable on axons in the developing optic
nerve and cerebellum (Bartsch et al., 1992a, b). It is there-
fore tempting to speculate that astrochondrin may subserve
a functional role in the formation of axonal processes, which
could, however, not be observed in the in vitro assay systems.
Finally, our results suggest that not only astrochondrin,
but the L5 carbohydrate epitope expressed by it, may medi-
ate and/or stabilize process outgrowth by astrocytes. It is im-
portant to mention that astrochondrin is the only molecule
on astrocytes and by far the predominant molecule in brain
carrying the L5 epitope. Interestingly, another carbohydrate
structure, the L2/HNK-1 epitope, which is also expressed by
astrochondrin (Streit et al., 1990) and several neural recog-
nition molecules (Kruse et al., 1984, 1985; Schachner et al.,
1990) plays an important role as a ligand in astrocyte-lami-
nin interactions (Kiinemund et al., 1988). However, in con-
trast to the L5 carbohydrate, the L2/HNK-1 carbohydrate ap-
pears to be directly involved in the initial attachment of
astrocytes to laminin (Liu, L., H. Hall, M. Schachner, B.
Schmitz, submitted for publication). Thus, carbohydrate
structures as posttranslational modifications may be in-
strumental in influencing and modifying cellular behaviour
by their specific temporal expression patterns possibly on
even one and the same protein backbone (Schachner et al.,
1990). Further investigations will elucidate the functional
roles of carbohydrates in cell interactions and the structural
basis underlying these interactions.
The authors are grateful to Bernd Gehrig for graphic design, Dr. Volker
Kfinemund and Stefanie Magyar-Lehmann for help with the microexplant
cultures, Jiirgen Holm for help with the image analysis, and Dr. Udo
Bartsch for helpful discussions on the immunocytological observations.
This work was supported by a fellowship from Studienstifiungdes Deut-
schen Volkes to A. Streit by German-Israeli Foundation for Scientific Re-
search and Development for Support.
Received for publication 5 June 1992 and in revised form 16 August 1992.
References
Antonicek, H., E. Persohn, and M. Schachner. 1987. Biochemical and func-
tional characterization of a novel neuron-glia adhesion molecule that is in-
volved in neuronal migration. J. Cell BioL 104:1587-1595.
Bartsch, S., U. Bartsch, U. Dtrries, A. Faissnar, A. Weller, P. Ekblom, and
M. Schachner. 1992a. Expression of tenascin in the developing and adult
cerebellar cortex. J. Neurosci. 12:736-749.
Bartsch, U., S. Bartsch, and M. Schachner. 1992b. Immundhistologicallocal-
ization ofJ l/tenascin in the developingand lesionedadult mouseoptic nerve.
Fur. J. Neurosci. In press.
Bazin, H. 1982. Production of rat monoclonal antibodies with Lou rat non-
secreting Ir9835 myeloma cells. Prot. Biol. Fluids Proc. Colloq. 29:
615-618.
Bignami, A., and H. J. Ralston. 1969. The cellular reaction to Wallerian de-
generation in the central nervous systemof the cat, Brain Res. 13:727-744.
Black, J, A., and S. G. Waxrnan. 1988. The perinodal astrocyte. Glia.
1:169-183.
Bradford, M. M. 1976. A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of
microgram quantities of protein using the principle of protein-dye binding.
Anal. Biochem. 72:248-254.
Cavanangh, K. P., D. Gurwitz, D. D. Cunningham, and R. A. Bradshaw.
1990. Reciprocal modulationof astrocyte stellationby thrombinand protease
nexin-l. J. Neurochem. 54:1735-1743.
Cleveland, D. W., S. G. Fischer, M. W. Kirschner, and U. K. Laemmli. 1977.
Peptide mappingby limited proteolysis in sodiumdodecyl sulfate and analy-
sis by gel electrophoresis. J. Biol. Chem. 252:1102-1106.
Cole, G. J., D. Schubert, and L. Glaser. 1985. Celt-substratum adhesion in
chick neural retina dependsupon protein-heparan sulfateinteractions. J. Cell
Biol. 100:1192-1199.
Cole, G. J., and C. F. McCabe. 1991. Identification of a developmentallyregu-
lated keratan sulfate proteoglycan that inhibits cell adhesion and neurite out-
growth. Neuron. 7:1007-1018.
Couehman,J. R., and M. H66k. 1988. Molecular and cellular biology of wound
repair. R. A. F. Clark and P. M. Henson, editors. PlenumPress, New York.
437-470.
Culp, L. A., B. L Rollins, J. Buniel, and S. Hitri. 1978, Two functionallydis-
tinct pools of glycosaminoglycansin the substrate adhesion site of murine
cells. J. Cell Biol. 78:788-801.
Davis, S., C. Bauchard, O. Tsatas, and N. Giftochristos. 1990. Maerophages
can modify the non permissive nature of the adult mammalian central ner-
vous system. Neuron. 5:463-469.
Del Rio, J., and E. Soriano. 1989. Immtmocytochemical detection of 5'-
bromodeoxyuridineincorporation in thecentral nervous systemofthe mouse.
Dev. Brain Res. 49:311-317.
Doege, K., E Fernandez, J. R. Hassell, M. Sasaki, and Y. Yamada. 1986. Partial
eDNA sequenceencodinga globular domainat the C terminusofthe rat carti-
lage proteoglycan. J. Biol. Chem. 261:8108-8111.
Dow, K. E., S. E. L. Mirski, J. C. Roder, and R. J. Riopelle. 1988. Neuronal
prnteoglycans: biosynthesisand functional interaction with neurons in vitro.
J. Neurosci. 8:3278-3289.
Faassen, A. E., J. A. Schrager, D. J. Klein, T. R. Oegema, J. R. Couchman,
and J. B. McCarthy. 1992. A cell surface chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan,
immunologically related to CD44, is involved in type I collagen-mediated
melanoma cell motility and invasion. J. Cell Biol. 116:521-531.
Fahrig, T., C. Landa, P. Pesheva, K. Klihn, and M. Schachner. 1987. Charac-
The Journal of Cell Biology. Volume 120, 1993 812
terization of binding properties of the myelin-associatedglycoprotein to ex-
tracellular matrix constituents. EMBO (Eur. Mol. Biol. Organ.) J. 6:2875-
2883.
Faissner, A., J. Kruse, R. Chiquet-Ehrisman, and E. Mackie. 1988. The high
molecular weight J1 glycoproteins are immunocbemically related to tenas-
cin. Differentiation. 37:104-114.
ffrench-Constant, C., R. H. Miller, J. Kruse, M. Schachner, and M. C. Raft.
1986. Molecular specialization of astrocyte processes at nodes of Ranvier in
rat optic nerve. J. Cell BioL 102:844-852.
Fichard, A., J.-M. Verna, J. Olivares, and R. Saxod. 1991. Involvement of a
chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan in the avoidance of chick epidermis by dor-
sal root ganglia fibers: a study usingB-D-xyloside. 1991. Dev, Biol. 148:1-9.
Fischer, G., V. Kiinemund, and M. Schachner. 1986. Neurite outgrowth pat-
terns in cerebellar microexplantcultures are affectedby antibodies to the cell
surface glycoprotein LI. J. Neurosci. 6:605-612.
Gasser, U. E., and M. E. Hatten. 1990. Neuron-gila interactions of rat hip-
pocampal cells in vitro: glial-guidedneuronal migration and neuronal regula-
tion of glial differentiation. J. Neurosci. 10:1276-1285.
Gierson, J. P., R. E. Petroski, D. S. Ling, and H. M. Geller. 1990. Astrocyte
topography and tenascin/cytotactin expression: correlation with the ability
to support neuritic outgrowth. Dev. Brain Res. 55:11-20.
Goridis, C., H. l)eagostini-Bazin, M. Him, M. R. Hirsch, G. Rougon, R.
Sadoul, O. K. Langley, G. Combos, and J. Finne. 1983. Neural surfaceanti-
gensduring nervoussystemdevelopment. Cold Spring Harbor Syrup. Quant.
Biol. 48:527-538.
Gowda, D. C., R. U. Margolis, and R. K. Margolis. 1989. Presence of the
HNK-1 epitope on poly(N-acetyllactosaminyl)oligosaccharides and identifi-
cation of multiple core proteins in the chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans of
brain. Biochemistry. 28:4468--4474.
Grumet, M., S. Hoffman, K. L. Crossin, and G. M. Edelman. 1985. Cytotac-
tin, an extracellular matrixprotein of neural and non-neuraltissuesthat medi-
ates gila-neuron interaction. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 82:8075-8079.
Harrison, B. C., and P. L. Mobley. 1990. Phorbol ester-induced change in as-
trocyte morphology: correlation with protein kinase C activation and protein
phosphorylation. J. Neurosci. Res. 25:71-80.
Hatten, M. E. 1985. Neuronal regulationof astroglial morphologyand prolifer-
ation in vitro. J. Cell BioL 100:384-396.
Herndon, M. E., and A. D. Lander. 1990. A diverse set of developmentally
regulated proteoglycans is expressed in the rat central nervous system. Neu-
ron. 4:949-961.
Hertz, L., D. E. McFarlin, and B. H. Waksman. 1990. Astrocytes: auxiliary
cells for immune responses in the central nervous system? lmmanol. Today.
11:265-268.
Him, M., M. Pierres, H. Deagostini-Bazin, M. Hirsch, and C. Goridis. t981.
Monoclonal antibody against cell surface glycoprotein of neurons. Brain
Res. 214:433-439.
Hoffman, S., and G. M. Edelman. 1987. A proteoglycan with HNK-1 antigenic
determinants is a neuron-associated ligand for cytotactin. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA. 84:2523-2527.
Hoffman, S., K. L. Crossin, and G. M. Edelman. 1988. Molecular forms, bind-
ing functions, and developmental expression patterns of cytotactin and
cytotactin-binding proteoglycan, an interactive pair of extracellular matrix
molecules. J. Cell Biol. 106:519-532.
Hfrk, M., I. Kjrllen, S. Johansson, and J. Robinson. 1984. Cell surface
glycosaminoglycans.Annu. Rev. Biochem. 53:847-869.
Husmann, K., A. Faissner, and M. Schachner. 1992. Tenascin promotes cere-
bellar granule cell migration and neurite outgrowth by different domains in
the fibronectin type/II repeats. J. Cell Biol. 116:1475-1486.
Iijima, N., A. Oohira, T. Mori, K. Kitabatake, and S. Kohsaka. 1991. Core
protein of chondroitin sulfateproteoglycanpromotes neurite outgrowth from
cultured neocortical neurons. J. Neurochem. 56:706-708.
Iozzo, R. V. 1985. Neoplastic modulation of extracellular matrix. J. Biol.
Chem. 260:7464-7473.
Jalkanen, M., S. Jalkanen, and M. Bernfield. 1991. Binding of extracellular
effector molecules by cell surface proteoglycans. In Receptors for Extracel-
lular Matrix. Academic Press Inc., Orlando, FL. 1-37.
Janeczko, K. 1989. Spatiotemporal patterns of the astroglial proliferation in rat
brain injured at the postmitotic stage of postnatal development: a combined
immunocytochemicaland autoradiographic study. Brain Res. 485:236-243.
Janzer, R. C., and M. C. Raft. 1987. Astrocytes induce blood-brain barrier
properties in endothelial ceils. Nature (Land.). 325:253-257.
Jessen, K. R., and R. Mirsky. 1990. Neurobiology of gila. In Seminars in the
Neurosciences. Vol. 2. Saunders Scientific Publications, Saunders Co.,
Philadelphia. 421-518.
Kallunki, P., and K. Tryggvason. 1992. Human basement membrane heparan
sulfate proteoglycan core protein: a 467-kD protein containing multiple do-
mains resembling elements of the low density lipoprotein receptor, laminin,
neural cell adhesion molecules, and epidermal growth factor. Z Cell BioL
116:559-571.
Keilhauer, G., A. Faissner, and M. Schachner. 1985. Differential inhibition of
neuron-neuron, neuron-astrocyteand astrocyte-astrocyteadhesionby L1, L2
and N-CAM antibodies. Nature (Land.). 316:728-730.
Koda, J. E., A. Rapraeger, and M. Bernfield. 1985. Heparan sulfateproteogly-
cans from mousemammaryepithelial cells. J. Biol. Chem. 260:8157-8162.
Krnse, J., R. Mailhammer, H. Wernecke, A. Falssner, I. Sommer, C. Goridis,
and M. Schachner. 1984. Neural cell adhesion molecules and myelin-
associatedglycoprotein share a cotmrmncarbohydrate moiety recognized by
monoclonal antibodies L2 and HNK-1. Nature (Lond.). 311:153-155.
Kruse, J., G. Keilhauer, A. Falssner, R. Timpl, and M. Schachner. 1985. The
J 1 glycoprotein-a novel nervous system cell adhesion molecule of the L2/
HNK-I family. Nature (Lond.). 316:146-148.
Krnsius, T., and E. Ruoslahti. 1986. Primary structure of an extracellular ma-
trix proteoglycan core protein deduced from cloned cDNA. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA. 83:7683-7687.
Kyhse-Andersen,J. 1984. Electroblotting of multiple gets: a simple apparatus
without buffer tank for rapid transfer of proteins from polyacrylamide gels
to nitrocellulose. J. Biochem. Biophys. Meth. 10:203-209.
Lander, A. D., K. Tomaselli, A. L. Calof, and L. F. Reichardt. 1983. Studies
on extracellular matrix components that promote neurite outgrowth. Cold
Spring Harbor Syrup. Quant. Biol. 48:611-623.
Landis, D. M. D., and T. S. Reese. 1982. Regional organization of astrocyte
membranes in cerebellar cortex. Neurosci. 7:937-950.
Lark, M. W., J. Laterra, and L. A. Culp. 1985. Close and focal contact adhe-
sion of fibroblasts to a fibronectin-contalning matrix. Federation Proc.
44:394-403.
Latov, N., E. A. Zimmermann,W. G. Johnson, A. J. Silverman, R. Defendini,
and L. Cole. 1979. Fibrillary astrocytes proliferate in response to brain in-
jury. A study combining immunoperoxidase technique for glial fibrillary
acidic protein and radioautography of tritiated thymidine. Dev. BioL
72:381-384.
Liesi, P., D. Dalai, and A. Vaheri. 1983. Lamininis produced by early rat astro-
cytes in primary culture. J. Cell Biol. 96:920-924.
Liesi, P. 1985a. Laminin-immunoreactivegila distinguish regenerative adult
CNS systemsfrom non-regenerativeones. EMBO (Eur. Mol. Biol. Organ.)
J. 4:2505-2511.
Liesi, P. 1985b. Do neurons in the vertebrate CNS migrate on laminin? EMBO
(Eur. Mol. Biol. Organ.)J. 4:1163-1170.
Lindahl, U., and M. Hfrk. 1978. Glycosaminoglycansand their binding to bin-
logical macromolecules. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 47:358--417.
Lindner, J., F. G. Rathjen, and M. Scbachner. 1983. L1 mono- and polyclonal
antibodies modify cell migration in early postnatal mouse cerebellum. Na-
ture (Lond.). 305:427--430.
Lindner, J., G. Zinser, W. Werz, C. Goridis, B. Bizzini, and M. Schaehner.
1986. Experimental modification of postnatal cerebeUar granule cell migra-
tion in vitro. Brain Res. 377:298-304.
Margolis, R. U., and R. K. Margolis. 1989. Nervous tissue proteoglycans.
Dev. Neurosci. 11:276-288.
Margolis, R. U., K. I.alley, W. L. Kiang, C. Crockeff, and R. K. Margolis.
1976. Isolation and properties of a soluble chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan
from brain. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 73:1081-1024.
Martin, G. R., and R. Timpl. 1987. Laminin and other basement membrane
components. Annu. Rev, Cell Biol. 3:57-85.
Martini, R., and M. Schachner. 1986. lmmunoelectron microscopic localiza-
tion of neural cell adhesion molecules (L1, N-CAM and myelin-associated
glycoprotein) in regenerating adult mouse sciatic nerve. J. Cell BioL
106:1735-1746.
Matthew, W. D., and L. F. Reichardt. 1982. Development and application of
an efficient procedure for converting mouse IgM into small, active frag-
ments. J. lmmunol. Methods. 50:239-253.
Muir, D., E. Engvall, S. Varon, and M. Manthorpe. 1989. Schwannoma cell-
derived inhibitor of the neurite-promoting activity of laminin. J. Cell Biol.
109:2353-2362.
Nagata, I., and M. Schachner, 1986. Neuronal influence on antigenic marker
profile, cell shape and proliferation of cultured astrocytes obtained by
micrndissectionof distinct layers from the early postnatal mousecerebellum.
Dev. Brain Res. 24:217-232.
Nolte, C., M. Schachner, and R. Martini. 1989. Immunocytochemicallocaliza-
tion of the neural cell adhesion molecules LI, N-CAM, and J 1 in Pacinian
corpusclesof the mouseduringdevelopment, in the adultand during regener-
ation. J. Neurocytol. 18:795-808.
Noonan, D. M., E. A. Horigan, S. R. Ledbetter, G. Vogeli, M. Sasaki, Y.
Yamada, and J. R. Hassell. 1988. Identification of cDNA clones encoding
different domains of the basement membrane heparan sulfate proteoglycan.
J. Biol. Chem. 263:16379-16387.
Oohira, A., F. Matsur, M. Matsuda, Y. Takida, and Y. Kubohi. 1988. Occur-
rence of three distinct molecular species of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan
in the developing rat brain. J. Biol. Chem. 263:10240-10246.
Oohira, A., F. Matsui, and R. Katoh-Semba. 1991. Inhibitory effects of brain
chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans on neurite outgrowth from PC 12D cells.
J. Neurosci. 11:822-827,
Pulay, S. L, and V. Chan-Palay. 1974. Cerebellar cortex. In Cytology and Or-
ganization. Springer Verlag, New York, Heidelberg, Berlin. 1-348.
Perris, R., and S. Johansson. 1987. Amphibian neural crest cell migration on
purified extracellular matrix components: a chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan
inhibits locomotion on fibronectin substrates. J. CellBioL 105:2511-2521,
Perris, R., and M. Bronner-Fraser. 1989. Recent advances in defining the role
of the extracellular matrix in neural crest development. Comm. Dev. Neu-
robiol. 1:61-83.
Perris, R., and S. Jobansson. 1990. Inhibition of neural crest cell migration by
aggregation chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans is mediated by their hyaluro-
Streit et al. Astrochondrin in Process Formation and Cell Migration 813
nan binding region. Dev. Biol. 137:1-12.
Pesheva, P., E. Spiess, and M. Schachner. 1989. Ji-160 and Jl-180 are
oligodendrocyte-secreted nonpermissivesubstrates for cell adhesion. J. Cell
Biol. 109:1765-1778.
Porter, R. R. 1959. The hydrolysis of rabbit 3,-globulin and antibodies with
crystallin papain. Biochem. J. 73:119-125.
Raldc, P. 1972. Mode of cell migration to the superficial layers of fetal monkey
neocortex. J. Corap. Neurol. 145:61-84.
Rakic, P. 1990. Principles of neural cell migration. Experientia. 46:882-891.
Rathjen, F. G., and M. Schachner. 1984. Immunocytologicaland biochemical
characterization of a new neuronal cell surface component (L1 antigen)
which is involved in cell adhesion. EMBO (Eur. Mol. Biol. Organ.) J.
3:1-10.
Riopelle, R. J., and K. E. Dow. 1990. Functional interactionsof neuronal hepa-
ran sulphate proteoglycans with laminin. Brain Res. 525:92-100.
Roberts, C., N. Platt, A. Streit, M. Schachner, and C. D. Stern. 1991. The
L5 carbohydrate epitope: an early marker for neural induction in the chick
embryo and its involvement in inductive interactions. Development.
112:959-970.
Rogister, B., P. Leprince, V. Bonhomme, J. M. Rigo, P. Delree, A. Colige,
and G. Moonen. 1990. Cultured neurons release an inhibitor of astroglial
proliferation (Astrostatine). J. Neurosci. Res. 25:58-70.
Ruoslahti, E. 1988. Structure and biology of proteoglycans. Annu. Rev. Cell
Biol. 4:229-255.
Ruoslahti, E. 1989. Proteoglycans in cell regulation. J. Cell Biol. 264:
13369-13372.
Salacinsid, P. R. P., C. McLean, J. E. C. Sykes, V. V. Clement-Jones, and
P. J. Lowry. 1981. Iodination of proteins, glycoproteins, and peptides using
a solid oxidizing agent, 1,3,4,6-tetrachloro-3-6-diphenylglycoluriliodogen.
Anal. Biochem. 117:136-146.
Saunders, S., M. Jalkanen, S. O'Farrell, and M. Bernfield. 1989. Molecular
cloning of syndecan, an integral membrane proteoglycan. J. Cell Biol.
108:1547-1556.
Scatchard, G. 1949. The attraction of proteins for small molecules and ions.
Ann. New York Acad. Sci. 51:660-672.
Schachner, M., H. Antonicek, T. Fahrig, A. Faissner, G. Fischer, V. Kfine-
mund, R. Martini, A. Meyer, E. Persohn, E. Pollerberg, R. Probstmeier,
K. Sadoul, R. Sadoul, B. Seilheimer, and G. Thor. 1990. Families of neural
cell adhesion molecules. In Morphoregulatory Molecules (edited by G. M.
Edelman, B. Cunninghamand J.-P. Thiery, editors. John Wiley and Sons,
New York. 257-275.
Schmidt, G., H. Robenek, B. Harrach, J. Glossl, and V. Nolte. 1987. Interac-
tion of small dermatan sulfateproteoglycan from fibroblasts with fibronectin.
J. Cell Biol. 104:1683-1691.
Schnitzer, J., and M. Schachner. 1981. Developmental expression of cell-type
specific markers in mouse cerebellar cells in vitro. J. Neuroimmunol.
1:471-487.
Schrappe, M., F. G. Klier, R. C. Spiro, T. A. Waltz, R. A. Reisfeld, and C. L.
Gladson. 1991. Correlation of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan expression
on proliferating brain capillary endothelial cells with the malignant pheno-
type of astroglial cells. Cancer Res. 51:4986-4993.
Schubert, D., and M. LaCorbiere. 1985. Isolation of a cell surface receptor for
chick neural retina adherons. J. Cell Biol. 100:46-64.
Schubert, D., M. LaCorbiere, F. G. Klier, and C. Bridwell. 1983. A role for
adherons in retinal cell adhesion. J. Cell Biol. 96:990-998.
Selak, I., J. M. Foidart, and G. Moonen. 1985. Laminin promotes cerebellar
granule cell migration in vitro and is synthesizedby cultured astrocytes. Dev.
Neurosci. 7:278-285.
Snow, D. M., V. Lemmon, D. A. Carrino, A. Caplan, and J. Silver. 1990.
Sulfated proteoglycans present in astroglial barriers during development in
vivo inhibit neurite outgrowth in vitro. Exp. Neurol. 109:111-130.
Snow, D. M., M. Watanabe, P. C. Letourneau, and J. Silver. 1991. A chon-
droitin sulfate proteoglycan may influence the direction of retinal ganglion
cell outgrowth. Development. 113:1473-1487.
Stallcup, W. B., and L. Beasley. 1987. Bipotential glial precursor cells of the
optic nerve express the NG2 proteoglycan. J. Neurosci. 7:2727-2744.
Stallcup, W. B., K. Dahlin, and P. Healy. 1990. Interaction of the NG2 chon-
droitin sulfate proteoglycan with type VI collagen. J. CellBiol. 111:3177-
3188.
Streit, A., A. Falssnar, B. Gehrig, and M. Schachner. 1990. Isolation and bio-
chemical characterization of a chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan expressing
the L5 carbohydrate epitope. J. Neurochem. 55:1494-1506.
Tan, S., K. L. Crossin, S. Hoffrnan, and G. M. Edelman. 1987. Asymmetric
expression in somites of cytotactin and its proteoglycan ligand is correlated
with neural crest cell distribution. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 84:7977-81.
Tetzlaff, W., M. B. Graeber, M. A. Bisby, and G. W. Kreutzberg. 1988. In-
creased glial fibrillary acidic protein synthesis in astrocytes during retro-
grade reaction of the rat facial nucleus. Glia. 1:90-95.
Tiveron, M.*C., E. Barboni, F. B. P. Rivero, A. M. Gormley, P. J. Seeley,
F. Grosveld, and R. Morris. 1992. Selective inhibition of neurite outgrowth
on mature astrocytes by Thy-I glycoprotein. Nature (Lond.). 355:745-748.
Toru-Delbauffe, D., D. Baghdassarian-Chalaye,J. M. Gavaret, F. Courtin, M.
Pomerance, and M. Pierre. 1990. Effects of transforming growth factor/31
on astroglial cells in culture. J. Neurochem. 54:1056-1061.
Trotter, J., D. Bitter-Suerman, and M. Schachner. 1989. Differentiation-
regulated loss of the polysialylated embryonic form and expression of the
different polypeptides of the neural cell adhesion molecule by cultured
oligodendrocytes and myelin. J. Neurosci. Res. 22:369-383.
Verna, J. M., A. Fichard, and R. Saxod. 1989. Influence of glycosaminogly-
cans on neurite morphology and outgrowth patterns in vitro. Int. J. Dev.
Neurosci. 7:389-399.
Vernadakis, A. 1988. Neuron-gila interrelations. Int. Rev. Neurobiol. 30:
149-224.
Wight, T. N. 1989. Cell biology of arterial proteoglycans. Arteriosclerosis.
9:1-20.
Woods, A., J. R. Couchrnan, S. Johansson, and M. H66k. 1986. Adhesionand
cytoskeletal organization of fibroblasts in response to fibronectin fragments.
EMBO (Eur. Mol. Biol. Organ.) J. 5:665-670.
Zaremba, S., A. Guimaraes, R. G. Kalb, and S. Hocldield. 1989. Characteriza-
tion of an aodvity-dependent, neuronal surface proteoglycan identified with
monoclonal antibody Cat-301. Neuron. 2:1207-1219.
Zimmermann, D. R., and E. Ruoslahti. 1989. Multiple domains of the large
fibroblast proteoglycan, versican. EMBO (Eur. Mol. Biol. Organ.). J.
8:2975-2981.
The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 120, 1993 814