pmcNat CancerNat Cancer358wtpa101761119Nature cancer2662-1347pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleUKPMC Funders Author ManuscriptsPMC7612546PMC7612546.176125467612546EMS1405663512207410.1038/s43018-021-00326-1EMS140566WTPA140566WTMS140566UKMS1405661ArticleSelective multi-kinase inhibition sensitizes mesenchymal pancreatic cancer to immune checkpoint blockade by remodeling the tumor microenvironment
FalcomatàChiara BärthelStefanie WidholzSebastian A. SchneeweisChristian MonteroJuan José ToskaAlbulena MirJonas KaltenbacherThorsten HeetmeyerJeannine SwietlikJonathan J ChengJing-Yuan TeodorescuBianca ReichertOliver SchmittConstantin GrabichlerKathrin ColuccioAndrea BonioloFabio VeltkampChristian ZukowskaMagdalena VargasAngelica Arenas PaikWoo Hyun JesinghausMoritz SteigerKatja MareschRoman ÖllingerRupert AmmonTim BaranovOlga RoblesMaria S. RechenbergerJulia KusterBernhard MeissnerFelix ReichertMaximilian FlossdorfMichael RadRoland Schmidt-SupprianMarc SchneiderGünter SaurDieter 
1Division of Translational Cancer Research, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) and German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
2Chair of Translational Cancer Research and Institute of Experimental Cancer Therapy, Klinikum rechts der Isar, School of Medicine, Technische Universität München, Ismaninger Str. 22, 81675 Munich, Germany
3Department of Internal Medicine II, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, Ismaninger Str. 22, 81675 Munich, Germany
4Institute of Molecular Oncology and Functional Genomics, School of Medicine, Technische Universität München, 81675 Munich, Germany
5German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
6Institute of Pathology, Technische Universität München, Trogerstrasse 18, 81675 Munich, Germany
7Institute for Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, Technische Universität München (TUM), Trogerstrasse 30, 81675 Munich, Germany
8Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Emil-Erlenmeyer-Forum 5, 85354, Freising, Germany
9Experimental Systems Immunology Laboratory, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany
10Institute of Innate Immunity, Department of Systems Immunology and Proteomics, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany
11Institute of Experimental Hematology, School of Medicine, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany
12Center for Translational Cancer Research (TranslaTUM), School of Medicine, Technical University of Munich, Ismaninger Str. 22, 81675 Munich, Germany
13Center for Protein Assemblies (CPA), Technische Universität München, Ernst-Otto-Fischer Str. 8, 85747 Garching, Germany
14University Medical Center Göttingen, Department of General, Visceral and Pediatric Surgery, 37075 Göttingen, Germany
15Institute of Medical Psychology, Faculty of Medicine, LMU Munich, Goethe Str. 31, 80336 Munich, Germany
16Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Marburg, Baldingerstraße, 35043 Marburg, Germany
*Correspondence and lead contact: Dieter Saur, Tel. +49-89-4140-5255, Fax. +49-89-4140-7289, dieter.saur@tum.de
01320223112022334042203183361412202131072022310720223103202216062024https://www.springernature.com/gp/open-research/policies/accepted-manuscript-termsUsers may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, subject always to the full Conditions of use: https://www.springernature.com/gp/open-research/policies/accepted-manuscript-terms

## Summary
KRAS-mutant pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is highly immunosuppressive and resistant to targeted and immunotherapies. Among the different PDAC subtypes, basal-like mesenchymal PDAC, which is driven by allelic imbalance, increased gene-dosage and subsequent high expression levels of oncogenic KRAS, shows the most aggressive phenotype and strongest therapy resistance. Here, we perform a systematic high-throughput combinatorial drug screen and identify a synergistic interaction between the MEK inhibitor trametinib and the multi-kinase inhibitor nintedanib, which targets KRAS-directed oncogenic signaling in mesenchymal PDAC. This combinatorial treatment induces cell cycle arrest and cell death, and initiates a context-dependent remodeling of the immunosuppressive cancer cell secretome. Using a combination of single cell RNA sequencing, CRISPR screens and immunophenotyping, we show that this combination therapy promotes intra-tumor infiltration of cytotoxic and effector T cells, which sensitizes mesenchymal PDAC to PD-L1 immune checkpoint inhibition. Overall, our results open new avenues to target this aggressive and therapy-refractory mesenchymal PDAC subtype.

Pancreatic cancercombination therapyimmune checkpoint inhibitionscRNA-seqpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes

## Introduction
With a ten-year survival rate of approximately 1%, PDAC is almost universally fatal
 
. Recently, it surpassed breast cancer becoming the third leading cause of cancer related deaths in the western world
 
. PDAC is highly refractory to all available treatment options, including chemo- and immunotherapies. Meaningful treatment responses are limited almost exclusively to the classical glandular subtype of the disease, characterized by an epithelial morphology and gene expression program
 – 
. Undifferentiated non-glandular PDACs display a mesenchymal morphology and a basal-like transcriptional program
 – 
. These tumors are characterized by a particularly poor prognosis, often not responding to standard of care chemotherapy, therefore representing an unmet clinical need
 – , 
.
Novel therapeutic approaches, such as immune checkpoint blockade (ICB), have demonstrated no effect in trials of PDAC patients
 
. This lack of response likely results from the relatively low mutational burden, leading to a low amount of immunogenic neo-antigens. Combined with multiple immunosuppressive features of the PDAC tumor microenvironment (TME), this leads to scarcity of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs)
 
. Recent studies reported rare cases of PDAC patients presenting tumors with high T cell infiltration, a feature associated with prolonged overall survival
 – 
. These reports highlighted the potential to treat PDAC more effectively by targeting the immunosuppressive TME and recruiting TILs via rational combination therapies.
KRAS is mutationally activated in over 90% of PDAC patients. However, to date no clinically applicable strategy has been developed to effectively treat KRAS-mutant PDAC. Downstream of oncogenic KRAS, the RAF-MEK-ERK pathway plays a central role in tumor initiation
 
. Although MEK inhibitors yielded therapeutic value in RAS-mutant melanoma and lung cancer
 , 
, unstratified trials failed in PDAC patients. Recently, we and others showed that an increased gene-dosage (iGD) and expression of mutant KRAS (KRAS-mut) drives the disease, with the mesenchymal non-glandular basal-like subtype displaying the highest KRAS-mut gene-expression levels
 , , 
. Based on the strong effects of KRAS-mut expression on PDAC phenotypes, we set out to develop a combination therapy for mesenchymal tumors that targets KRAS-driven tumor cell intrinsic signaling and in parallel reprograms the TME. By high-throughput drug screening combining the MEK inhibitor (MEKi) trametinib with 418 drugs, we identified a synergistic combination with the multikinase inhibitor nintedanib, inducing cell death and widespread reprogramming of the immunosuppressive microenvironment. The combination therapy activates an antitumor immune response, resulting in the recruitment of cytotoxic T cells, sensitizing mesenchymal tumors to ICB.

## Results

## Mesenchymal PDAC is resistant to MEK pathway inhibition
Recent data show that KRAS-mut expression levels have a strong impact on PDAC differentiation and phenotype, including the response to standard of care polychemotherapy
 , , 
. In addition, the mesenchymal basal-like phenotype is linked to poor prognosis ( and
 , – 
). Based on the hypothesis that oncogenic KRAS overexpression provides a unique vulnerability in mesenchymal tumors, we systematically explored canonical RAF-MEK-ERK pathway inhibition. To this end, a panel of primary patient-derived cell cultures and conventional human PDAC (hPDAC) cell lines was screened with the MEKi trametinib. Unexpectedly, mainly cell lines with a classical epithelial morphology and gene expression signature
 , 
 showed high sensitivity towards MEKi ( , ). Human PDAC cells of complete mesenchymal morphology, representing the most undifferentiated and aggressive subtype, are underrepresented and commonly not observed in surgically resectable cancers. Therefore, we extended our screen to mouse primary cell cultures (mPDAC) isolated from tumors of mice expressing KrasG12D
 in the pancreas
 
. Mesenchymal mPDAC cells expressed KrasG12D
 to the highest levels ( and
 
). In line with hPDAC, mainly classical mPDAC cells were sensitive to MEKi, whereas almost all mesenchymal cells showed remarkable resistance ( , ). These differences were not due to different dependencies on the driving oncogene KRAS, nor direct KRAS-downstream targets, as indicated by similar dependency scores of CRISPR/Cas9 based negative selection screens ( ). In contrast, we observed fundamental differences in signaling output. Site-specific protein-phosphorylation profiling revealed enrichment of PDGF, ERBB2, mTORC1, RTK, NTRK signaling and the VEGFA/VEGFR pathway in mesenchymal tumor cells, whereas classical showed e.g. higher levels of the insulin receptor and AKT signaling cascade ( and ).
To exclude insufficient MEK1/2 inhibition and/or feedback/cross-activation of the pathway in primary resistant cells, we developed a dual-recombinase based PDAC mouse model
 
 allowing the inducible permanent genetic inactivation of the MEK pathway in established tumors ( and ): we crossed Pdx1-Flp;FSF-KrasG12D/+;FSF-R26CAG-CreERT2/+
 mice with animals harboring loxP-flanked Mek1 and Mek2 alleles and subsequently ablated MEK1/2 in PDAC cells by tamoxifen administration in vitro and in vivo after orthotopic transplantation ( and ). Loss of MEK1/2 reduced cell proliferation in vitro, without triggering cell death. In line, ablation of MEK1/2 in vivo did not induce tumor regression or a complete growth arrest as assessed by KI67 staining, but delayed tumor progression of the respective animals ( , ). In parallel, we found that pharmacological MEKi delayed disease progression in classical epithelial PDAC significantly (p=0.0002 vs controls), but only moderately in the mesenchymal subtype (p=0.0506 vs controls). Of note, trametinib did not induce tumor regression as observed in other cancer types, such as non-small cell lung cancer ( and
 , 
). Therefore, neither MEKi nor complete sustained genetic disruption of canonical KRAS-downstream signaling is sufficient to induce PDAC regression, demonstrating the need to develop combinatorial treatment strategies.

## Drug screening identifies novel therapies for mesenchymal PDAC
We performed a systematic high-throughput combinatorial compound screen to identify drugs synergizing with MEKi. We screened two hPDAC and two mPDAC cultures, representing both classical and mesenchymal KRAS-subtypes, with trametinib in combination with 418 drugs in preclinical and clinical investigation ( and ). One of the top-hits in mesenchymal PDAC was the clinically approved RTK-inhibitor nintedanib ( ). We validated our findings in long-term clonogenic assays in a larger cohort and observed synergistic interactions of trametinib and nintedanib in 11/15 hPDAC cultures, with the strongest effect in the five mesenchymal cultures ( ; p=0.009). We extended the combinatorial screen to 30 additional mPDAC cultures
 
. A high synergism was achieved in most of the models, with the mesenchymal Kras-mut overexpressing cells predominantly benefitting from the treatment ( ). Antagonism was observed in 3/15 human and 6/30 mouse cell cultures, respectively, which were characterized almost exclusively by a classical epithelial morphology. In line with the heterogeneity of responses observed in the clinical setting even within molecularly stratified cohorts, we detected synergism in some classical PDAC cultures, demonstrating heterogeneity within subtypes ( and ). Trametinib and nintedanib (T/N) treated epithelial and mesenchymal PDAC cells revealed similar changes in ERK phosphorylation, indicating that primary sensitivity and resistance to T/N is not due to differences in canonical pathway blockade ( ). Increasing the dosage of both inhibitors did not alter the antagonistic action of the drug combination substantially, arguing for fundamental biological differences between the tumors ( ). Strikingly, we observed cell death upon T/N treatment, with the strongest effects in mesenchymal PDAC ( ).
We assessed the consequences of oncogenic KRAS-mut expression on cell morphology and treatment response using classical mPDAC cells transduced with a doxycycline-inducible KRASG12D
 vector or GFP as control. KRASG12D
 overexpression led to increased ERK1/2 phosphorylation, decreased E-cadherin expression (Cdh1), and morphological changes of the epithelial PDAC cells towards a mesenchymal spindle shaped morphology, which increased from day 1 to day 14 ( ). T/N treatment revealed a remarkable change in drug sensitivity. While the controls showed antagonism, this was reverted to synergism in the KRASG12D
 overexpression system ( ), supporting the notion that KRAS levels impact on cellular differentiation states
 
, are main drivers of mesenchymal PDAC and provide therapeutic vulnerabilities.
To uncover the direct targets of trametinib and nintedanib and to elucidate the drivers of treatment response and resistance, we performed kinobead pulldown assays on six mPDAC cultures of both subtypes. While trametinib showed selectivity for binding MEK1/2, nintedanib displayed a broad range of targets, enriched in RTKs and cell surface receptors ( ). Importantly, expression of the nintedanib targets was subtype-dependent. Four were selective for mesenchymal PDAC, including PDGFRB, FGFR1 and DDR2, and 24 were shared by both subtypes. Further, expression of these targets remained largely unchanged after drug perturbation ( ). Therefore, differences in the basal gene expression program underlie synergistic drug-action in PDAC subtypes.
To identify the functional relevant pathways mediating response to T/N, we analyzed changes in the phosphoproteome. In mesenchymal PDAC, we observed a decreased activity of a broad range of important cancer-relevant pathways, such as the cell cycle regulators CDK2, Cyclin D and Cyclin E; PP2A and IER3 that regulate PI3K/AKT signaling; ERBB2, mTOR and KIT downstream signaling, as well as RAF-dependent and independent ERK1/2 activation ( and ). These findings support the view that mesenchymal PDAC cells depend on broad RTK-driven signaling input. In contrast, we found a more limited spectrum of altered pathways in classical tumors, including distinct downregulation of VEGFA/VEGFR pathway and RHO GTPases, as well as decreased MAPK activation ( and ). This confirmed and extended our initial observation of fundamental differences in signaling between classical and mesenchymal tumors under basal conditions (see ), reinforcing the notion that multiple kinases need to be targeted to achieve meaningful responses in the mesenchymal subtype.
Next, we assessed other drugs sharing targets with nintedanib. Strikingly, in mesenchymal PDAC several top hits of our combinatorial drug screen are multikinase inhibitors that display an overlapping target spectrum with nintedanib ( and and ). Additionally, we tested novel compounds with overlapping targets ( , https://www.proteomicsdb.org). AZD-4547, which shares with nintedanib amongst others the targets PDGFRB, FGFR1, DDR1 and DDR2, mimics the synergistic responses observed with T/N and could potentially be used in combination with trametinib. In contrast, other drugs that share targets with nintedanib, including imatinib, display highly heterogeneous responses, showing cell type and contextspecific synergisms ( ).
To functionalize the targets of nintedanib and decipher key gens synergizing with MEKi, we employed pooled genome-wide as well as focused CRISPR/Cas9-based negative selection (viability) screens in three mesenchymal mPDAC cell cultures. We performed a genome-scale screen in 9091 cells and an in-house developed nintedanib-target-focused screen in 8248 and 8570 cells, with and without trametinib ( , and and ). To identify genes altering trametinib sensitivity, we calculated differential sensitivity scores, as the difference in β-score between the trametinib- and DMSO-treated arms. We focused on genes displaying a negative differential sensitivity score, indicating enhanced depletion in presence of trametinib ( and ).
In the genome-scale CRISPR screen we identified 8 nintedanib targets out of a total of 758 hits with statistically significant β-scores, whose inactivation resulted in the specific depletion of trametinib treated cells ( ). In the focused screens in 8248 and 8570 cells, nine and four nintedanib targets cooperated with trametinib, respectively ( ). Altogether, of 53 nintedanib targets identified in kinobead pulldown experiments, 15 showed functional relevance in the presence of trametinib in mesenchymal PDAC cells ( ). Importantly, the three different mesenchymal cell cultures showed some degree of heterogeneity across relevant nintedanib targets, indicating potential differences in underlying genetic, epigenetic and phenotypic characteristics of this subtype. Further analysis of the targets and their interaction using the STRING database (http://string-db.org) revealed a high degree of interconnectivity and convergence on FGFR, MEK/ERK family members and PDGFR regulated networks with different members of these pathways observed in the three screens ( ). Unexpectedly, gene expression profiling revealed no clear correlation between mRNA abundance of nintedanib targets and trametinib sensitization upon depletion ( ). Taken together, these data indicate that no single kinase but rather a specific spectrum of targets, such as PDGFR, FGFR and MEK/ERK family members, act in concert to mediate therapeutic efficacy in a context-specific manner.
Analysis of the 758 hits of the genome-scale CRISPR screen allowed us to identify pathways in mesenchymal PDAC, which globally cooperated with MEKi, such as ERBB, PDGFRB, KIT, and RB1 ( ). These pathways correlated to a high degree with the phospho-proteomic analysis of the T/N-treated mesenchymal PDAC cells, thereby cross-validating these results functionally ( ).
To extend and validate the top-scoring nintedanib targets of our negative selection screens, we exploited single and combinatorial CRISPR/Cas9 sgRNA-based approaches. First, we individually depleted Acvr1, Grb2, Map2k5, Map3k3, Prkaa1 and Fgfr1, and assessed cell growth using clonogenic assays with and without trametinib. In-line with our negative selection screens, we observed heterogeneity in the cooperation of these nintedanib targets with MEKi across the different models ( and ). To probe the cooperation among the identified targets in mediating trametinib-sensitization, we next depleted Acvr1, Grb2, Map2k5, Map3k3, Prkaa1 and Fgfr1 in triple combinations with and without trametinib, using a transfection-based Cas9-sgRNA ribonucleoprotein (RNP) approach ( and ). Additionally, we correlated the relative indel frequency of each combination with the loss of viability in presence of trametinib ( ). Consistently, we observed a heterogeneous response across the three cellular models, with the combinatorial depletion of Prkaa1, Fgfr1 and Map2k5 being most efficient in two out of three mesenchymal cell cultures in presence of trametinib. This confirmed our hypothesis that the depletion, not of one, but of a combination of multiple targets is important to sensitize mesenchymal PDAC towards MEKi. Thus, broad targeting is needed to efficiently and comprehensively treat mesenchymal PDAC.

## T/N triggers a T cell-dependent anti-tumor immune response
Our in vitro findings prompted us to explore the combination treatment in vivo in syngeneic orthotopic transplantation models of classical and mesenchymal PDAC (see ). These models resemble the clinical course of PDAC patients, with the mesenchymal subtype model being more aggressive, displaying rapid and uniform tumor progression to death ( ).
We randomized tumor-bearing mice and observed that the T/N combination led to a remarkable response of mesenchymal PDAC with a significant reduction in tumor volume of up to ~40% and doubled survival ( ). Moreover, we observed not only a decrease in tumor cell proliferation, but also vascular remodeling as evidenced by an increased amount of CD31+ vessels ( ), as well as markers of angiogenesis and endothelial cell activation ( ).
Unexpectedly, also the classical subtype responded to the combination therapy; however, this effect was mainly mediated by trametinib as evidenced by similar tumor volumes of trametinib and T/N treated cancers (p=0.786; ). In addition, mesenchymal tumors showed a superior overall response with two partial remissions and stable disease in 12/21 mice treated with T/N, according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) ( ). In contrast, classical tumors showed no partial remission and only 3/18 mice displayed stable disease. Accordingly, the difference in T/N-induced tumor regression between both subtypes is statistically significant (p=0.0162, ). This translated into improved overall survival, which was doubled in the mesenchymal subtype (36 days for T/N vs 16 days for controls), whereas classical tumors displayed only a 50% increase (27 days for T/N vs 20 days for controls; ). This difference in survival benefit is statistically significant (p=0.0007; , right panel). Thus, the novel combination is to our knowledge the first preclinical therapy that induces tumor regression and an increase in overall survival in Kras-mut iGD-driven mesenchymal PDAC. In line with the differential response, we observed a subtype-specific decrease in PDGFRB-Tyr1021 and AMPKα-Thr172 (PRKAA1) phosphorylation of T/N treated mesenchymal tumors in vivo ( ). Both kinases are important nintedanib targets identified in the proteomic kinobead-based pulldown approach ( ).
PDAC is considered immunologically “cold”: its microenvironment is characterized by a lack of cytotoxic T cells and infiltration of immunosuppressive immune cells
 , 
. T/N treatment substantially increased T cell infiltration into mesenchymal tumors. In contrast, classical tumors displayed features of immune exclusion – showing only a moderate enrichment of T cells at the tumor margins ( and ). Immunophenotyping of mesenchymal tumors revealed increased infiltration of CD8+ T cells, localized preferentially around vessels, arguing that vascular remodeling upon drug perturbation contributes to cytotoxic T cell infiltration ( ).
To investigate the role of T cells in therapy response, we employed CD3ε knockout mice on a C57BL/6 background, lacking all T cells
 
 ( and ). T cell deficiency blunted T/N response and diminished survival benefits of mesenchymal tumors ( and ). The tumor volume decreased significantly in wild-type vs. CD3ε knockout mice (p=0.0124; ). In addition, T/N treatment prolonged survival in comparison to controls by 20 days in wild-type mice, but only marginally by 5 days in mice lacking T cells (p=4.9x10-5, ). These data support the notion that T cells contribute significantly to the in vivo efficacy of the T/N combination in the mesenchymal subtype. However, treatment response is not mediated by T cells alone, but depends on TME reprogramming and tumor cell intrinsic drug action.
In contrast to mesenchymal PDAC, the classical subtype showed a mixed response in T cell deficient animals. There was no difference in tumor volume (p=0.563, wild-type vs CD3ε knockout mice; ), but a slight effect of T cell deficiency on survival, which was reduced by 5 days in T/N treated CD3ε knockout mice (p=0.028, ), indicating immune surveillance also in this model upon therapy, but to a significantly smaller extent (p=0.0014, ).
Cancer therapies can affect macrophage functions and alter their recruitment or polarization states
 
. The combination treatment did not change the overall number of macrophages substantially ( ). However, their polarization changed from the pro-tumorigenic M2- to an anti-tumorigenic M1-like state ( ), suggesting that they might contribute to anti-tumor responses. However, this effect was present in both subtypes. Therefore, these changes do not explain the observed subtype-specific differences.
Distinctively, epithelial tumors displayed an increase of neutrophils upon treatment ( ). The role of tumor associated neutrophils is controversial; some studies have shown their ability to block anti-tumor immune responses and mediate CD8+ T cell suppression, others have highlighted their various anti-tumor properties, including direct cytotoxicity and inhibition of metastasis
 – 
. Therefore, distinct immune cell types and mechanisms seem to contribute to the anti-tumor effects of the drug combination in both subtypes, with T cells being the key contributor to the strong effects observed in mesenchymal PDAC.

## The T/N combination sensitizes mesenchymal PDAC towards ICB
Our in vivo findings prompted us to investigate whether the combination therapy could sensitize the highly aggressive mesenchymal subtype towards ICB. Compared with controls, anti-PD-L1, and T/N treated groups, T/N+anti PD-L1 therapy induced tumor regression up to ~80% and increased survival selectively in mesenchymal PDAC (p=0.016 T/N+anti PD-L1 vs T/N; ). The median survival benefit by adding anti PD-L1 to the combination was 10.5 days compared to T/N alone and 30.5 days compared to vehicle, representing an almost 3-fold increase in survival ( ). 6/16 mice showed objective tumor regression with a partial response according to RECIST. Of the remaining 10 mice, 8 displayed stable and only 2 progressive disease (p=0.078 T/N+anti PD-L1 vs T/N; ). In contrast, no tumor regression, survival benefit or increased response rates were observed in classical PDAC, and both subtypes did not respond to ICB with PD-L1 alone ( ).
In summary, the triple treatment with ICB markedly improves anti-tumor responses offering a clear survival benefit selectively in mesenchymal PDAC.

## Single cell RNA sequencing reveals context-specific T/N driven changes
To investigate therapy-induced TME changes in a global and unbiased fashion, and to mechanistically decipher the drug action on epithelial and mesenchymal tumor cells and their environment in vivo, we performed single cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) of whole tumors. 1-2 PDAC per model and treatment condition were dissociated, sorted into mesenchymal/fibroblast and epithelial/immune enriched cell fractions and sequenced ( ). To define cell populations, we combined the data from both subtypes and all treatment groups, representing a total of 30677 cells (1677–13169 cells per model and treatment condition, ). In both subtypes we identified tumor cells, acinar cells, T cells, natural killer cells, B cells, myeloid populations such as macrophages and neutrophils, and fibroblasts ( ). In the classical tumors we additionally identified a cluster of endothelial cells ( and ).

## Treatment-induced cancer cell transcriptional changes
We assessed the impact of the combination therapies on gene expression of cancer cells and observed no evidence of epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) or the reverse process (MET) in T/N treated tumors with and without ICB ( ). Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) uncovered widespread and in part context-specific treatment-induced alterations of immune related pathways in tumor cells ( ). For both subtypes, we observed an induction of antigen processing and cross-presentation ( ). Additionally, mesenchymal PDAC showed an exclusive and striking enrichment for interferon signaling signatures, including an interferon gamma response as well as interferon regulatory factor 2 (IRF2) induction in the context of the triple therapy ( and ).
A growing body of evidence connects immune responses to errors in DNA replication and genomic instability
 , 
. GSEA revealed treatment-induced DNA-damage in both subtypes. We validated this observation by γH2AX immunohistochemistry, a marker for DNA-damage. Interestingly, induction of DNA-damage was stronger in the classical subtype, indicating that the remarkable treatment response of mesenchymal PDAC is not mediated by DNA-damage alone ( ). Several studies link DNA-damage to the senescence associated secretory phenotype (SASP) as well anti-tumor immune responses
 
. GSEA showed that SASP was strongly enriched exclusively in classical PDAC and this was maintained across treatments ( ). Senescence-associated β-galactosidase (SA-β-gal) staining confirmed this phenotype ( ). This indicates that the therapeutic effects observed in the classical subtype are mediated by a complex combination of mechanisms, which include induction of DNA damage, SASP, and reduction in cell proliferation.

## Drug treatment-induced immune responses
Our in vivo immune profiling shows a robust anti-tumor immune program in mesenchymal PDAC centered on T cells upon T/N treatment. Analysis of the T cells (3260 cells) of our scRNA-seq dataset ( ) revealed six subpopulations for both PDAC subtypes (cluster 1 to 6) ( and methods).
T/N treated mesenchymal tumors showed a substantial decrease of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells with a gene expression signature resembling naïve T cells, and a dramatic increase in T cells with functional cytotoxic, effector and memory gene expression signatures ( ). Addition of anti PD-L1 to T/N resulted in a further increase of cytotoxic and effector T cells up to almost 75% of all T cells ( ).
In contrast to recent studies indicating that SASP induces vascular remodeling leading to T cell infiltration and anti-tumor immunity
 
, the T/N combination reprogrammed the TME of classical PDAC towards a decrease of regulatory and effector T cells and an increase in the naïve-like CD4+ compartment ( ). Furthermore, the functional gene expression signature was much weaker in the cytotoxic and effector clusters in classical compared to mesenchymal tumors ( ).
Together, our findings show that in mesenchymal tumors the T/N combination alone leads to a considerable increase of effector-like, activated, and cytotoxic T cells, indicating an effective antitumor immune response, which was further enhanced by anti PD-L1 treatment. This contrasts the classical subtype, which showed a reduction of regulatory and effector T cells upon treatment despite displaying a SASP phenotype.
To gain insights into changes that could mediate T cell infiltration upon therapy, we analyzed the secretomes of T/N treated epithelial and mesenchymal tumor cells with mass spectrometry-based proteomics
 
. We observed profound T/N-induced changes in the secretion of immunomodulatory chemokines and cytokines between both subtypes ( ). To get a comprehensive overview of the resulting intercellular communication networks, we integrated tumor cell secreted proteins across treatment conditions with cell populations expressing the corresponding receptors as identified by scRNA-seq. This revealed key differences in the secretion of factors previously shown to modulate immune cell recruitment, differentiation and expansion, as well as tumor immune responses ( and , inner circle)
 – 
. In mesenchymal PDAC, the T/N combination specifically induced CXCL12, CXCL16 and TNFSF12 secretion, whereas CCL2, CSF1 and LGALS9 were downregulated ( ). This contrasts the classical subtype, which showed reduced levels of secreted CXCL12, CXCL16 and CXCL20 as well as an increase in CCL2 and CSF1 upon T/N treatment ( ). CXCL16, which is upregulated in mesenchymal PDAC upon T/N treatment, is a key chemoattractant for TILs and high expression levels correlate with a favorable prognosis and increases TILs e.g. in colorectal and breast cancer
 , , 
. Accordingly, PDAC tumors with high CXCL16 mRNA expression levels display an increased overall survival (n=176 samples, log rank test, p=0.042; https://www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000161921-CXCL16/pathology/pancreatic+cancer

 
). CXCL12 increases cytotoxic T cell infiltration in osteosarcoma
 
 and CCL2 and CSF1 mediate immunosuppression in various cancer types
 , 
. Therefore, T/N treatment induces a tumor-cell derived favorable reprogramming of the immunosuppressive TME thereby priming mesenchymal PDAC for ICB.

## Cancer associated fibroblasts reprogramming
PDAC subtypes differ in cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), desmoplastic stroma and extracellular matrix content, most abundant in classical while almost absent in mesenchymal tumors
 
. CAFs are highly heterogeneous, displaying diverse effects on tumor progression and therapeutic response
 , 
. Recently, at least three different CAF subpopulations, myofibroblast-like cells (termed myoCAFs), inflammatory (iCAFs) and antigen presenting CAFs (apCAFs), were characterized in PDAC
 , 
.
To investigate the dynamics of CAF subtypes in the PDAC TME, we analyzed their number and polarization making use of our scRNA-seq dataset ( ). Fibroblasts comprised only 9% of sorted classical tumors, in line with recent human PDAC datasets, which contain only <2% CAFs out of all cells in scRNA-seq experiments
 
. Mesenchymal tumors consist of densely packed tumor cells that lack the classical desmoplastic stroma
 , 
. Accordingly, only very few CAFs were detected in vivo preventing the analysis of this population.
In classical PDAC, T/N treated tumors displayed a substantially reduced amount of myoCAFs and a remarkable increase in iCAFs. In addition, myoCAFs presented reduced Tgfb1 expression upon dual- and triple treatment ( ). In line with its well-known role in blocking immune responses within the TME
 
, TGFβ1 downregulation was paralleled by decreased regulatory T cells ( ).
Collectively, our data highlight distinct treatment- and context-specific reprogramming of the TME between subtypes. Exploiting these changes for additional rational therapeutic intervention could lead to improved treatment efficacy also in classical PDAC.

## Discussion
PDAC is a complex disease with diverse molecular and morphological subtypes showing TME heterogeneity. Classical PDAC is characterized by a dense desmoplastic stroma, which fosters an immunosuppressive hypovascularized TME, believed to play a major role in primary therapy resistance
 , , 
. Conversely, the mesenchymal KRAS-mut iGD PDAC subtype shows high tumor cellularity, sparse stroma, is commonly more aggressive and unresponsive to all to date attempted polychemotherapies, targeted therapies and ICB
 – , , , 
.
Here, we identified a novel targeted therapy for mesenchymal PDAC by high-throughput combinatorial drug screening. We show how this therapy remodels the immune landscape in vivo and how it creates new vulnerabilities towards ICB in mesenchymal tumors. The T/N combination reprogrammed the immunosuppressive mesenchymal cancer cell secretome and downregulated cytokines and chemokines, including CCL2 and CSF1, capable of attracting and inducing expansion of macrophages and myeloid derived suppressor cells. In parallel, it induced secretion of T cell modulators, such as CXCL16 and CXCL12, important for TIL recruitment
 – , 
 and provoked upregulation of antigen processing and presentation pathways in mesenchymal PDAC cells in vivo. Finally, the combination strongly impacts on the TME by increasing blood vessel density, inducing endothelial cell activation, vascular remodeling and facilitating cytotoxic and effector T-cell infiltration. Thus, we show for the first time that reprogramming of the immunologically “cold” to a “hot” tumor stroma of the highly aggressive mesenchymal subtype is possible and can be exploited therapeutically by adding anti PD-L1 ICB to the T/N combination.
The context-specific impact of the T/N combination on the immune system was not expected. While a link between the DNA damage response, induction of antigen processing and presentation, and the activation of strong immune responses is well established
 – 
, the lack of these effects in classical PDAC was surprising. Although the combination induces DNA damage, it also induces immunosuppression by increasing the secretion of CCL2 and CSF1. Differences in oncogenic KRAS signaling outputs might drive immune signaling divergence between subtypes. High levels of KRAS expression, as observed in mesenchymal tumors, were shown to repress interferon gamma signaling in vivo as evidenced by reduction in IRF2
 
. Blockade of KRAS signaling by MEKi in combination with broad RTK and PD-L1 inhibition might release this important pathway and - in combination with therapy-induced DNA damage - boost neoantigen presentation while inducing anti-tumor immunity in mesenchymal tumors
 
. In line, we observed selective upregulation of IRF2 in PDAC cells upon T/N+anti PD-L1 therapy in this subtype in vivo.
Although being highly antagonistic in vitro, the combination showed substantial antitumor effects also in classical PDAC in vivo, indicating an impact on the TME
 
. The failure of the in vitro drug screen to predict in vivo responses of this subtype is remarkable. Therefore, treatment-mediated TME remodeling should be considered for the transition of in vitro screening hits to the (pre)clinical setting.
We observed an antiproliferative effect of the combination in classical PDAC, as well as the selective induction of SASP. SASP is characterized by the secretion of chemokines, cytokines, matrix metalloproteinases and other paracrine factors
 , , 
. In classical KRAS-driven PDAC, it has been shown that the combination of MEKi and CDK4/6 inhibitors induces a strong SASP response with the release of pro-angiogenic factors that promote tumor vascularization, endothelial cell activation and VCAM-1 expression. This in turn promotes T cell extravasation into tumors and sensitizes this subtype to ICB
 
. In contrast, we found no evidence for SASP-induced vascular remodeling in classical PDAC upon T/N therapy. In line, classical T/N-treated tumors did not show T cell infiltration into the tumor core. This might be due to insufficient levels of SASP-induction or other treatment-induced context-specific effects on the cancer cells and their environment counteracting vascular remodeling, T cell extravasation and reactivity. Of note, our study supports the notion that SASP-induction is context-specific
 
 as we were not able to detect therapy-induced senescence in vivo in mesenchymal KRAS-mut driven PDAC. This demonstrates that the biology, stromal composition and treatment response of PDAC is highly contextdependent and differs substantially between PDAC subtypes.
Trametinib and nintedanib are both clinically approved by the FDA/EMA. Trametinib is used for treatment of patients with unresectable or metastatic BRAF-mutant melanoma, NSCLC and anaplastic thyroid cancer. Nintedanib in combination with docetaxel has been approved for the second-line treatment of advanced NSCLC and first-line therapy for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) (www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/daf/index.cfm?event=BasicSearch.process). IPF is characterized by the activation of fibroblasts towards a myofibroblast differentiation
 , 
. Accordingly, blocking myofibroblast activation by nintedanib, or pirfenidone, which targets the TGFβ pathway, slows down pulmonary disease progression
 
. Classical PDAC harbor a dense stroma, which is composed in large parts by activated myoCAFs and TGFβ expression ( )
 , 
 We therefore hypothesized that adding nintedanib to trametinib might reprogram myoCAFs, thereby contributing to stromal normalization in classical PDAC. Using scRNA-seq we observed that the amount of myoCAFs decreased upon T/N therapy, and TGFβ1 expression, which can contribute to immunosuppression via regulatory T cells, is downregulated. This demonstrates that reprogramming of the fibrotic microenvironment of the classical subtype is feasible and could be exploited for further improved therapeutic responses.
To identify the therapeutically relevant targets of the multikinase inhibitor nintedanib, we performed multiscale analyses ranging from kinobead-based proteomic identification of the nintedanib-bound kinases, to phosphoproteomic analyzes of drug action, and genome-scale and focused CRISPR/Cas9-based negative selection screens. This revealed a key set of nintedanib targets, including FGFR, kinases belonging to the MEK/ERK family and PDGFR regulated networks that cooperate with trametinib in mesenchymal PDAC. However, it also revealed heterogeneity of the functionally relevant targets within this subtype. This is remarkable and indicates that indeed broad multikinase inhibition is needed to target this highly aggressive and therapy-resistant subtype efficiently across the whole spectrum of its phenotypes. In addition, it supports the notion that no single target gene is responsible for the synergistic effect of the T/N combination and challenges the one biomarker per drug paradigm in oncology. Indeed, mesenchymal cancer cell morphology and the underlying genetic program is the strongest predictor of therapeutic response towards T/N.
In summary, our work sets the basis for the combination of T/N with immunotherapy in the treatment of mesenchymal PDAC and provides a first step towards molecularly stratified combinatorial therapies in the clinic. Considering the widespread occurrence of RAS-driven tumor entities with an increased RAS gene dosage and a mesenchymal differentiation state, our data suggest that combining T/N with ICB or other forms of immunotherapy might trigger anti-tumor immunity and improve therapeutic outcomes across entities.

## Methods
Our study complies with all relevant ethical regulations. Animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees (IACUC) of the local authorities of Technische Universität München and the Regierung von Oberbayern.

## Primary PDAC cell culture, clonogenics and inhibitors
Primary mPDAC cell cultures were isolated from autochthonous PDAC and cultured as described previously
 
. All cells were cultivated for less than 30 passages, authenticated by genotyping and tested for mycoplasma contamination by PCR. Conventional human PDAC cell lines and primary patient derived low passaged PDAC cell cultures were established and cultured as previously reported
 
.
For long-term clonogenic cell proliferation assays, cells were seeded into 24-well plates (density of 1-2×103 cells/well, depending on growth rate. The following day, plates were treated with different concentrations of drugs as indicated. Every 7 days, media and drug were refreshed. Cells were fixed and stained with 0.2% crystal violet in an ethanol/water solution 7 to 13 days after the start of treatment, according to the confluence reached by the untreated control. Crystal violet was solubilized with 10% acetic acid and absorbance was quantified at 595 nm. The resulting values were used to calculate the Bliss synergy score with the online software Synergy Finder (v1.0)
 
. All assays were performed independently at least three times. Trametinib, nintedanib, AZD-4547, imatinib and PF-3758309 were obtained from Selleckchem, 4-OHT from Sigma, murine anti PD-L1 mAb (Anti PD-L1-mIgG1e3 InvivoFit™) was purchased from InvivoGen, and tamoxifen for in vivo treatment from Sigma.

## Caspase 3/7 assay
To assess apoptosis, 1000 cell/well were seeded in 96-well plates and treated after 24 hours with trametinib (10 nM) or nintedanib (2 μM) alone or the combination of both as indicated. After 24 hours from the start of treatment, caspase 3/7 activity was determined measuring luminescence using Caspase 3/7 assay (Promega), according to the kit instruction. All assays were performed independently at least three times.

## Kinobead Pull Downs
Kinobead pulldown assays were performed as previously described
 
. In-gel digestion was performed according to standard procedures
 
. Peptide/protein identification and quantification were performed with MaxQuant (v.1.5.7.4) by utilizing the Swissprot database (murine, 16,996 entries, downloaded on 23.11.2018) using the search engine Andromeda. Data analysis was performed as previously described
 
.

## Automated combinatorial drug screen
The screened compounds were purchased from SelleckChem either in DMSO or water. 1000-2000 cells were seeded in 96-well plates using a Multidrop Combi (Thermo Fisher) dispenser. The optimal cell number for each cell culture was determined to ensure that each cell line has undergone at least two cell doublings at the end of the assay 96h after seeding (~85% confluency). After overnight incubation, cells were treated with a 7 point dilution series (7 concentrations of each compound, 3-fold dilutions, highest concentration 10μM) and DMSO as control, using liquid handling robotics (CyBio Felix), and assayed 72h later. Each cell culture was treated with a library of 418 compounds either in monotherapy or in combination with a fixed concentration of trametinib (final concentration: 5nM). Viability was measured using CellTiter-Glo® Luminescent Assay (Promega). CellTiter-Glo reagent was added using the Multidrop Combi dispenser, cells were shaken and incubated for 10 minutes in the dark. Luminescence was measured using an Infinite Pro 2000 Lumi (Tecan) Luminometer.
Dose-response curves were generated for both monotherapy and combination using the R package GRmetrics (v3.14)
 , 
 to derive both growth-rate adjusted and traditional measures of drug sensitivity (half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50), area under the curve (AUC), efficacy (Emax), half-maximal effective concentration (EC50)). Only drugs for which a sigmoid curve could be fitted (coefficient of determination, r
 
>0.9) were considered for further analysis. For each drug we calculated an expected effect of the combination with trametinib using the Bliss independence model. We used the delta of the AUC between the expected and the measured response to the combination as a proxy for synergy. Drug sensitivity parameters for each cell culture are summarized in .

## Phosphoprotein array sample preparation and analysis
mPDAC cells 9091 and 8661 were plated in 10 cm dishes. The next day, they were treated for 6 hours with DMSO (vehicle) or T/N (10 nM trametinib and 2 μM nintedanib) and analyzed using the Phospho Explorer antibody microarray, which contains 1,318 antibodies (Full Moon Biosystems), according to the protocol of the manufacturer.
Pathway enrichment analysis was based on the Reactome gene-set and performed through Cytoscape (v3.8.2) with ClueGO (v2.5.8)
 
, a Cytoscape plug-in to decipher functionally grouped pathway annotation networks. The functionally grouped networks used for visualization present terms as nodes and are linked based on their kappa score level (≥0.4). The node size represents the term-enrichment significance and functionally related groups are depicted by similar colors.

## Cloning of focused Cas9 sgRNA library
For the custom sgRNA Cas9 library, 4 sgRNAs (from the Brie library (Addgene ID #73633)) per target, non-targeting controls, common essential genes and trametinib sensitizing/resistance genes were included to a total of 350 sgRNA sequences which were embedded into an oligo sequence with flanking PCR handles and BsmBI restriction sites 
 
. The oligo pool (Twist Bioscience) was then amplified at 5 nM input with NEBNext Ultra II polymerase and primers binding the PCR handles, followed by purification with AmpureXP beads (Beckman Coulter). For Golden Gate cloning, BsmBI-v2 (NEB)-digested pLenti-guide puro (Addgene ID #52963) was mixed with T4 DNA ligase (NEB), 10x T4 buffer, BsmBI-v2, linearized backbone and amplified insert (1:3 molar ratio) (30 cycles Golden Gate). The assembled product was purified with AmpureXP beads and electroporated into Endura Competent cells (Lucigen) using a BioRad MicroPulser (1.8 kV in 0.1 cm gap cuvettes (Sigma-Aldrich)). Bacteria were grown at 33°C overnight (LB-medium (Sigma) with 100 μg/ml Ampicillin). DNA was extracted using the NucleoBond Xtra Midi EF Kit (Macherey-Nagel). Libraries for NGS were constructed according to the protocol given below to determine sgRNA abundance. Sequences of oligonucleotides for all described methods from this study are provided in .

## Lentivirus production and titration
For virus production of sgRNA libraries, HEK293FT cells were seeded into 15cm dishes to reach confluency of 60% the following day. Cells were transfected with 14.3 μg library plasmid, 10.9 μg psPAX2 (Addgene ID #12260) and 7.1 μg pMD2.G (Addgene ID #12259) per plate using 119 μl TransIT-LT1 (Mirus Bioscience) in 850 μl OptiMEM (Gibco). 48h and 72h post transfection, supernatant was collected and filtered (0.45 μm). For other constructs, HEK293FT were seeded in 10 cm plates and transfected with 2 μg viral plasmid, 1.25 μg psPAX2 and 0.75 μg pMD2.G per plate using 18 μl TransIT-LT1 in 270 μl OptiMEM (Gibco) the next day.
Lentiviral sgRNA libraries were functionally titrated by spinfection (2h, 1000g, 33°C) of target cells with varying amounts of lentiviral supernatant in 12-well plates with 3x10^6 cells per well as described in syngeneic
 
. Amount of lentivirus needed per 12-well for a target MOI of 0.3 was calculated as survival of 0.25 relative to unselected control.

## Whole-genome and focused CRISPR/Cas9 screens
CRISPR/Cas9 screens were performed in clonal Cas9-expressing cells, with the focused Cas9 library at 1000x coverage and with the genome-wide Brie library (pLenti-guide puro) at 500x coverage. Parental cell lines were infected with pLenti Cas9-2A-BSD (Addgene ID #52962) and selected with BlasticidinS (Invivogen) (10 μg/ml). Single clones were obtained by limited-dilution in 96-well plates, tested for Cas9 expression by immunoblot and validated by resistance to 6-Thioguanine (Sigma) treatment in cells edited at the Hprt-locus (mediated by a sgRNA cloned into pLenti-guide puro).
The final dose of trametinib for the screens was determined by culturing the cells with different concentrations of trametinib (1.25 nM, 2.5 nM, 5 nM, 10 nM and 20 nM) and assessing cell proliferation and ERK1/2 phosphorylation. 500000 cells were seeded in 10 cm dishes and trametinib at the indicated concentrations was added. Cells were passaged every 3-4 days and counted at each passage. Protein samples were harvested at each count and phospho-ERK levels were assessed by immunoblot analysis.
The CRISPR/Cas9 screens were performed in side-by-side duplicates (genomewide) or triplicates (focused Cas9). Cas9 expressing cells transduced with the lentiviral libraries and selected in medium containing Puromycin (Sigma; final concentration 9091 and 8248: 4μg/ml; 8570: 12μg/ml). 4 days after infection, Puromycin was washed out and cells were allowed to recover for 2 days. Then, cells were assigned to control (vehicle, DMSO) and experimental arms (5 nM trametinib). Cells were passaged every 3-4 days for 2 weeks, thereby refreshing the drug treatment and maintaining representation. At the final timepoint, cells were harvested and genomic DNA (gDNA) was extracted using the DNeasy Blood & Tissue kit (focused libraries) or the Blood & Cell Culture DNA Maxi Kit (both Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

## sgRNA library construction, Next-generation Sequencing and MaGECK analysis
Approx. 230 μg (genome-wide screen) and 9 μg (focused screen) of gDNA was used for library preparation. One PCR reaction (50 μl) contained 6 μg gDNA, 25 μl 2x KAPA HiFi HotStart ReadyMix (Roche) and 2 μl each of forward/reverse primer (10 μM) with unique sequencing-barcode indices. PCRs were purified using NEB Monarch PCR-cleanup kit, pooled and quantified using the KAPA library quantification kit for Illumina. Pooled libraries were sequenced on Illumina NextSeq 500 (custom read and indexing primers spiked in). Read depth was intended to maintain library coverage (35 Mio reads for genome-wide, 350000 reads for custom library).
Downstream processing was conducted with MAGeCK v0.5.9.4
 
. Reads were aligned to the reference of sgRNA sequences and counted. Beta scores were calculated using the maximum likelihood estimation (mle) method utilizing the information from non-targeting control guides, resulting in a single score for each gene (beta score). The final score represents enrichment (+) or depletion (-) of the sgRNAs with respect to their initial abundance.
To investigate significantly depleted nintedanib targets in the presence of trametinib, the score difference between both arms of the experiment was calculated (DMSO and trametinib). Values falling in the left and right tails of this distribution (< 5th and > 95th percentile) were considered as conferring resistance or synergizing with drug treatment.

## Lentiviral CRISPR/Cas9-induced deletion of individual genes
sgRNAs were designed using CRISPick
 
 (https://portals.broadinstitute.org/gppx/crispick/public) and synthesized as complementary forward and reverse oligos (Eurofins Genomics GmbH; see ). Oligos were annealed in T4 DNA-ligase buffer (NEB), cloned into CRISPR expression vectors (either pLenti CRISPR V2, Addgene ID # 52961, or pLenti-guide puro) using BsmBI-v2 and T4-DNA ligase (both NEB), transformed into chemically competent bacteria (Stbl3 strain) using 5x KCM buffer (500 mM KCl, 150 mM CaCl2, 250 mM MgCl2) and grown on Ampicillin-containing (100 μg/ml) LB-plates overnight. Plasmid DNA was isolated using the Monarch Plasmid MiniPrep Kit (NEB) and used for lentivirus production.
For lentiviral transduction of target cell lines, 1 x 10^5 cells were seeded into 6-well plates. The following day, medium was replaced with 1 ml lentiviral supernatant, 1 ml fresh medium and polybrene (final concentration of 8 μg/ml). 48h post transduction, selection with puromycin was initiated. Indel analysis was performed by genomic DNA extraction using the DNeasy Blood & Tissue kit (Qiagen). PCR-amplification was done with primers flanking the genomic sgRNA binding site using 2x KAPA HiFi HotStart ReadyMix (Roche). PCR product was purified (Monarch PCR cleanup kit, NEB), submitted to Sanger sequencing (Eurofins) and analyzed for CRISPR edits using the web-based application ICE (Synthego, v2.0, https://ice.synthego.com/). Edited cells were seeded and clonogenic assays performed in 24-well plates (1000 cells/well) in presence and absence of trametinib as described above.

## Electroporation of CRISPR/Cas9 Ribonucleoproteins (RNPs) and Indel depletion assay
For multiplexed validation of targets conferring sensitivity to trametinib, sgRNAs were synthesized as crRNAs (Integrated DNA Technologies, IDT; see ) and complexed with a tracrRNA (IDT) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The resulting crRNA::tracrRNA duplex was complexed at 22 pmol with Alt-R Cas9 enzyme (Alt-R S.p. Cas9 Nuclease V3, IDT) at 18 pmol at room temperature for 20 min, thus forming ribonucleoproteins (RNPs).
Cells were detached trypsin-free by using PBS-EDTA (0.046%) and cell number was adjusted to obtain 400000 cells per transfection (10 μl volume). Complexed RNPs were added to the cell solution and electroporated using the Neon Transfection system (Thermo Fisher) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Next, cells were seeded for clonogenic growth as described above. To determine indel shift due to drug exposure, 20000 cells were seeded in 6-well plates and subjected to trametinib (5 nM) or vehicle (DMSO) treatment the next day. Cells were passaged if necessary and drug was renewed after 4 days. After 7-9 days, gDNA was extracted and PCR-amplified as described above. Indel frequency was determined by Sanger Sequencing and ICE analysis (Synthego, v2.0) for DMSO and trametinib treated samples.

## Mouse strains, tumor models and in vivo treatment

LSL-KrasG12D/+

 
, Pdx1-Cre

 
, Ptf1aCre/+

 
, Pdx1-Flp, FSF-R26CAG-CreERT2/+
 and FSF-KrasG12D/+

 
 and Map2k1lox/lox

 
 mice have been described previously. Map2k2lox/lox
 (Map2k2tm1e(EUCOMM)Wtsi) mice were obtained from EUCOMM. The strains were on a mixed C57Bl/6;129S6/SvEv genetic background and interbred to obtain compound mutant mice that develop autochthonous tumors in the pancreas.
For transplantation experiments, cancer cells (2500 to 10000) were orthotopically grafted into the pancreas of syngeneic immunocompetent C57Bl/6J wild-type, or T cell deficient C57BL/6 CD3ε-knockout mice 
 
. When tumors grew to size of ~100 mm
3
 mice were randomized into the different treatment arms. The following drugs were used: trametinib (3 mg/kg, 5 days a week, oral gavage), nintedanib (50 mg/kg, 5 days a week, oral gavage), anti PD-L1 antibody (200 μg/mouse, every third day, intraperitoneal injections) and tamoxifen (4 mg/mouse, every third day, intraperitoneal injections). One week after implantation, mice were scanned by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for the presence of tumors. Animals were sacrificed when individual mice reached the human endpoint or at the completion of treatment.
All animal studies were conducted in compliance with the ARRIVE and the European guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals and were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees (IACUC) of the local authorities of Technische Universität München and the Regierung von Oberbayern. A maximal tumor size of 1,5 cm and a specific burden score (determined by a cumulative burden score) permitted by the IACUC and Regierung von Oberbayern was not exceeded in this study.
Animals were kept in a dedicated facility, with a light-dark cycle or 12:12 hours, a housing temperature between 20 and 24°C and a relative air humidity of 55%.

## Magnet Resonance Imaging (MRI) and Quantification
Animals were anesthetized with isoflurane to perform MRI of the pancreas using Bruker Biospec 7T MRI scanner to scan 35 consecutive sections. Tumor volume was quantified using the Horos medical image viewer software to reconstruct MRI volumetric measurements (v3.3.6). Horos is an open source code software (FOSS) program that is distributed free of charge under the LGPL license at Horosproject.org and sponsored by Nimble Co LLC d/b/a Purview in Annapolis, MD USA. Acquisition of the MRI signal was adapted according to cardiac and respiratory cycles to minimize motion effects during imaging.

## Histology and immunohistochemistry
Mouse pancreatic tumors were fixed in 4% PFA (Carl Roth), embedded in paraffin and cut into 1 μm sections. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining of tissue sections was performed according to standard protocols. The following primary antibodies were used for immunohistochemistry (IHC): Rat anti-CK19 (DHSB, 1:250), Rabbit anti-KI67 (Thermo Scientific, 1:50), Rat anti-CD31 (Optistain, 1:50), Rabbit anti-CD3 (Zytomed Systems, 1:100), Rat anti-CD8 (Dianova, 1:100), Rabbit anti-Phospho-Histone H2A.X (Ser139) (Cell Signaling Technology, 1:500), Rabbit anti-MEK1 (30C8) (Cell Signaling Technology, 1:50), Rabbit anti-MEK2 (13E3) (Cell Signaling Technology, 1:50), Rabbit anti-pERK (p-p44/42 MAPK Thr202/Tyr204) (Cell Signaling Technology, 1:50), Rabbit anti-pPDGF Receptorβ (Tyr1021) (Cell Signaling Technology, 1:50) and Rabbit anti-pAMPKα (Thrl72) (Cell Signaling Technology, 1:50). Antibody detection was performed with the Bond Polymer Refine Detection Kit (Leica) or Rabbit anti-rat IgG (Vector Laboratories, 1:200) secondary antibody or followed by a secondary antibody conjugated to biotin (Vector Laboratories). Detailed protocols of individual stainings are available upon request. Images were acquired using Leica AT2 Scanner (Leica) and processed by Aperio Image Scope (Leica, v12.3.3) and FIJI (NIH, v2.1.0). For quantification of KI67, CD31 and γH2AX stainings five fields of view of individual tumors per treatment condition were analyzed in a blinded fashion. In at least 6 individual tumors per treatment condition, mitoses were counted per HPF in areas showing increased mitotic activity on scanning magnification. Moritz Jesinghaus a board certified pathologist performed all quantifications.

## Senescence β-Galactosidase (SA-β-gal) staining
PFA-fixed OCT-embedded tumor tissues were cut into 5 μm sections and mounted on slides. SA-β-gal staining was performed using a Senescence β-Galactosidase Staining Kit (Cell Signaling Technology) at pH 6.0. Images were acquired using Aperio Versa Scanner (Leica) and were processed by FIJI (NIH, v2.1.0).

## Immunofluorescence staining and imaging
PFA-fixed OCT-embedded tumor tissues were cut into 5 or 10 μm sections and mounted on slides. The slides were incubated with Aceton (Sigma) for 6 min at 4°C. After rehydration with PBS for 10 min, the tissues were blocked for 1h at RT with 10% goat serum and 10% donkey serum in PBS. The following primary antibodies were used for immunofluorescence staining of T cells, endothelial cells, epithelial and mesenchymal tumor cells: Rat anti-CD3 (Biolegend, 1:50), Armenian hamster anti-CD31 (Abcam, 1:400), Rabbit anti-aSMA (Abcam, 1:100), Rabbit anti-P-selectin (LSbio, 1:200), Rabbit anti-CK18 (Sigma, 1:800) and Chicken anti-Vimentin (Invitrogen, 1:100). Primary antibodies were incubated each for 3h at RT and diluted in 3% BSA (Sigma) in PBS. Goat anti-rat AF680 (Invitrogen, 1:200), Donkey anti-rat AF488 (Invitrogen, 1:200), Goat anti-Armenian Hamster IgG Cy™3 (Jackson Immuno, 1:200), Goat anti-rabbit AF488 (1:200) and Goat anti-chicken AF680 (1:200) were used as secondary antibodies (staining for 1h at RT diluted in in 3% BSA in PBS). Nuclear staining was performed for 10 min at RT with DAPI (Biotium, 1:500) in 3% BSA in PBS.
The following primary antibodies were used for IF staining of macrophage subpopulations: Rat anti-CD68 (Bio-Rad, 1:150), Rabbit anti-ARG1 (ThermoFisher, 1:300) and Rabbit anti-CD80 (Abcam, 1:300). Donkey anti-rat AF594 (Invitrogen, 1:200) and Goat anti-rabbit AF488 (Invitrogen, 1:200) were used as secondary antibodies (staining for 1h at RT diluted in in 3% BSA + 6% TritonX in PBS). Nuclear staining was performed with DAPI (Biotium, 1:1000) in 0,25% BSA in PBS.
After three washes in PBS, slides were mounted with Vectashield Mounting Medium (Vector Laboratories). Images were acquired using a TCS SP8 Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope (Leica) and were processed by FIJI (NIH, v2.1.0). For Quantification of T Cells, ten fields of view of 4 individual tumors per treatment condition were analyzed. For Quantification of Macrophage subpopulations five fields of view of 5 individual tumors per treatment condition were analyzed.

## Immunophenotyping by flow cytometry
Fresh tumor samples were minced and enzymatically digested with the tumor dissociation kit (Miltenyi #130-096-730) for 40 min at 37°C with agitation. The cell suspension was strained through a 100 μm strainer, spun down and resuspended in 2% FCS/PBS. Cells were blocked for 10 min on ice with anti-mouse CD16/CD32 FC block (Biolegend, 1:100) and stained with Zombie Aqua Fixable Viability Kit (Biolegend, 1:500) and the following antibody cocktails: CD4 BUV805 (BD, 1:100), CD3εBUV395 (BD, 1:20), CD8a BV785 (Biolegend, 1:100), CD45 PerCP Cy5.5 (Biolegend, 1:100), CD19 FITC (Biolegend, 1:100), EpCAM APC/AF647 (Biolegend, 1:200) for acquisition of adaptive immune cells; CD11c BUV737 (BD, 1:30), NK1.1 BUV395 (BD, 1:25), Ly6C BV785 (Biolegend, 1:200), CD11b BV650 (Biolegend, 1:100), F4/80 BV421/PB (Biolegend, 1:30), CD45 PerCP Cy5.5 (Biolegend, 1:100), Ly6G PE (Biolegend, 1:200), CD68 APC-CY7 (Biolegend, 1:20), EpCAM APC/AF647 (Biolegend, 1:200) for acquisition of innate immune cells. Per panel 1,000,000 events were acquired on the BD LSRFortessa. Flow cytometry data was analyzed using FlowJo software (v10.6.2).

## Whole cell lysates and western blot
Protein extraction from cells and tissues, western blots and subsequent detection of proteins were performed as described
 , 
. The following primary antibodies were used: HSP90 (1:1000, Cat# sc-13119, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), MEK1 rabbit mAb (1:1000, Cat # 9146, Cell Signaling Technology), MEK2 rabbit mAb (1:1000, Cat # 9147, Cell Signaling Technology), p-ERK (1:1000, Cat # 4377, Cell Signaling Technology), ERK (1:1000, Cat #610123, BD), CAS9 (1:1000, Cat #14697, Cell Signaling Technology), β-ACTIN (1:1000, Cat #4970, Cell Signaling Technology).

## 
KRASG12D
 induction after lentiviral transduction of mPDAC cells
The pINDUCER20 vector system comprising a puromycin resistance gene was used for doxycycline-inducible KRASG12D
 overexpression as previously described
 
.

## Gene expression profiling and amplicon-based deep sequencing at the Kras locus or of Kras mRNA expression
Drug perturbed cells were seeded in a 10 cm dish and treated the following day with 10 nM trametinib or vehicle. RNA was isolated with the RNeasy kit (Qiagen) from 80% confluent primary cells and immediately transferred into RLT buffer (Qiagen) containing β-mercaptoethanol.
RNA-seq library preparation, amplicon-based deep sequencing at the Kras locus or of Kras mRNA was performed as previously described
 
.
Analyses were carried out using R version 3.6.2 (R Core Team, 201) and Bioconductor v3.1. Differential gene expression analysis was performed using DESeq2 version 1.26.0. A gene was considered to be differentially expressed with a Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p-value of 0.05 and an absolute fold change >1.
We used the single sample Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (ssGSEA) function from the gene set variation analysis (GSVA, v3.14)
 
 and the Hallmark gene set EMT
 
 to estimate the classical or mesenchymal gene expression programs in our collection of human and mouse PDAC cell cultures.

## Sample preparation for single cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq)
Tumor specimens were dissociated and enzymatically digested with the tumor dissociation kit as described above. The cell suspension was strained through a 100 μm strainer, spun down and resuspended in 2% FCS/PBS including RNase inhibitor (NEB, #M0314L,1:100). Debris removal solution (Miltenyi #130-109-398) was used to remove cell debris from the dissociated tissue. Then the dead cell removal kit (Miltenyi #130-090-101) was used to enrich for live cells. The cell suspension was spun down and then resuspended in PBS and blocked for non-antigen-specific binding for 10 min on ice with anti-mouse CD16/CD32 FC block (Biolegend, 1:100). Cells were stained with the following antibodies for FACS sorting: TER-119 BV421 (Biolegend, 1:100), CD45-AF647 (Biolegend, 1:20), CD31-AF647 (Biolegend, 1:20) and EPCAM-AF647 (Biolegend, 1:20) for 30 min on ice. Cell sorting was performed using the BD FACS Aria Fusion. The sorted cells from the TER-119-negative/CD45-/CD31-/EPCAM-positive fraction (for enrichment of immune, endothelial and epithelial tumor cells and exclusion of erythrocytes) as well as TER-119-/CD45-/CD31-/EPCAM-negative fraction (for enrichment of fibroblasts/mesenchymal tumor cells and exclusion of erythrocytes). Sorted cells were collected in 2% FCS/PBS.

## scRNA-seq library preparation and sequencing
The sorted cells were counted, diluted in 2% FCS/PBS and up to 20,000 cells were loaded per lane on a 10x Chromium chip to generate gel beads in emulsion (GEMs). Single cell GEM generation, barcoding and library construction was performed by using 10x Chromium Single Cell 3’ v3 chemistry according to the manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA and generated libraries were checked for sample size and quality on an Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 using HS DNA Kit (Agilent). Libraries were sequenced on Illumina NovaSeq 6000 S2 (PE, 28+94 bp).

## Data preprocessing and quality control
Alignment of the scRNA-seq data to the mouse reference genome (mm10, release 108.20200622), filtering, barcode and unique molecular identifier (UMI) counting was performed using the 10x Genomics Cell Ranger software (v3.1.0). Python (v3.8.3) and the Python software package SCANPY was employed for all further analyses (v1.6.0)
 
. Cells that expressed less than 200 genes or had more than 10% mitochondrial gene counts were excluded from the analysis. We also filtered out genes with less than 20 counts. Counts were per-cell normalized and (log+1)-transformed. Highly variable genes were computed using the first N=4000 most variable genes for the analyses across cell types, tumor cells, T cells, fibroblasts, macrophages and treatment conditions. Batch-effect correction was performed using BBKNN (batch balanced k nearest neighbors, v1.5.1).

## Dimensionality reduction and clustering
The Leiden algorithm (v0.8.1) was used for cell clustering and Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP, v0.4.6) for dimensionality reduction. The clusters were further annotated by assessment of known cell-type specific markers. Principal component analysis was performed with default parameters. Neighborhood graphs were computed based on n=10 principal components and k=30 neighbors. The calculation of all UMAP projections was based on default parameters. The number of Leiden clusters was adjusted according to the sample of consideration.

## Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)
Differential gene expression analysis was performed using the tool rank_genes_groups, which is part of the SCANPY package (v1.6.0, https://github.com/theislab/scanpy). The Benjamini-Hochberg method was used to correct for multiple testing. Subsequent GSEA was performed using GSEA v4.1.0 jar package and MSigDB v7.1 gene sets provided by Broad Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University. GSEA was conducted on a pre-ranked gene list output of the differential gene expression analysis, genes were ranked based on “t test” metric. Parameters were set as follows: number of permutations was set to 1000 and enrichment statistic for scoring was set as “weighted”; other parameters were set as default. The cut-off for a significant FDR q-value was set at 0.05 and NOM p-value at 0.05.

## Cell type-specific analysis

## CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell identification
In classical and mesenchymal tumors, scRNA-seq uncovered six different T cell clusters. The identified CD4 naive-like populations expressed Cd4 and the naive T cell marker Sell, additionally they lacked the expression of Cd44 and T cell activation genes, such as Icos, Lag3, Havcr2 (Tim-3), Pdcd1, Tnfrsf4 and Ctla4. The identified activated/effector T cells showed the highest levels of activated markers such as Icos, Tim-3, Ctla4 and Pdcd1, and intermediate levels of Sell and Cd44. Regulatory T cells expressed high levels of Cd4 and Foxp3, and intermediate levels of T cell activation genes Icos, Ctla4 and Pdcd1. Central memory T cells were positive for Cd4, Cd27, Cd28, Cd44, Il7r and displayed a unique central memory marker signature including Sell and Ccr7. CD8 naive-like T cells expressed high levels of Cd8a and Sell. Cytotoxic T cells showed the highest levels of T cell activation genes Lag3, Tim-3, Pdcd1, Tnfrsf18 and Ifng, and cytotoxic markers Gzma, Gzmb and Prf1.

## CAFs identification
scRNA-seq uncovered a sufficient number of CAFs for downstream analysis only in classical tumors. We defined CAFs based on the expression of the following genes: Vim, S100a4, Acta2, Col6a1, Col1a2, Fap, Pdgfra, Cspg4. MyoCAFs expressed Tagln, Acta2, Postn, Thy1, Col12a1, Thbs2, apCAFs H2-Ab1, Cd74, Saa3, Slpi and iCAFs Clec3b, Col14a1, Il6, Pdgfra, Cxcl12, Dpt, Lmna, Cxcl1, Cxcl2, Ccl2.

## Conditioned media collection
mPDAC cells 9091 and 8661 were plated in 10 cm dishes, and subsequently treated after 24 hours for 3 days in the presence of DMSO (vehicle) or T/N (10 nM trametinib and 2 μM nintedanib). At day three of drug treatment, the medium was removed, cells were washed once with PBS, twice with serum/phenol-red free medium, and incubated for 6 hours in 5 ml serum/phenol-red free medium with DMSO or T/N. The resulting conditioned medium was then collected, filtered with 0.2 μm pores and used for downstream secretome analysis.

## MS-based secretomics
Cell supernatants were concentrated to ~250 μl and washed with 50 mM Tris, pH 8 using Amicon Ultra 3 kDa cutoff filter units (Merck) at 4°C, 4000 x g. 50 μl of concentrated supernatants were supplemented with 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide and then heated in a thermoshaker for 10 minutes at 95°C, 1000 rpm. Afterwards, samples were digested with 1.5 μg trypsin/ LysC mix for 16 h at 37°C, 1000 rpm. Samples were acidified by adding 100 μl isopropanol, 1% TFA and desalted using in-house made SDB-RPS StageTips.
Desalted peptide mixtures were reconstituted in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and analyzed with an EASY-nLC 1200 ultrahigh-pressure system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 300 ng peptide were loaded onto a 50-cm in-house made column with 75 μm inner diameter, packed with C18 1.9 μm ReproSil beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 5% to 30% buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) in 95 minutes at flow rate of 300 nl min-1. An in-house made column oven maintained the temperature at 60°C.
Data were acquired with a data-dependent MS/MS method. Full scans (300 to 1650 m/z, R = 60,000 at 200 m/z) at a normalized AGC target of 300% were followed by 15 MS/MS scans with higher energy collisional dissociation (normalized AGC target 100%, maximum injection time 28 ms, isolation window 1.4 m/z, HCD collision energy 30%, R = 15,000 at 200 m/z). Dynamic exclusion of 30 s was enabled.

## Data analysis
MS raw files were processed with the Andromeda search engine built into MaxQuant3 (v1.6.2.10) and MS/MS spectra were matched against the mouse UniProt FASTA database (June 2019) with an FDR of 0.01 at the protein and peptide level and a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids. Match between runs was enabled and the minimal ratio count for label-free quantification was set to one. Proteins were filtered for extracellular annotation (GOCC terms “extracellular space” and “extracellular matrix”, UniProt keywords “secreted”). Missing values were replaced from a Gaussian distribution (30 % width and downshift by 1.8 standard deviations of measured values) and t-tests were performed with a permutation-based FDR of 0.05.

## Intercellular communication analysis
Cell-to-cell interactions were inferred based on the expression of known ligandreceptor pairs in different cell types. Specifically, we used the ligand-receptor interactions from CellPhoneDB (v2.0)
 
 complemented by proteins with secretomics-derived experimental evidences
 
. Communication networks were devised by integrating quantitative MS secretome data of “sending” tumor cells with scRNA-seq data of “receiving” cell populations.

## Statistics and reproducibility
No statistical method was used to predetermine sample size. No data were excluded from the analyses. If possible, the experiments were randomized and the Investigators blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment. Graphical depiction, data correlation and statistical analysis were performed with GraphPad Prism (v8). Unless otherwise indicated, all data were determined from at least 3 independent experiments. For comparisons between data sets, log-rank test or two-tailed t-test with Welch's correction was employed and resulting p-values are indicated in the respective figures. The significance level was set to 0.05. If more than one statistical test was performed simultaneously on a single data set, a Bonferroni-adjusted significance level was calculated to account for the increased possibility of false-positive results. Survival analysis was carried out by the log-rank test.

## Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.

## Extended Data
 

## Supplementary Material
Inventory of supporting informationSource data extended data figure 1Source data extended data figure 2Source data extended data figure 3Source data extended data figure 5Source data extended data figure 6Source data extended data figure 7Source data extended data figure 8Source data extended data figure 9Source data extended data figure 10Source data extended data gels figure 2Source data extended data gels figure 3Source data extended data gels figure 6Source data figure 1Source data figure 2Source data figure 3Source data figure 4Source data figure 5Source data figure 6Source data figure 8Supplementary Information Supplementary Figure 1Supplementary tables 1-8

## Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Drs. Hassan Nakhei, Tyler Jacks, David Tuveson, Manuela Baccarini, Roland Schmid and Allan Bradley for providing transgenic animals, and the TUM animal facility and the imaging core facility of the Department of Nuclear Medicine, Klinikum rechts der Isar, for excellent technical support. This study was supported by the German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG SA 1374/4-2, SFB 824 C09 to G.S. and D.S., SFB 1321 Project-ID 329628492 P06 to D.S. and M.S.S, P11 to M.S.R. and D.S., and S01 to D.S., M.R., R.R., and G.S., and SFB 1371 Project-ID 395357507 P12 to DS), the Wilhelm Sander-Stiftung (2020.174.1), and the European Research Council (ERC CoG No. 648521, to D.S.).

Author contributions

C.F., S.B., S.A.W., C.S., J.J.M., A.T., J.M., T.K., J.H., J.J.S., B.T., O.R., C.S., K.G., A.C., C.V., M.Z., A.A.V., W.H.P., R.M., R.Ö., T.A., and J.R. performed research; M.S.R., B.K., K.S., F.M., M.R., M.F., R.R., M.S.S. and D.S. contributed new reagents and analytic tools; C.F., S.B., S.A.W., C.S., J.M., J.J.S., J.C., A.C., F.B., M.J., K.S., O.B., J.R, F.M., M.F., R.R., M.S.S., G.S. and D.S. analyzed data; C.F. and D.S. wrote the paper.

Competing Interests

The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to D.S.

## Data availability
The RNA-sequencing dataset has been deposited to the EBIArrayExpress repository with the dataset identifier E-MTAB-11187. The mass spectrometry kinobead pulldown and the mass spectrometry secretomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD023267 and PXD027877, respectively. The scRNA-seq data have been deposited to the EBIArrayExpress repository with the dataset identifier E-MTAB-9954. The human pancreatic cancer data were derived from previous studies and are available in the supplementary information of the respective publications
 – 
. All other data have been provided as or source data files. Mice and cell lines are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. Key resources are listed in .

## Code availability
Analyses were performed using open-source software, and in-house scripts in R v3.6.2 and Python v3.8.3, which are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. Codes are provided via the GitHub repository at the following link: https://github.com/stefanie-baerthel/combinatorial_treatment_analysis.