Chem RevChem Rev822acssd2985134RcrChemical Reviews0009-26651520-6890pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC7883342PMC7883342.1788334278833423344587410.1021/acs.chemrev.0c007791ReviewThe Use of Alternative Strategies for Enhanced Nanoparticle
Delivery to Solid Tumors
IzciMukaddes MaksoudianChristy ManshianBella B. SoenenStefaan J. †NanoHealth
and Optical Imaging Group, Translational Cell and Tissue Research
Unit, Department of Imaging and Pathology, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49, B3000 Leuven, Belgium‡Translational
Cell and Tissue Research Unit, Department of Imaging and Pathology, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49, B3000 Leuven, Belgium*Email: s.soenen@kuleuven.be.140120211002202112133754551746180325072020150220211602202131032024© 2021 The Authors. Published
by American
Chemical Society2021The AuthorsThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes. 
Nanomaterial (NM)
delivery to solid tumors has been the focus of
intense research for over a decade. Classically, scientists have tried
to improve NM delivery by employing passive or active targeting strategies,
making use of the so-called enhanced permeability and retention (EPR)
effect. This phenomenon is made possible due to the leaky tumor vasculature
through which NMs can leave the bloodstream, traverse through the
gaps in the endothelial lining of the vessels, and enter the tumor.
Recent studies have shown that despite many efforts to employ the
EPR effect, this process remains very poor. Furthermore, the role
of the EPR effect has been called into question, where it has been
suggested that NMs enter the tumor via active mechanisms
and not through the endothelial gaps. In this review, we provide a
short overview of the EPR and mechanisms to enhance it, after which
we focus on alternative delivery strategies that do not solely rely
on EPR in itself but can offer interesting pharmacological, physical,
and biological solutions for enhanced delivery. We discuss the strengths
and shortcomings of these different strategies and suggest combinatorial
approaches as the ideal path forward.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesdocument-id-old-9cr0c00779document-id-new-14cr0c00779ccc-price1

## Introduction
1.1

## The Use of Nanomaterials for Cancer Therapy
and Diagnosis
The application of nanotechnology for medical
purposes, also known as nanomedicine, is a relatively novel field
that has been gaining increasing interest over the years. It owes
its success to the highly multidisciplinary nature of the field itself,
bridging physics and chemistry expertise in nanomaterial (NM) synthesis
and characterization with expertise in biology and medicine for functional
applications. While NMs have been mostly
investigated within the electronic and industrial fields, the unique
properties of NMs render them ideally suited to be explored in a wide
variety of biomedical applications. As a result, various studies have
focused on the interactions of NMs with their biological environment,
aiming at elucidating which particular aspects of the NMs trigger
which exact biological response. Through
our increased understanding of bionano interactions in combination
with the rapid developments and in-depth knowledge gained in several
medical fields such as oncology, research groups have been able to
exploit the various unique properties of NMs to enhance therapeutic
and diagnostic outcomes in cancer research and clinical use. 
The unique properties of NMs stem from
a variety of characteristics, including their high surface area over
volume ratio, easy tunable size, and the availability of a wide range
of different materials, of which some possess even further unique
properties such as the superparamagnetism and surface plasmon resonance
(SPR) of magnetic and gold NMs, respectively. The surface of the NMs
can also be easily functionalized in a wide range of manners, significantly
impacting their biodistribution and clearance from the bloodstream.
Finally, different functionalities can be incorporated into a single
entity (i.e., fluorescent probe, drug, or antibody
coupled onto a magnetic carrier), allowing the engineering of a nanocarrier
with multiple properties and functions. 
For cancer therapy and diagnosis, various NMs have already
been
approved for clinical use, and many more are currently undergoing
clinical trials. The therapeutic and diagnostic
NMs can generally be classified into two categories: organic NMs (i.e., liposomes, polymeric, micelles, etc.) and inorganic NMs (i.e., iron oxide, gold, silica, etc.) ( ). Because of their high biocompatibility and reduced long-term side
effects, organic NMs have been most successful in their translation
into the clinic and are mainly being developed for applications like
vaccination, long-lasting depot delivery systems, hemostasis, and
topical agents for systemic delivery through the skin. − Intravenously delivered organic NMs are mainly aimed at two specific
applications: the delivery of small molecule drugs for cancer treatment
(i.e., breast, melanoma, head and neck, etc.) and gene therapy. − Translation of inorganic NMs into the clinic has been more limited,
despite major successes on a preclinical level, due to their lower biocompatibility and lack of knowledge
and consensus pertaining to their safety and long-term deposition
in different organs such as the liver and spleen. Inorganic NMs are
thus mainly used as contrast agents for magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) and are currently undergoing clinical trials for different applications
such as thermal ablation of tumors and intraoperative sentinel lymph
node imaging. , 
 Organic NMs are mainly being explored
for drug or gene delivery
purposes as they enhance drug/gene protection, extend circulation
in the blood, and provide controlled release of their encapsulated
content while improving targeting to diseased tissues compared to
their free drug counterparts. , Inorganic NMs, can,
depending on their properties, offer the same advantages as the organic
NMs while simultaneously providing further functional benefits associated
with the chemical composition of their core. For example, magnetic
NMs can be used for MRI or magnetic targeting, and the SPR present
on noble metals such as gold and silver can be used for imaging or
thermal heating during direct therapy or triggered drug release, which
other molecules and individual drugs do not offer without profound
additional chemical functionalization. , 
Both
organic and inorganic NMs have thus the potential to work
as promising delivery systems with different design features such
as drug encapsulation, targeting antibodies, and control over how/when
the diseased site interacts with this drug in a “plug-and-play”
format for the treatment of other or additional diseases. While the
main application of both types of NMs is their sole use as carriers
for more common chemotherapeutic agents, , the intrinsic
properties of NMs can be further exploited as direct therapeutic or
diagnostic agents, particularly in the case of inorganic NMs. , − In this review, both organic and inorganic NMs will
be discussed. A short overview of the mechanisms involved in NM delivery
to solid tumors is described in and more extensively described in and .
 
1.2

## NM Delivery
to the Tumor: Active and Passive
Targeting
Owing to their physicochemical properties, (in)organic
NMs can enhance the specific delivery of pharmaceutical agents to
the tumor, either passively or by stimulated (externally triggered)
release. Passive delivery of NMs to the
tumor site is normally achieved in a process known as the enhanced
permeability and retention (EPR) effect, the idea being that NMs are
able to passively accumulate within the tumor interstitium due to
the increased leakiness of the tumor vasculature compared to its normal
counterpart, in combination with its poor lymphatic drainage that
allows NMs to remain in the tumor tissue for longer. The increased permeability of tumor-associated blood vessels
is due to the high metabolism of tumors and tumor-associated endothelial
cells, which drive angiogenesis (the growth of novel vessels) at high
rates and prevent adequate vessel maturation. The fenestrations of
these newly formed blood vessels have a cutoff size that will determine
the maximal dimensions of the NM that allows extravasation. Specifically,
NMs with the size of 6–8 nm are typically cleared very rapidly
from the bloodstream by the kidneys and therefore often fail to achieve
high tumor-specific uptake levels. At the same time, sizes of around
200 nm are too big and are for this reason unlikely to extravasate
from the blood vessels into the tumor site. 
Most bare NMs will eventually get cleared from the bloodstream
by the immune and reticulo-endothelial systems (RES). To prevent NM
recognition by immune cells and complement factors such as opsonins, , NMs have been optimized for reduced agglomeration and improved long-term
circulation (i.e., by coating with polyethylene-glycol,
PEG), enhancing their extravasation through the leaky tumor endothelium. Specifically, the longer the NMs circulate in
the bloodstream by avoiding clearance by the RES, the higher the chance
for tumor delivery because the NMs will flow multiple times through
the tumor-associated blood vessels, and with every passage, there
is a chance of extravasation. Besides
PEG, various other antifouling agents, such as synthetic coatings
(i.e., polyvinylpyrrolidone, PVP; polyphosphoesters,
PPEs; polyelectrolytes; zwitterionic polymers, etc.) and natural polymeric coatings (i.e., polynucleotides,
polypeptides, dextrans, chitosan, etc.) have been
developed with the aim of maintaining the physicochemical properties
and functional integrity of NMs upon their exposure to biological
systems and fighting against the RES, NM agglomeration, protein corona
formation, and other bionano interactions that serve as barriers for
effective NM delivery. , The translation of NMs from in vitro to in vivo settings, including
the effect of protein corona formation on NMs, will be discussed in
more detail in . For more information on the various types of biocompatible
coatings, a thorough review by Schubert and Chanana can be consulted. 
The sole reliance on EPR for NM delivery
typically results in low
levels of NM accumulation at the tumor site ( ; delivery by EPR will be discussed in great
detail in ). Accordingly, most studies make use of active targeting ligands
(i.e., antibodies, peptides, or membranes from host
cells) to improve tumor targeting in a variety of ways. For endothelial targets such as RGD peptides
against αvβ3 integrin present on
neovessels, this can result in an enhanced accumulation of the NMs
within close proximity to the tumor cells, which would enhance tumor
cell uptake of drugs that are locally released. Alternatively, targeting
tumor cells themselves still requires the NMs to extravasate via the EPR effect, similar to passive delivery. However,
as solid tumors have high interstitial fluid pressure (IFP), this
impedes the retention of NMs that would have managed to traverse the
endothelial barrier (and extracellular matrix) into the solid tumor
mass, as they will effectively be pushed outward again. Any ligand
that can facilitate binding of the NMs to tumor cells would in turn
prevent the removal of the NMs from the tumor by anchoring it onto
the tumor cell membrane or even promote tumor cell internalization.
 Another alternative active strategy to improve NM delivery
to solid
tumors is to use biological methods such as extracellular vesicles
and attenuated bacteria, as well as encapsulate NMs in cells that
naturally home toward tumors in a Trojan Horse-like mechanism or functionalize
them onto the surface of such cells ( ). Various cell types have been used for
cell-based delivery of NMs or have had their membranes isolated and
coated onto NMs including erythrocytes, macrophages, leukocytes, stem
cells, tumor cells, among others. For instance, Cao et al.( ) used macrophage membranes as an active
targeting method, given that macrophages are present as some of the
most abundant cells in the tumor microenvironment (TME) and can bind
to metastatic cancer cells via the α4 integrins
of the macrophage and the vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-
1) of cancer cells. In this study, cytotoxic anticancer drug Emtansine
was encapsulated into pH-sensitive organic liposomes, which were then
coated with isolated macrophage membranes. These nanoformulations
were intravenously injected in mice bearing lung metastasis models
of breast cancer, and their delivery to metastatic sites was considerably
improved via the α4 integrin–VCAM-1
interactions compared to the uncoated liposomes, significantly inhibiting
metastasis. 

1.3

## Difficulties
in Delivering NMs to solid Tumors
Despite all the efforts
made in optimizing NM design to promote
active or passive targeting, a slightly controversial meta-analysis
of Chan and his group published in 2016 showed that in preclinical
models only 0.7% of the intravenously administered dose of either
organic and inorganic NMs accumulates in solid tumors irrespective
of whether this has occurred via passive or active
targeting. The analysis itself studies
the percentage of NMs that reach the tumor after intravenous injection
without taking into account the size of the tumor itself nor the injected
dose. For therapeutic applications, 0.7% of a given substance in a
small-sized tumor (only a few cells) could be more than sufficient,
while this may not be the case for a much larger tumor, as the number
of existing cancer cells could influence the success rate of NMs reaching
the tumor site. Additionally, therapeutic efficacy is not solely determined
by effective NM targeting but also on the efficiency of the drug release.
Although 0.7% may not seem very convincing, this value in itself is
much higher than the values obtained for many conventional drugs not
associated with a nanoformulation. The
authors also do not discuss the heterogeneity of the EPR and do not
consider that 0.7% delivery may be sufficient for full anticancer
therapy and patient benefit. Lastly, the meta-analysis was focused
on the percentage of the injected dose, hereby ignoring the level
present in blood or relative differences in tumor size between studies.
A recent reanalysis of these data using classical pharmacokinetic
metrics revealed a far greater relative tumor delivery of NMs. In a more recent study published by Warren Chan
and his group, they suggest that a minimum dose threshold of 1 trillion
nanoparticles (NPs) is required to achieve a 12% tumor delivery efficiency
to 93% of all cells within the tumor and attribute this successful
delivery to the overwhelming of Kupffer cell uptake rates, reduced
liver clearance, and enhanced circulation. 
Nanoformulations have been shown to dramatically enhance the
time frame of tumor exposure by significantly reducing the clearance
rate of the agent. They have therefore
been shown to have great clinical potential but also a large window
of opportunity for further improvement, which can be achieved by boosting
delivery efficacies. To do so, treatment
regimen need to incorporate various strategies aimed at overcoming
different biological barriers. While the NMs themselves can be engineered
in a way that exploits the inherent differences in microenvironments
of healthy and tumor tissues for specific tumor targeting, the various
obstacles within the TME can be simultaneously modulated through pharmacological
and physical means to facilitate NM transport across the different
stages. Among the barriers of the TME are the pro-tumorigenic stromal
cells and highly dense cell masses associated with elevated IFP, hindering
the diffusion of NMs from the blood into the tumor against this pressure
difference. In fact, another study by Warren Chan and his group has
shown that the size of gold NMs plays a pivotal role in the delivery
efficacy mainly due to the thickness and permeability of the stromal
barrier. Accordingly, as thickness and
compactness of the stromal barrier was related to tumor size, delivery
efficacy could be optimized by tuning gold NM diameter in function
of tumor size. The authors varied tumor volume to determine whether
cancer pathophysiology could possibly influence tumor accumulation
and penetration of differently sized gold NMs and found that changes
in pathophysiology were associated with tumor volume, which could
selectively change tumor uptake of gold NMs of varying sizes. Their
results suggest that NMs could be personalized according to a patient’s
disease state to achieve an optimal diagnostic and therapeutic outcome. 
Another issue lies in the biological differences
between different
tumors, even of the same type. Both in patients and animals, two tumors
are not fully identical. For (in)organic NMs to extravasate from the
bloodstream into the tumor mass, there should be ample perfusion of
the tumor (sufficient number of blood vessels) and the vessels should
be permeable to the NMs. The process of angiogenesis is highly complex,
involves many different factors and signaling pathways, and is influenced
by the growth rate of the tumor, any signaling mediated by tumor-associated
immune cells, the presence of hypoxic regions, among others. All these
factors will differ between individuals, and thus the ability for
a given formulation to reach a certain tumor cannot be predicted without
knowledge of these factors. In this review,
we will discuss the various pharmacological, physical, and biological
strategies aimed at enhancing NM delivery to solid tumors, including
the modulation of the TME, the EPR effect, increased transcytosis
across endothelial barriers, and the use of cell-based therapy ( ).
 

2

## Modulating
the Tumor Microenvironment (TME)
Upon their administration
into the body, NMs need to go through
several stages in order to reach cancer cells from blood circulation
and exert their therapeutic effect, starting with their vascular navigation
toward various regions of the tumor, followed by their transvascular
passage through the vessel walls, and finally their transport across
the interstitium to reach the cancer cells. Compared to normal tissue,
the TME is characterized by leaky blood vessels and poor lymphatic
drainage that significantly affect blood flow, as well as altered
physiological parameters (i.e., acidosis, hypoxia,
and elevated IFP) and a dense ECM containing stromal cells that have
developed pro-tumorigenic properties. In this section, we briefly
discuss the various barriers existing within the TME, how they affect
efficient NM delivery, and some of the numerous strategies that have
been developed over the years to modulate the TME and facilitate on-target
NM delivery.
2.1

## Pharmacological Methods to Increase Blood
Flow and Associated NM Delivery
The EPR effect for (in)organic
NM delivery and thereby NM accumulation is variable due to the heterogeneity
of the tumor vasculature, which is differentiated according to various
characteristics, such as vessel maturity, perfusion, density, and
pore size. Given that NM and drug delivery to tumors is significantly
affected by blood flow, the tumor vasculature is an important target
for the modulation of EPR-mediated targeted delivery. To enhance the
EPR effect and overcome EPR heterogeneity, numerous physical and pharmacological
strategies have been developed, many of which have been discussed
in depth by Ojha et al.( ) Here, we provide only a short overview of these methods and refer
the interested readers to the review by Ojha et al. for more detailed information ( ). We also touch
upon potential shortcomings associated with each of these methods.
 2.1.1

## Vascular Permeabilization
One method
of increasing blood flow to the tumor area is vascular permeabilization,
which is the widening of the endothelial pores by inflammatory cytokines
and other vasomodulators (neuronal regulators of blood flow) such
as bradykinin, histamine, tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α),
and serotonin, or using external mechanical forces. Vasoconstrictive
endothelin-1 (ET-1) and its receptor ETA are both significantly overexpressed
in tumor vessels to maintain vascular contractility, at 13-fold and
5-fold higher than in their normal counterparts, respectively. Despite the ability of vasodilators to increase
blood flow and enhance the accumulation and efficacy of NMs and anticancer
drugs, their systemic administration
has been associated with several side effects, such as lethal shock,
tissue injury, among others. , With the aim of overcoming
systemic toxicity, Eggermont et al. used isolated
limb perfusion (ILP) to deliver TNF-α (a potent pro-inflammatory
agent), interferon gamma (IFNγ, a cytokine important for innate
and adaptive immunity), and cancer chemotherapeutic melphalan to treat
patients with soft tissue sarcomas. Given
that this treatment regimen was well-tolerated and a vast antitumor
response was detected in 87% of the patients, it has now become a
standard treatment for melanomas and sarcomas. , In a more recent study, the hypotensor captopril was able to dilate
tumor blood vessels by upregulating bradykinin, resulting in enhanced
vascular permeability and delivery of paclitaxel-loaded PEG-polylactic
acid (PLA) nanoparticles (NPs) to glioma tumor xenograft models, which
in turn led to increased tumor shrinkage and necrosis. 

2.1.2

## Vascular Normalization
Another
effective approach for enhancing NM delivery to solid tumors is vascular
normalization. The tumor vascular network is chaotic, with several
functional and structural abnormalities that are caused by an imbalance
between pro- and antiangiogenic factors, hampering NM delivery and
efficacy. During vascular normalization, low doses of antiangiogenic
agents are used to correct these vascular abnormalities by reducing
the levels of vascular endothelial, fibroblast, and platelet-derived
growth factors (VEGF, FGF, and PGDF, respectively). Restoring the
balance between pro- and antiangiogenic factors has shown to correct
these structural abnormalities, partially restore functionality of
the tumor vasculature, and reduce IFP. For instance, Batchelor et al. combined chemoradiation
together with cediranib (a pan-VEGF receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor)
to shed light on mechanisms of newly diagnosed glioblastoma patients
(nGBM) and showed that the resulting increased blood perfusion was
able to significantly improve tumor oxygenation and patient survival. 
While normalization has been found to
promote the delivery of free chemotherapeutics and very small mainly
inorganic NMs, , it may impede the permeability
of larger organic NMs due to the reduced amount and size of endothelial
fenestrations associated with the resulting decreased leakiness of
the tumor blood vessels. For example, upon normalization of the abnormal
vasculature in orthotopic E0771 murine breast cancer models using
the anti-VEGFR2 antibody DC101, the delivery of 10 nm albumin-based
nanocarriers (Abraxane) was significantly improved, while the normalization
did not have any considerable effect on the accumulation of 100 nm
liposomal nanomedicines, such as Doxil (PEGylated liposomal doxorubicin),
at the tumor site. Despite these promising
results, more research into this method is required as normalization
is, for example, short-lived and highly dependent on dosing and timing,
rendering it difficult to predict therapeutic outcomes, schedule for
normalization therapy, and optimally combine normalization with chemo
and/or radiotherapy. Additionally, the
dense tumor ECM may affect the penetration and extravasation of NMs
even postvascular normalization. , Modulating
the ECM and other barriers of the TME will be discussed in more detail
in the remainder of .

2.1.3

## Vascular Disruption
Vascular disruption
is the breakdown of the endothelial lining that can be caused by either
vascular disrupting agents, such as combretastatin A4 phosphate (CA4P,
a tubulin-binding agent that inhibits tubulin polymerization) or by
certain mechanical stimuli, allowing anticancer agents and NMs to
easily accumulate at the target site. For instance, Satterlee et al. used CA4P as a pretreatment to improve the accumulation
and efficacy of lutetium-loaded lipid-calcium-phosphate NPs (Lu-LCP)
in subcutaneous UMUC3/3T3 ovarian, orthotopic 4T1 breast, and B16
melanoma tumors. The combination therapy
of CA4P and Lu-LCP showed a significant inhibition of tumor growth
compared to CA4P and Lu-LCP treatment alone. In addition, the accumulation
of Lu-LCP was significantly higher in CA4P-pretreated tumors than
those treated with Lu-LCP alone. Despite the potential for vessel
disruption to enhance the target site accumulation of NMs and anticancer
agents, the systemic administration of these disrupting agents are
associated with severe side effects, calling for more on-site vascular
disruption strategies to be incorporated into treatment regimen. , 

2.2

## Physical Treatments That Improve Blood Flow
2.2.1

## Hyperthermia
Hyperthermia is the
application of microwaves, radiofrequency, and ultrasound (US) to
locally heat the tumor to temperatures up to ∼70 °C as
an anticancer treatment. Even mild hyperthermia (39–42 °C)
makes the tumor more sensitive to chemo- and radiotherapy by dilating
the blood vessels, enhancing oxygenation and promoting perfusion and
improving the efficacy and clinical performance of (in)organic NM
formulations. , − Sato et al. investigated the effect
of combined hyperthermia-chemotherapy using μ-oxo N,N′- bis(salicylidene)ethylenediamine iron
(Fe(Salen)) NPs, which are specifically delivered to the tumor site
with magnetic guidance as a new strategy for cancer treatment. Because
Fe(Salen) NPs need to be rapidly heated up in an alternating magnetic
field (AMF), the authors hypothesized that these single-drug NPs would
be effective for combined hyperthermia–chemotherapy, as opposed
to conventional hyperthermic particles that are mainly composed of
iron oxide and thus are not associated with anticancer activity in
the absence of an AMF. They found that Fe(Salen) NPs induced apoptosis
in cultured cancer cells together with an enhanced apoptotic effect
due to AMP exposure. Further, they evaluated the combined 3-fold strategy
in a rabbit model of tongue cancer, i.e., chemotherapy
with Fe(Salen) NPs, magnetically guided delivery of the NPs to the
tumor, and AMF-induced heating of the NPs to induce local hyperthermia.
After intravenous administration of the NPs, the tumor volume ratio
was reduced almost by half, even before the other two modalities were
applied, each of which then inhibited tumor growth even further. 

2.2.2

## Radiotherapy
About half of the
solid tumor patients are treated with radiotherapy. While radiotherapy
can exert direct antitumor effects, it can also enhance the accumulation
and penetration of drugs and NMs into the tumor. − This is mainly
due to increased tumor vessel permeability resulting from the induction
of endothelial cell apoptosis and enhanced expression of vasoactive
mediators (i.e., VEGF), which reduce cellular density
and IFP in treated tumors. In a recent
study by Erel-Akbaba et al., radiotherapy was applied
to orthotopic glioblastoma xenograft murine models to improve the
delivery of iRGD-mediated solid lipid NPs loaded with epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) and programmed cell-death ligand-1 (PD-L1)
siRNAs. This combination of radio-, targeted-,
and immunotherapy showed significant inhibition in glioblastoma growth
and extension of mouse survival, with the radiotherapy-treated group
exhibiting considerable down-regulation of EGFR and PD-L1 compared
to the other groups as a result of increased NP uptake within the
brain tumor regions. Improved NM delivery via transcytosis
using iRGD will be further elaborated on in .

2.2.3

## Sonoporation
Sonoporation is the
permeabilization of the cell membranes or endothelial barriers by
inducing high intensity-focused US after fast expansion and compression
of gas-filled microbubbles (MB), which initially cavitate and finally
implode, thereby physically damaging any biological membrane in their
immediate vicinity. Theek B et
al. evaluated the impact of sonoporation on the PEGylated
double-fluophore-labeled liposome accumulation in two tumor models
with low EPR baseline levels, i.e., highly cellular
A431 epidermoid xenografts and highly stromal BxPC-3 pancreatic carcinoma
xenografts. The MBs and liposomes were coinjected intravenously, and
the MBs were then locally destroyed in the tumor region using US.
Using in vivo computed tomography-fluorescence molecular
tomography (CT-FMT) imaging and ex vivo multiphoton–photon
microscopy, the authors found that sonoporation was able to significantly
enhance the accumulation and penetration of liposomes in both tumor
models. 

2.2.4

## Phototherapy
During photodynamic
therapy (PDT), photosensitizers are locally or systemically administered
and the tumor is then locally irradiated with a laser light with a
specific wavelength. Light exposure leads to the absorption of photons
by the photosensitizers, causing elevated energy levels from a grounded
singlet state to an excited state. The subsequent relaxation of the
photosensitizers to the ground state generates a singlet oxygen and
a reactive oxygen species (ROS), which is an unstable molecule that
easily reacts with other biological molecules. The resulting elevated
ROS levels then lead to cell damage and induce apoptosis. Similar to radiotherapy, the enhanced (in)organic
NM delivery by PDT is mainly driven by the loss of cell numbers and
reduced IFP. This PDT method is gaining interest as an anticancer
treatment because it also causes toxic effects on endothelial cells,
which are able to cause higher vascular leakiness and/or vascular
shutdown in tumor tissues. − The pro-tumorigenic effects of endothelial cells will be further
discussed in .
A recent study by Paris et al. used
NPs as drug delivery systems (DDS) for multimodal antivascular therapeutics
that incorporates dual drug release, photothermal, and photodynamic
therapy. This proof-of-concept DDS was
based on mesoporous silica NPs, in which four therapeutic modalities
were formulated: (1) the gold nanorod core provided photothermal therapy
(PPT, generating local heat) upon near-infrared (NIR) irradiation,
(2) the coupled photosensitizer indocyanine green (ICG) enabled PDT
and generated toxic ROS under the same stimulus as PTT, (3) the two
drugs of interest, AAD (doxycycline or DOXY) and CA4P were loaded
into the NP design for antiangiogenic and vascular disruption activities,
respectively, and (4) the surface-functionalized iRGD enabled the
NPs to reach and interact with the overexpressed integrins on the
surface of tumor endothelial cells, facilitating uptake. These four
therapeutic modalities were evaluated in an ex ovo fibrosarcoma xenograft model, which showed a significant decrease
in the number of blood vessels within the tumors upon NP delivery
and after which the remaining blood vessels were destroyed with NIR
irradiation. 

2.3

## Modulating Physiological Parameters, Such
as Hypoxia, Acidosis, and Elevated IFP
Hypoxia is a prominent
physiological feature found in 50–60% of solid tumors that
results from the inability of the abnormal vasculature to supply the
rapidly developing and highly energy-consuming tumor with sufficient
oxygen levels. As a result, hypoxic TMEs
have been shown to contain up to a 96% decrease in oxygen levels compared
to their normoxic counterparts, such as from 8.5 to 1.5% in breast
and from 7.5 to 0.3% in pancreatic tissues. Hypoxia has been found to play a key role in the alteration of gene
expression profiles (i.e., upregulation of hypoxia-induced
factors, HIFs), leading to the development of the invasive and metastatic
characteristics of tumors, as well as their induction of epithelial-mesenchymal
transitions (EMTs), angiogenesis, and resistance to various conventional
therapies. One way of mitigating tumor hypoxia is improving blood
flow by one of the aforementioned means. Another method is to increase
oxygen delivery to these targeted areas using hemoglobin and perfluorocarbon,
although the amounts of oxygen delivered with these alone are often
insufficient. Alternative strategies
include the delivery of MnO2, CaO2, and catalase,
which are able to induce in situ production of oxygen,
often in the form of nanocarrier systems to the tumor site. − For instance, polyelectrolyte-albumin-containing MnO2 NPs have been shown to increase tumor oxygen levels by 45%, while Ce6-loaded PEG-coated MnO2 NPs
reduced hypoxic-positive areas by 35% in orthotopic and subcutaneous
breast cancer tumors, respectively, significantly
inhibiting tumor growth in combination with either ionizing radiation
or PDT. Lastly, reducing oxygen consumption by delivering agents such
as metformin, atovaquone, tamoxifen, or NO to tumors has also proven
to mitigate hypoxic levels through interference with the mitochondrial
electron transport chain. − Given that PDT is able to significantly contribute
to tumor hypoxia by consuming oxygen and decreasing vascular perfusion,
incorporating hypoxia regulators into PDT regimen significantly improves
therapeutic outcomes. , It is important to note that
extensive efforts have also been made to develop nanocomplexes that
harness the differences in oxygen levels between healthy and tumor
tissues to specifically target tumor cells. 
Another effect of hypoxia on the TME is acidosis, which simultaneously
results from the large concentration of acidic byproducts of glycolysis. Upon delivery to the tumor site and subsequent
internalization into cells by endocytosis, NMs experience a range
of pH from 7.4 in healthy tissue to 5.7–7.8 in tumor regions
and 4.5–5.5 within the lysosomal compartments of cells. These changes in pH may significantly affect
the structural and thereby functional integrity of NMs, such as etching
of coatings as well as catalyze the degradation of NMs prior to reaching
their destination. While the design of
pH-sensitive NMs is one strategy of overcoming the effects of tumor
acidosis, modulating tumor acidosis itself can also significantly
improve NM efficiency, for instance by acid neutralization. Such strategies
include the use of buffers (i.e., bicarbonate, imidazoles,
lysine), proton-pump inhibitors (i.e., omeprazole
and esomeprazole), MCT inhibitors (i.e., α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamate,
CHC), and CAIX inhibitors (i.e., sulphonamide-based,
glycosylcoumarins, acetazolamide). , Similarly
to the case with hypoxia, NMs have also been designed to exploit the
differences in pH levels between healthy and tumor tissues to specifically
target tumor cells. 
Interstitial
fluid pressure (IFP) is another physiological outcome
inherent to most solid tumors, where it can reach 75–130 mmHg
in pancreatic tumors, for instance, compared to 8–13 mmHg in
the healthy pancreas. Such elevated pressure
results from aberrant blood flow along the tumor vessels as well as
the extravasation of excessive fluid from the leaky tumor vessels
into the tumor interstitium, where the poor lymphatic drainage is
not able to restore normal pressure levels. Hydraulic conductivity
in desmoplastic tumors also contributes to IFP and is dependent on
the characteristics and organization of fibers in the ECM. For example,
increasing amounts of tumor collagen significantly reduces hydraulic
conductivity while anionic glycosaminoglycans increase flow resistance
by the trapping of water. The elevated
IFP reduces the convection of NM delivery as it redirects the blood
from the center of the tumor to the periphery through compression
of the vessel walls and even leak into healthy tissue while containing
not only NMs but also growth factors and tumor cells, which may lead
to metastasis. At the same time, higher
IFP enhances the EPR effect and can thus be beneficial for NM delivery
as long as the IFP remains lower than the microvascular pressure. Strategies that have shown to reduce tumor IFP
include the aforementioned pharmacological and physical methods that
aim to regulate blood flow, including PDT and targeting of VEGF, PDGF,
and TNF, as well as modulating the ECM, which will be discussed in
further detail below.

2.4

## ECM
Under normal
physiological conditions,
the ECM consists of a myriad of macromolecules that can be classified
as either fibrous proteins (i.e., collagens, fibronectin,
integrins, laminins) or proteoglycans (i.e., hyaluronan),
the combination of which varies among different tissues, and serves
as a natural barrier for cell proliferation and differentiation along
the basement membrane and interstitial space. , However, during tumor progression, the ECM becomes highly unregulated
and disorganized and has been shown to either excessively produce
the aforementioned macromolecules in desmoplastic tumors (leading
to fibrosis) or downregulate production in highly vascularized tumors,
such as gliomas and melanomas. , Collagens, which provide
tissue tensile strength, and integrins, which are the main cell adhesion
receptors in the ECM, have been associated with tumor progression
in their dysregulated forms in various studies. During tumor fibrosis, the high collagen turnover thickens
and eventually stiffens the epithelial structures, such as through
its cross-linking with elastin fibers via lysyl oxidase
(LOX), while the individual collagen fibers interact with various
tumor-associated proteins, and their catabolins (i.e., matrix metalloproteinases, MMPs) expose their binding sites, facilitating
tumor invasion. − At the same time, dysregulated bindings
and transformations of integrins lead to the induction of EMTs and
tumor invasion. Other components of
the ECM that are highly upregulated in various tumors are hyaluronan
and fibrin. Hyaluronan provides the ECM with its gel-like phenotype,
which increases IFP and hinders the penetration of external fluids
and NMs. Fibrin has been found to be
abundant in highly vascularized tumors due to the continuous leakage
of coagulation factors from circulation to the tumors, and it mainly
resides in the vicinity of the vessels where it causes vessel compression,
thereby reducing blood flow and NM delivery. , 
Thus, while the strengthening of the ECM is able to hinder
tumor metastasis at early stages, it also significantly interferes
with NM delivery in desmoplastic tumors by creating a dense matrix
mesh that reduces blood flow and NM convection and diffusion while
also elongating the diffusion paths by enlarging the interstitial
spaces. , As such, one of the main strategies for
modulating the ECM is the degradation of its various components. This
can be achieved through physical methods (i.e., photothermal,
ultrasound), or the delivery of biochemical enzymes (i.e., hyaluronidases, collagenases, tissue plasminogen activators) or
chemical agents (i.e., cyclopamine, relaxin, NO). , − For instance, treatment of pancreatic cancer xenograft-bearing mouse
models with cyclopamine has shown to disrupt ECM fibronectins, improving
tumor perfusion rate of PEG–PLA NPs and thereby significantly
inhibiting tumor growth. With the aim
of improving the tumor-specific disruption of the ECM and reducing
damage to healthy tissue, NMs coated with various ECM enzymes have
been shown to provide more effective NM diffusion and associated therapeutic
outcomes compared to the separate and systemic administration of these
agents. , A similar strategy for regulating the ECM
is to interfere with the native ECM assembly by blocking specific
stages of the process, such as LOX, MMPs and growth factors involved
in tumor-associated fibroblast (TAF) stimulation (i.e., TGF, Hedgehog, PDGF using angiotensin II receptor antagonists),
which have been shown to also encode for ECM components. − In cases where the aim is to enhance the barriers for metastasis,
particularly in early stages of tumor progression, then the opposite
strategy is implemented wherein the ECM is strengthened to minimize
cancer cell leakage by using artificial materials, such as laminin-mimicking
peptides (LMPs). These LMPs are self-assembled
into NPs that are capable of transforming into nanofibers upon binding
to integrins and laminin receptors on the surface of tumor cells and
have been shown to stabilize in the tumor for over 72 h, inhibiting
lung metastasis by 82% in breast and 50% in melanoma tumor models.

2.5

## Stromal Cells
Growth factors secreted
by tumor and tumor-associated cells may cause functional changes in
stromal cells of solid tumors, including endothelial cells (ECs),
pericytes, and fibroblasts, that give rise to their tumorigenic properties.
Specifically, tumor-associated ECs tend to be more proliferative,
upregulate various angiogenesis-related markers and genes, such as
aminopeptidase N and tumor endothelial marker 8, and contribute to
the immunosuppressive TME that interferes with successful NM delivery. , Pericytes, which reside in the perivascular space, tend to contribute
to blood vessel growth and maturation and promote EC survival. , In highly desmoplastic tumors, pericytes have been shown to cover
up to 70% of the endothelium, limiting the transport of NMs through
endothelial gaps, and may even become phagocytic, internalizing NMs
along their way. − While antiangiogenic agents have proven
to successfully target ECs, these treatments have led to increased
pericyte growth. As such, efforts have
been made to target pericytes using drug-loaded NMs functionalized
with different peptides, such as CPRECES and TH10, which target the
aminopeptidase A protein and NG2 proteoglycan, respectively, on the
surface of pericytes. , It is important to note that,
as is the case with ECM degradation, late-stage targeting and destruction
of pericytes may affect blood vessel permeability and facilitate leakage
of tumor cells, leading to metastasis.
Another type of stromal
cell that is highly abundant in desmoplastic tumors are TAFs, which
are distinct from healthy tissue-resident fibroblasts and overexpress
fibroblast activation proteins (FAPs) and fibroblast-specific proteins. It is claimed that TAFs originate from a variety
of sources, including epithelial and endothelial cells through mesenchymal
transitions, and bone marrow-derived mesenchymal and hematopoietic
stem cells. Another theory is that TAFs differentiate from normal
fibroblasts that have been activated by growth factors such as EGF
and TGF-β, and these cells are characterized by the expression
of α-smooth muscle actin (SMA) and exhibit enhanced migratory
abilities compared to TAFs originating elsewhere. TAFs contribute to tumor progression and hinder efficient
NM delivery in a number of ways. First,
they contribute significantly to the densening and stiffening of the
ECM by producing large amounts of collagen and proteoglycans as well
as MMPs, disintegrins, and plasmin to disrupt and remodel the ECM.
Second, they produce and secrete high amounts of VEGF, TNF, IL-6,
PDGF, and TGF-β, providing tumors with their chemoresistant
properties and promoting their growth. As such, disrupting or targeting
TAFs through the use of FAP antibodies, antifibrotic angiotensin receptor
II (AR2) antagonists, or cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors, for example,
have been shown to significantly improve the therapeutic efficacy
of NMs. − For instance, AR2 antagonist (losartan)-loaded peptides capable
of self-assembling into long filaments to form a hydrogel were able
to remain in the tumor for at least nine days, gradually and sustainably
releasing losartan to destroy TAFs in breast tumor-bearing mice. Other groups have targeted the wingless-type
MMTV integration site (Wnt) that is overexpressed in cisplatin-treated
TAFs using anti-Wnt16 siRNAs loaded in lipid-calcium-phosphate (LCP)
liposomes in combination with cisplatin, reducing resistance to cisplatin
and improving its therapeutic efficiency. 

2.6

## Immunosuppression
Another prominent
feature of solid tumors is their immunosuppressive environment, which
arises due to a variety of events including the downregulation of
MHC and recruitment of anti-inflammatory immune cells by tumor cells,
reducing the immune system’s capacity for defense. Various
immunosuppressive molecules are also released, such as PDL1, immune-checkpoint
molecules (i.e., CD47), natural killer cell ligands
(i.e., FASL), among
many others. One type of immune cell that has gained significant attention
within the field of cancer immunotherapy over the years is the macrophage,
which is capable of developing either an anti- or pro-tumorigenic
phenotype (M1 or M2, respectively) depending on the activation conditions.
Within the hypoxic TME, macrophages tend to exhibit M2-like genetic
expression profiles such as lower IL12 and elevated IL10, indoleamine,
NO, arginase, PGE2, and TGF-β levels and further hinder M1 activation. Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) have been
shown to originate from monocytes and healthy tissue-resident macrophages
that have gained the ability to promote angiogenesis, tumor invasion,
and immune evasion. , Other negatively immunomodulating
cells involved in tumor progression include regulatory T cells (Tregs)
and myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) that are triggered in
response to tumor-released cytokines (i.e., macrophage
colony-stimulating factor MCSF and IL6). , Together, they interfere significantly with T-cell function and
activation by secreting large amounts of arginase-1, NO, IL10, and
TGF-β and suppressing dendritic cells (DCs). , Tregs also secrete perforin and granzymes to disrupt effector T
cells and are further triggered by the presence of indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase
(IDO) to activate the suppressive MDSCs. In combination with the lack of immune activation in the TME, the
downregulation of NK cells and adhesion molecules ICAM-1 and VCAM-1
as well as CD62L on the surface of CD8+ T cells hinders effective
antitumor immune response. , 
Given the variety
of existing immunosuppressive elements within tumors, numerous strategies
have been developed to boost the immune system’s ability to
fight against cancer cells, with immune checkpoint inhibitors (i.e., anti-PD1 and -PDL1 antibodies and small molecules)
exhibiting some of the most significant therapeutic benefits and making
their way to the clinic. Other immunosuppressive
molecules that have been targeted include IDO, MMPs, and TGF-β. Depleting TAMs has also been widely explored
by the administration of colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor (CSF-1R)
and bisphosphonates, although such treatments tend to result in the
simultaneous destruction of M1-like macrophages. , More targeted strategies involve inhibiting the specific recruitment
and survival of M2-type TAMs through M2pep and anti-CD204 ligand modifications,
for instance, or repolarizing them to an M1 phenotype using agents
such as chloroquine, celecoxib, and TLR agonists. − In relation to tumor cytotoxic-NM delivery, however, the depletion
of TAMs and other phagocytic inflammatory cells could reduce NM uptake
by these cells and thus off-target delivery, improving the therapeutic
efficiency of the NMs. In fact, Roode et al. have
shown that in melanoma xenograft tumor models, NP uptake was 4-fold
greater in TAMs than in cancer cells. At the same time, the phagocytic properties of these cells can be
exploited to facilitate the on-target delivery of NMs that have been
specifically developed to target TAMs and other negatively modulating
immune cells rather than tumor cells. Other strategies have aimed
at depleting Tregs through PDT or modulating them using CTL4 and STAT3/5
pathway inhibitors, while MDSCs have been targeted using derivatives
of oleanolic acid and gemcitabine, for example, potentiating cancer
therapy. − As such, the combination of NMs with immunotherapeutic agents has
been extensively explored over the recent years to modulate the TME
and maximize the therapeutic efficacy of treatment regimen.

2.7

## Conclusion
Most of the methods described
above rely on disrupting the barriers that are present within the
TME to improve NM delivery. While the permeability of tumor blood
vessels and the various components of the ECM are, from a practical
point of view, interesting to exploit in view of targeted delivery
of (in)organic NMs to solid tumors, the resulting fenestrae within
the endothelial barrier do pose some dangers. Solid tumors themselves
are, depending on their nature, sometimes hard to treat, but one of
the major issues with cancer lies in the dissemination of cancer cells
from the original tumor into remote metastases. Tumor cells that can
find their way from the main tumor mass into the bloodstream can then
be further transported to other organs and locations into the body.
The endothelial barrier is one of the major obstacles that impede
tumor cells from accessing the blood and vessel normalization, whereby
fenestrae in the vessels are inhibited, is one of the major clinical
applications in a variety of tumor treatments including ovarian cancer. Any effect on the integrity of the endothelial
barrier by promoting blood flow may therefore result in higher levels
of metastasis. In particular, for less controlled methods, such as
radiotherapy, phototherapy, or sonoporation, endothelial cell death
or damage can open doors for promoting tumor malignancy.

3

## EPR-Mediated NM Delivery and Quantification
While the
EPR effect is significantly influenced by various features
of the TME, it is also affected by the physicochemical properties
of the NMs, including composition, size, stability, and surface properties,
which determine the nature of the bionano interactions and thereby
NP half-life and behavior in circulation and transvascular transport
to the tumor. For instance, as a result of the leaky tumor vasculature,
organic NMs of sizes <500 nm can easily penetrate through the vascular
gaps (depending on the gap size in the vessel wall) and into the tumor
tissue, while smaller NMs of (<30 nm) can also easily diffuse back
into circulation and are thus associated with poor tumor retention. This low retention at the tumor site can, however,
be significantly enhanced by active targeting. At the same time, the longer the half-life of the NM in
circulation, the more likely it is to experience the EPR effect. In
an early study by Liu et al., the biodistribution
of liposomes of varying sizes was evaluated 4 h after their intravenous
administration, and it was found that 60% of the NPs ranging from
100 to 200 nm in size were still found in circulation compared to
only 20% of those with sizes <50 and >250 nm. Similar observations were made for tumor uptake data wherein
100–200 nm liposomes exhibited a 4-fold higher uptake rate
in the tumor compared to those with sizes <50 and >300 nm.
The surface characteristics of NMs is another prominent factor
that influences the EPR effect as it is associated with the solubility,
aggregation, biocompatibility, and the ability of NMs to transport
themselves across biological barriers. In general, NMs with neutral
surface charge have been shown to be more shielded from uptake by
the mononuclear phagocytic system (MPS) and thus remain in circulation
for longer than their charged counterparts. Specifically, cationic NMs tend to interact with anionic serum proteins in vivo, forming large aggregates that can cause transient
embolism in the lung, and these aggregates are better detected by
the MPS for clearance. At the same time,
while cationic NMs bind more easily to cell membranes and may thus
be better taken up by cells, they also bind more easily to the negatively
charged vascular endothelial surface which leads to a decreased NM
concentration in the plasma that is available to experience EPR. Improving the in vivo stability
and biodistribution of NMs via the reduction of MPS
recognition and protein corona and aggregate formation can thus be
achieved by coating the NMs with PEG and other antifouling agents
that reduce surface charge. − Similarly, the biocompatibility
and stability of organic NMs render them less susceptible to aggregation
and MPS clearance compared to inorganic NMs, whose reactive sites
can easily interact with the various elements in the biological environment.
Besides PEGylation, cell-based therapy has evolved as a relatively
novel strategy to enhance NM circulation time, wherein for instance,
NMs can be loaded into or functionalized on the surface of various
circulatory cells or even coated with isolated cell membranes, shielding
them from potential recognition by the MPS and significantly improving
their half-life and delivery to solid tumors. Cell-based therapy will
be discussed in great detail in .
3.1

## Personalized Medicine
Various efforts
have recently been undertaken to try and boost the delivery of (in)organic
NMs to solid tumors. One trend that has emerged is the need for personalized
medicine, where depending on the physiology of the tumor of a particular
individuum, this tumor would be more or less susceptible for NM therapy. Where most studies to date do not classify different
tumors based on their vascular properties (total blood flow and tumor
vessel permeability), they frequently will observe a broad distribution
in the tumor-targeting ability of any administered NM.
Individual
patients have a high heterogeneity in EPR effect among them. Because
of this heterogeneity, the clinical translation of NMs has been marginal.
Patients with high vs low levels of EPR effect in a clinical trial
can possibly cause different therapeutic results, which may also show
some superiority compared to gold-standard treatments when the patients
with high levels of EPR-mediated accumulation are preselected. Patient
preselection using protocols and probes are for this reason needed
for NM therapies, during which factors such as vascular leakiness,
perfusion, ECM density and macrophage content need to be considered.
EPR level assessment using imaging methods can possibly predict a
correlation between a high tumor accumulation of a given nanomedicine
and an increased antitumor response. At the same time, low levels
of EPR are likely to show a poor antitumor response. The visualization
and quantification of EPR-mediated tumor targeting and the evolvement
of EPR during therapy could be done using noninvasive direct or indirect
imaging techniques. 
3.1.1

## Indirect
and Direct EPR Imaging
Indirect EPR imaging is the visualization
and quantification of tumor
characteristics in a noninvasive way. These tumor characteristics
correlate with the level of NM accumulation in the tumor itself. Some
preclinical studies focus on key EPR-determining parameters of the
tumor vasculature, which are correlated with the accumulation and/or
efficacy of NMs. In one preclinical
study, assessment of the relative blood volume (rBV) in tumors was
done via contrast-enhanced ultrasound imaging. They
observed a correlation between rBV values and the tumor accumulation
of N-(2-hydroxypropyl) methacrylamide (HPMA)-based
organic polymeric drug carriers, highlighting the usefulness of imaging
vascular parameters in predicting EPR-mediated tumor targeting. Coll and colleague (2016) performed MRI scans
for the characterization of tumor models, which further correlated
rBV and vessel permeability with fluorophore-labeled nanocarrier accumulation.
This method was used for the detection of biomarkers for EPR-based
NM accumulation. Accordingly, indirect
imaging of biomarkers depends on the correlation of tumor vascularization
with NM accumulation, which in turn is correlated with treatment response. Direct EPR imaging is for this reason preferred,
during which the tumor accumulation of nanodiagnostics or nanotheranostics
(coloading of nanocarriers with an imaging agent and a drug) can be
visualized and quantified directly. − 
Recent studies
have shown that by using an imaging contrast agent along with the
therapeutic NM, a better understanding of the vascular properties
of every particular individuum can be obtained, based on which the
decision of whether or not this particular individuum would be susceptible
to NM-based therapy can be made. A study
performed by Merrimack Pharmaceuticals used 64Cu-labeled
human epidermal growth factor receptor (HER2)-targeted organic PEGylated
liposomes loaded with doxorubicin (DOX) for the evaluation of the
EPR effect in patients with primary and metastatic breast cancer tumors. Quantitative PET imaging was used to analyze
liposome accumulation in different lesions, and biopsies were taken
to determine the DOX concentration within tumors and metastatic sites
to be correlated with the therapeutic outcomes. They found that the treatment response is highly influenced
by the amount of drug accumulation at a target site, which was shown
to be highly heterogeneous between patients and within the same patient,
as well as by other aspects such as drug release, sensitivity to the
drug, cellular uptake, and intratumoral distribution. 
Despite its effectiveness, EPR effect
quantification using direct
imaging, wherein NMs are labeled and imaged themselves and their uptake
in tumors is directly quantified, is almost never done in clinical
practice due to cost challenges and regulatory legislation. Indirect imaging is more likely to be used
and employs nanosized imaging agents that behave similarly to NMs
to predict NM localization using imaging techniques. For instance,
Ferumoxytol (FMX, Feraheme), a clinically approved inorganic magnetic
30 nm NM, can predict colocalization (delivery and efficacy) of NMs
by MRI. FMX-MRI correlates well with NM uptake, cellular response,
and inhibition of tumor growth in mouse xenograft models. Thus, FMX
can be used as a generic diagnostic NM companion for multiple therapeutic
NM formulations to select the patients that are more likely to benefit
from EPR-mediated treatment. 

3.1.2

## Companion/Nanodiagnostics
Companion
diagnostics is an intermediate option between indirect vascular imaging
and the direct nanotheranostic imaging. One preclinical study by Perez-Medina et al.( ) introduced a PET nanoreporter
that serves as a companion diagnostic for organic PEGylated liposomes
loaded with chemotherapeutics such as Doxil. Liposomes with physicochemical
properties similar to Doxil were loaded with chelators to allow 89Zr-labeling and PET imaging, allowing the prediction of the
therapeutic outcome in individual tumors based on the accumulation
of nanoformulations. Doxorubicin and nanoreporter concentrations in
tumors were found to be correlated with therapeutic efficacy, suggesting
that PET nanoreporters can be used as effective tools for the preidentification
of tumors with good therapeutic response. The prediction of the tumor accumulation of drug-containing organic
liposomes in different solid mouse tumor models was also investigated
more recently by Lee et al., where diagnostic PEGylated
liposomes were labeled with 64Cu. Accumulation of the 64Cu-containing companion diagnostic
liposomes matched well with three different therapeutic liposomes
target site depositions. The classification of tumors into high vs
low levels accumulation of liposomes was enough for the prediction
of the tumor response to NM therapy. 

3.2

## Maximizing NM Delivery to Solid Tumors
3.2.1

## Advantages and Limitations of EPR-Mediated
NM Delivery
Various direct and indirect imaging tools and
technologies have been developed to determine the heterogeneity in
EPR-based tumor targeting, each of which are associated with advantages
and limitations based on clinical translatability, versatility, and
predictive power. Although indirect imaging
approaches are less accurate, they have the ability to be versatile
and have a straightforward clinical translation. For this reason,
some clinically approved inorganic NMs with pronounced imaging contrast
such as ferumoxytol can fasten the use of companion nanodiagnostics
for patient preselection. At the same
time, while direct nanotheranostic agents can be powerful tools for
the accurate prediction of a NM formulation performance, a new chemical
entity (such as chelators that can bind tightly to metal ions) must
be incorporated into every formulation for further radiolabeling.
This means that every formulation has to face a new full set of preclinical
and clinical toxicology experiments for the safety evaluation of the
new chemical. 
In conclusion, additional
studies are needed to determine the required level of accuracy and
specificity for EPR-mediated drug targeting assessment. The useful
parameters to predict patient responses to EPR-based NM therapies
should also be taken into consideration. While personalized medicine and characterization of EPR efficacy
can be very useful, they do not improve NM delivery to tumors on their
own. For this purpose, these image-based methods should be combined
with alternative strategies that can enhance (in)organic NM delivery
to solid tumors while taking into account the dangers associated with
these physical, chemical, and biological strategies discussed in this
review.
An important remark concerning the use of these methods
to enhance
NM delivery to solid tumors is that the EPR effect has been proposed
quite some time ago as the major mechanism by which NMs can be efficiently
targeted to cancerous tissues. This paradigm has now been challenged
in a recent study by Warren Chan’s group, in which they demonstrated
that most NMs reach solid tumors through active transcytosis pathways
across the endothelial barriers. The
gaps between endothelial cells, which are essential for EPR-based
strategies did not seem to be the major factors in enabling NMs to
reach the tumor cells. Instead, using a combination of detailed intravital
microscopy studies and mathematical modeling, the authors observed
that up to 97% of injected NMs arrived in tumors through active transport
mechanisms rather than passive EPR. For these studies, so-called zombie
mice were used, being paraformaldehyde-fixed and which were completely
devoid of active transport mechanisms. The authors noted that NM delivery
into tumors in these zombie mice was largely reduced. This paradigm
shift has elicited major responses from the scientific community, and more research work should be done to confirm
these findings and enhance our understanding of how NMs can efficiently
reach tumors. A wide range of different strategies have already been
investigated and will be discussed in detail in the sections below.
It is important to note that while the EPR effect may not be the major
contributing factor to NM deposition in the tumor, it should not be
completely ignored. Optimal results will therefore likely stem from
a combination of the methods listed above along with methods described
below. A personalized approach, in which the perfusion and vessel
density of the tumor is well-characterized, in combination with various
physical, pharmacological, and biological NM-based strategies described
in this review, may constitute a big step forward in cancer therapy.

3.2.2

## Potential Bottlenecks Related to NM Delivery
Numerous attempts have been and are continuously being made to
improve NM delivery to solid tumors, in particular, by physical or
chemical means, including blood vessel disintegration, sonoporation,
radiotherapy, or thermal therapy, all of which aim to break the endothelial
barrier and reduce interstitial pressure in the dense tumor mass. Recent work by the group of Warren Chan and
colleagues has demonstrated that blood clearance levels of NMs are
limited and tumor delivery can be significantly enhanced by exceeding
this saturation threshold of approximately 1 trillion NM per mouse. For drug-loaded NMs, this can be achieved by
initially administering high levels of empty NMs, followed by a second
administration of loaded NMs, resulting in nearly 12% tumor targeting
efficacy. While for inorganic NMs this
can indeed be an excellent opportunity, the high levels of NMs to
be used need to be considered carefully in view of their toxicity.
Similarly, for all strategies relating to disruptance of the blood
vessels, it needs to be carefully validated whether this does not
bring any issues in themselves. Recent work by Peng and colleagues revealed that inorganic (titanium dioxide,
silica, and gold) NMs themselves can damage the endothelial barrier,
which in turn can increase intravasation and extravasation of tumor
cells, resulting in potentially higher levels of metastasis. NMs have also been found to elicit inflammation
and result in elevated levels of TGF-β, a key cytokine that
among its many roles also induces cancer cell migration and invasiveness,
thereby promoting metastasis. Hence,
the understanding that (inorganic titanium dioxide) NMs by themselves
can disturb the tight junctions that hold together the endothelial
barrier surely raises concerns of significant
risks in view of cancer progression and malignancy. The deliberate breakdown of the barrier by physical or
chemical means would clearly add to this risk. One might ask, albeit,
whether the added efficiency in NM delivery outweighs the increased
concerns about the potential risk in metastasis formation. Afterall,
surgical removal of a tumor tissue is also, to a certain level, associated
with potential increase in the risk of metastasis at a later stage.
The matter of fact is that the actual impact of these findings
is yet unclear and warrants further research. It is true that the
major threat in cancer lies in the dissemination of cancer cells from
the primary tumor to secondary metastatic sites. The process of intravasation
is very common and can be increased by a wide range of factors, for
example, by the activation state of nearby macrophages. However, the formation of metastatic nodes
is a very inefficient process, where less than 0.01% of circulating
tumor cells lead to tumor formation at secondary sites. 
The formation of metastases is not completely
understood but is
often explained in view of the seed and soil theory, where circulating
tumor cells will only be able to form secondary tumors in organs where
the microenvironment is favorable to the tumor cells. For this, the “soil” is thought
to be prepared by extracellular vesicles released by the primary tumor, where the genetic transfer of material from
the primary tumor to the new target organ by the exosomes facilitates
any circulating tumor cells to nestle in. But, even then, the tumor
cell will still have to adapt to its new environment, quite often
undergoing changes in its metabolism to adapt to local nutrient availability. All these processes are quite complex and require
all conditions to be near-optimal for the migrating cell before any
metastasis can occur.
In view of the increased intravasation
or extravasation of cancer
cells owing to NMs themselves or by physical or chemical means, some
considerations must be taken into account before forming conclusions.
For example, as mentioned above, first, the complex process of metastasis
requires quite some time for all conditions to be met for the metastatic
tumor to start growing. For in situ metastasis, the
cells will have to first intravasate, migrate, and then extravasate,
requiring them to pass the endothelial barrier twice. The study by
Peng and colleagues revealed a clear effect of the inorganic NMs on
extravasation when the cells were injected intravenously, but this
was less clear in their in situ tumor experiments
where cells had to first migrate from the primary tumor. At this point, it also remains unclear whether
the disturbances are long-term or short-lived. NMs themselves are
normally only in circulation for a few hours, after which they are
often cleared out by the body and can no longer harm the endothelial
barriers.
A study that would be worth reading would be on the
subject of
the fate of these endothelial barriers over time. Can these barriers
repair themselves, and how long would this process require? At this
point, an actual increase in the level of intravasation or extravasation
due to the endothelial barrier disruption also remains unclear, where
in-depth studies utilizing intravital microscopy recordings would
be ideally suited to try and quantify the extent of cellular motion
across endothelial barriers. As some of the inorganic particles tested
in the study by Peng and colleagues have
also been shown to induce metastasis formation by TGF-β generation, it could be that changes in the TME caused
by this specific set of NMs contributed to the observed effects. The
use of alternative targeting strategies by means of biomimicry, in
which the (in)organic NMs are coated by biological membranes to avoid
recognition by immune cells, could help reduce endothelial disruptions
or inflammatory responses. In addition, the use of clinically approved
vessel normalization strategies, often a first line response in clinical
settings to avoid tumor spreading. 
Therefore, we would like to highlight the importance of not generalizing
NM behavior until the above-mentioned points are taken into account
and the questions raised in this review are answered sufficiently.
Additionally, it would be imperative to conduct a comparative, comprehensive
study to clarify as to exactly which NM properties contribute to the
barrier leakiness. Together, the data
presented by Peng and colleagues sheds
essential light on the future direction of nanomedicine and the importance
of treading carefully when proposing to use NMs for cancer treatment.
Conversely, at this stage, the impact of these findings are too premature
to develop an unenthusiastic attitude that could hinder the development
and the testing of NMs for such applications.

4

## Use of Peptides to Improve NM Delivery to Solid
Tumors
4.1

## Transcytosis with iRGD
Among the
major factors limiting the therapeutic efficacy of NMs and anticancer
drugs are their poor penetration into tumors and their off-target
deposition and adverse effects on healthy cells, requiring additional
doses (beyond safety thresholds) to be administered for effective
anticancer activity and priming the tumor tissue for drug resistance.
An alternative method to the previously mentioned strategies for enhancing
NM uptake into the tumor tissue is via transcytosis
using iRGD. 
iRGD (CRGDK/RGPD/EC)
is a tumor-penetrating peptide that can be chemically conjugated to
the NM and facilitates its transportation deep into the extravascular
tumor tissue. Specifically, iRGD binds to αv integrins
that are expressed on the tumor vessel endothelium, which in turn
proteolytically cleave the peptide in the tumor into CRGDK/R. The
resulting cleaved peptide has been found to trigger transcytosis via neuropilin-1 (NRP-1), a transmembrane glycoprotein that
is highly expressed in tumor-associated endothelial cells and cancer
cells and is involved in angiogenesis ( ). , Upon its gained affinity
for NRP-1, iRGD loses its integrin binding, leading to tissue penetration
alongside its cargo. This NRP-1 and iRGD binding is tumor specific
because the cleavage of the peptide requires the binding of the peptide
to the integrins. An overview of studies
using iRGD for enhanced NP delivery is provided in .
 4.1.1

## iRGD
in Breast Cancer
Various studies
have investigated the efficacy of iRGD to improve tumor uptake of
drug-loaded nanocarriers, particularly in breast cancer models. Sugahara
and colleagues showed that NMs do not need to be chemically conjugated
to the iRGD peptide but can simply be provided by means of coadministration
for effective tumor uptake. They showed
that the systemic administration of iRGD with different modalities
including organic NMs (nab-paclitaxel and DOX liposomes), small molecules
(DOX), and a monoclonal antibody (trastuzumab) enhances the tumor-specific
delivery and therapeutic index of these drug compositions in mice
bearing orthotopic breast and pancreatic tumor models, thereby reducing
off-target deposition and associated side effects on healthy tissue. In another study, the coadministration of iRGD
with multistage-responsive organic dendrimer NMs loaded with DOX and
photothermal agent ICG resulted in an efficient therapeutic distribution
deep inside the tumor, causing the primary tumor growth to be nearly
fully eradicated. In a similar cancer
model, iRGD-modified organic poly(lactic acid/glycolic acid) (PLGA)/lipid
hybrid NMs were developed and administered in vivo to achieve simultaneous tumor-specific delivery of ICG and hypoxia-activated
prodrug tirapazamine (TPZ). While the primary tumor growth was significantly
reduced, metastasis was also inhibited and minimal side effects were
detected. Co-delivering ICG and TPZ in one single NM formulation had
more anticancer benefits than a mixture of NMs loaded with individual
drugs. Similar delivery and therapeutic
efficiencies have been observed for combinations of iRGD with inorganic
NMs, including legumain responsive aggregable gold NPs. 
Ni et al.( ) used a droplet-confined/cryodesiccation-driven
crystallization approach to design nanocrystallites of the poorly
soluble chemotherapeutic drug paclitaxel (PTX) with considerably high
drug loading capacity, in the form of nanodots (NDs ≈ 10 nm)
and NMs (NMs ≈ 70 nm). These NDs and NMs were coated with iRGD,
which was shown to enhance the tumor cell uptake in an indiscriminative
way in a monolayer cell culture model. However, clearly improved inward
penetration and ensuing elimination of 3D multicellular tumor spheroids
were obtained to a greater extent by iRGD-NDs than iRGD-NMs, highlighting
the significance of particle size variation where smaller-sized NMs
seemingly benefited more from iRGD delivery enhancement. Only iRGD-coated
nanocrystallites of ultranano size (NDs) were able to be delivered
intratumorally, reach the cancer stem cells inside the tumor core,
and exert antimetastatic activity in orthotopic breast cancer murine
models. 

4.1.2

## iRGD
in Other Tumor Models
The
group of André Nel demonstrated that coadministration with
iRGD can trigger transcytosis of large inorganic silicasome NMs (130
nm diameter), resulting in their specific delivery to pancreatic cancer
cells. The resulting ultrastructural
images showed that in the iRGD coadministered tumors, a vesicular
transport pathway was induced, which carried the silicasomes from
the blood vessel lumen to the perinuclear site in the cancer cells.
The silicasome-encapsulated drugs were thus able to breach the tumor
barrier, although the large silicasome size (130 nm) can hamper their
internal tumor access. This iRGD-mediated
NM codelivery combination therapy was also used for the treatment
of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). While DOX combined with sorafenib
(SOR) is an effective strategy as an anti-HCC treatment, each of these
two drugs have different pharmacokinetic and endocytosis capacities
which hamper their current application. For this reason, iRGD was
coupled to an organic lipid-polymer hybrid NM with a shell–core
structure to make the DOX and SOR codelivery possible (DOX+SOR/iRGD
NMs). In a separate colon cancer study
by Ma et al., iRGD was introduced on PEGylated camptothecin
(CPT, topoisomerase poison)-loaded organic PLGA NMs, which improved
the accumulation of the NMs in tumor-bearing mice and increased tumor
cell apoptosis. iRGD has also been used
to improve intraperitoneal chemotherapy (IPC) of ovarian cancer, which
is often associated with poor penetration as well as NM-mediated gene therapy. 

4.1.3

## Treating Pregnancy Complications
Besides tumor targeting, iRGD has also been investigated as a tool
for targeted delivery of payloads to the placenta given the lack of
therapeutics for pregnancy complications as a result of the high risk
of causing damage to the fetus. King A et al. used
the tumor-homing peptide sequences CGKRK and iRGD which bind selectively
to the placental surface of humans and mice and do not interfere with
normal development. When the iRGD-coated
inorganic iron oxide nanoworms and organic liposomes were injected
intravenously into pregnant mice, these NMs accumulated inside the
mouse placenta more efficiently than control groups without iRGD administration,
in which a reduced binding and fetal transfer were detected. 

4.1.4

## iRGD for Imaging and
Theranostic Applications
iRGD has also been used in tumor
imaging to improve the poor tumor
specificity of nanoprobes. , In 2017, Liu et al. developed a nanosystem composed of NIR inorganic
quantum dots (QDs) and a membrane-impermeable etchant (cation donor)
to apply selective background quenching and obtain tumor-specific
signals. Specifically, upon the intravenous
administration of the QDs in combination with iRGD in mice bearing
orthotopic breast and pancreatic tumors, the QDs are quenched by the
etchant through cation exchange, which facilitates the renal clearance
of metal ions from the QDs. This leads to a high tumor-specific signal
provided by the intact QDs remaining in the extravascular tumor cells
and fibroblasts ( ). 
 Theranostic NM systems in which therapeutic payloads are combined
with diagnostic imaging modalities in a single probe have also been
studied upon coadministration with iRGD. Wang et al. developed dual-labeled iRGD-modified multifunctional porous inorganic
silicon NMs (Psi NMs) and loaded them with sorafenib (a hydrophobic
antiangiogenic drug) to enhance drug dissolution rate and improve
cancer therapy. These NMs were further
radiolabeled with 111In to monitor their in vivo biodistribution by single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT)
in metastatic prostate cancer mouse xenograft models, and their long-term
biodistribution were studied by fluorescent labeling ex vivo. They found that iRGD-conjugated NMs were associated with enhanced
tumor uptake and thereby increased tumor growth suppression. 

4.1.5

## Debate
Co-administration
of iRGD
with NMs is associated with several added advantages over their chemical
conjugation. First, the transport capacity of the carrier system is
mostly based on the available number of NRP-1 receptors on the endothelial
cells. The transport of conjugated NM is for this reason limited by
the relatively low number of target receptors on the endothelial cells
that can be reached by the peptide-bound NMs. Co-administered iRGD
on the other hand leads to a bulk transfer of NM to the tumor site.
Second, free iRGD has an antimetastatic activity due its regulation
of the integrin function, and finally, free iRGD is more practical
for clinical use because the conjugation step can be complex and expensive. 
Despite the high potency demonstrated
by the use of iRGD for the enhanced tumor delivery of NMs, this transcytosis
strategy has remained somewhat controversial, mainly due to the discrepancy
between the reproduction study performed by Mantis et al.( ) and the original report by Sugahara et al.( ) In contrast to the
original data that showed enhanced DOX penetrance, coadministration
of the iRGD peptide did not have an impact on the permeability of
free DOX in a xenograft model of prostate cancer. In other studies, however, an impact on permeability was
clearly observed. , − , The apparent discrepancy among
these different reports can be explained by the fact that the replication
study used free DOX instead of DOX combined with NMs, suggesting that
the iRGD system may be most effective for NM delivery rather than
the delivery of free drugs. Additionally, the purity and quality of
the iRGD peptide which was used in the replication study is not clearly
stated, which could also have a clear impact on the contradictive
results of their data. Lastly, the level of αvβ3 integrins and NRP1 on tumor-associated blood vessels is linked
with differences in tumor growth, angiogenesis, and hypoxia and can
therefore differ for the same tumor type between different studies,
significantly impacting the extent of on-target NM delivery.

4.2

## Multiple Peptides: Finely Tuning NM Functionalization
for Targeted Delivery
The classical method of active targeting
involves the functionalization of NMs with one particular type of
ligand against a cancer-related epitope. highlights various studies performed between
2005 and 2020 that used peptide/antibody coating for active targeting
and in which the tumor targeting efficiency was properly evaluated.
It shows that there targeting moieties (folate, Fa; transferrin, Tf;
hyaluronic acid, HA; EGF; HER2) that are very frequently used, without
any moieties proving to be clearly superior in terms of targeting
efficiency. As most epitopes are not unique to the cancer cells but
are rather overexpressed, and cancer-related epitopes are not easily
found by blood-bound NMs, this one-ligand targeting strategy typically
results in a poor targeting efficacy. To overcome this issue, several
groups have looked into optimizing targeted delivery by means of multiple
ligands. In this section, we discuss several recent studies that have
used dual-targeting for improved tumor-specific NM delivery, namely
in breast and brain glioma tumor models, some of which have also incorporated
iRGD into their delivery strategies.
 4.2.1

## Dual-Ligand
Targeting in Breast Cancer
Doolittle and colleagues investigated
the effect of organic liposomes
loaded with peptides targeting P-selectin (cell adhesion molecule
on surfaces of activated endothelial cells) and αvβ3 integrin
receptors on the spatiotemporal changes of the expression patterns
of these receptors in breast and triple negative breast (TNB) mouse
tumor models ( ). P-selectin and αvβ3
integrin are functionally linked to different stages of development
of metastatic disease, and as such, the authors found that these dual-ligand
liposomes had the ability to capture different metastatic sites in
the same animal which had an overexpression of both receptors. In a study pertaining to gene delivery in TNB
cancer, lipid-coated and siRNA-loaded calcium phosphate (LCP) NMs
were further conjugated with folic acid and/or EGFR-specific antibodies
to enhance therapeutic siRNA cellular uptake and transfection efficiency
both in vitro and in vivo.( )
 The potential of a dual-targeted
pH-sensitive DOX pro-drug (DP)
organic microbubble complex (DPMC) in US-assisted antitumor therapy
was studied by Luo and colleagues. The
DP was composed of a succinylated-heparin carrier conjugated with
DOX via hydrazine linkage and was further linked
with dual targeting ligands Fa and iRGD and with a microbubble (MB) via an avidin–biotin bridge. The subsequent sonoporation
and cavitation using US disrupted aggregates and resulted in a uniform
size distribution of the NMs, which then led to an improved DPMC intracellular
accumulation and therapeutic efficiency. These US-exposed DPMCs were
able to target angiogenic endothelial cells in the tumor region using
αvβ3-mediated recognition, which
further facilitated the specific binding to tumor cells by the Fa
receptor recognition. DPMC in combination with US exhibited increased
tumor specificity and toxicity against breast cancer cells in vitro compared to free DOX and DP and resulted in higher
tumor inhibition rates in breast cancer xenograft-bearing mice by
inducting apoptosis and inhibiting cell proliferation and angiogenesis. 

4.2.2

## Dual-Targeting of Brain
Glioma
One of the most difficult challenges in oncology is
the treatment
of brain glioma as drugs must be transported through the blood–brain
barrier (BBB) to specifically reach the brain and reduce off-target
delivery and side effects on normal tissue. These drugs must also
target brain cancer cells because most of the antitumor drugs are
also toxic to normal brain tissue. Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is
known to be the most malignant brain tumor in the central nervous
system with extensive cell proliferation and angiogenic properties.
One of the strategies aimed at overcoming this poor drug penetration
and accumulation is the use of functionalized nanocarriers with different
targeting ligands. To date, there only exists a few studies that investigate
effect of dual-targeting of NMs on BBB crossing and brain tumor targeting
by mainly using organic lipid and polymeric NMs and liposomes. , Gao and colleagues used a phage-displayed TGN peptide and an AS1411
aptamer against the BBB and cancer cells, respectively. These ligands were conjugated to organic PEG-poly(ε-caprolactone)
NMs to form a brain glioma cascade delivery system (AsTNP) loaded
with docetaxel, significantly improving tumor growth inhibition and
survival of glioma-bearing mice. A few
years later, the authors developed organic polymeric NMs functionalized
with iRGD and IL-13 to target αvβ3 on neovasculature and
IL13Rα2 on GBM cells, respectively. Another dual-targeting liposomal system was modified with T7 and
cell-penetrating peptide (CPP) TAT that enhanced the targeting of
the brain glioma tumor and transport across the BBB, respectively. 
Several other groups have also used iRGD
as part of a dual-targeting mechanism. Chen et al. screened organic liposomes containing one of six peptide-based ligands
that are widely used for brain delivery (Pep-1, D-SP5, Angiopep-2,
T7, Peptide-22, and iRGD) for optimal targeting ability across the
BBB and into the tumor tissue. On the
basis of this screening, iRGD and Peptide-22 dual-modified liposomes
were selected for further in vivo testing and showed
significant inhibition of glioma growth. Co-modified lactoferrin- and iRGD dual-ligand, Temozolomide and
vincristine-coloaded nanostructured organic lipid carriers (L/RT/V-NLCs) were also developed as combination therapy for
GBM. These nanosystems exhibited sustained-release behaviors, high
synergy, and cytotoxicity effects, increased drug accumulation in
the tumor tissue and cellular uptake and significant tumor inhibition
with low systemic toxicity, and thus serve as promising delivery systems
for glioblastoma chemotherapy. 

4.2.3

## Use of Dual Ligands in Other Tumor Models
Levine and
colleagues developed dual-targeted
heteromultivalent PEGylated liposomes conjugated with different ratios
of fibronectin-mimetic peptide (PR_b) and AG86, which in turn bind
cancer biomarkers α5β1 and α6β4 integrin, respectively, and investigated
their delivery to cancer cells with different integrin concentrations.
On 20 different cell lines, the expression of these cancer biomarkers
were quantified to determine the appropriate in vitro model system, and the results showed that liposomes with equal ligand
valencies showed an improved selectivity and binding for cancer cells
with equal and high levels of receptor expression, such as the human
ovarian cancer SKOV3 cell line, and thereby increased internalization
of encapsulated DNA. In another gene
delivery study, organic PEG-phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) NMs were
linked with Tf and Fa separately to form Tf–PEG-PE and Fa–PEG-PE
ligands to improve gene delivery to the liver in hepatocellular carcinoma-bearing
mice, and found a 30% increase in transfection efficiency compared
to single and nontargeted NMs. 
In 2013, Cheng et al. have also aimed to improve
targeting to the liver by incorporating chitosan into organic polymeric
NMs composed of lactic acid and glycyrrhetinic acid (GCGA), as chitosan
has been shown to possess liver-targeting abilities via the interaction between galactose and asialoglycoprotein receptor
on healthy and cancerous liver tissue. These NMs were further conjugated
with the thymidylate synthase inhibitor 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), which
has been commonly used as an anticancer agent for various solid tumors,
although in the absence of targeted delivery, its systemic administration
has been associated with numerous toxic effects including bone marrow
suppression, mucositis, diarrhea, among others. GCGA/5-FU NMs were shown to enhance NM accumulation in
the liver and gradually release 5-FU, successfully suppressing tumor
growth in orthotopic liver transplantation mouse models and improving
survival. In another study, Chen et al. tested the targeting of both osteosarcoma and cancer
stem cells (CSC) with salinomycin-entrapped organic lipid-polymer
NMs, which were labeled with CD133 and EGFR aptamers (CESP), and found
that CESP had a significantly higher cytotoxicity to both cell types
than single targeting or nontargeted NMs. In vivo administration of this dual-targeted NM resulted in improved efficacy
of tumor growth inhibition in osteosarcoma-bearing mice. For the in vitro and in vivo evaluation of the treatment of lung cancer, NMs
were loaded with Fa and Tf modified cisplatin (CDDP) to improve the
delivery of cisplatin to tumors. These FA/Tf-CDDP-NMs resulted in
enhanced tumor inhibition and increased accumulation in tumor tissue in vivo and in vitro compared to free drugs,
as well as a near-full suppression of tumor growth without any significant
changes in animal body weight. 
Several research groups have also incorporated iRGD into their
dual-targeting strategies, such as Jang and colleagues, who developed inorganic nanographene oxide
(nGO) NMs conjugated with Fa and iRGD using noncovalent interactions
that allow for the precise control of ligand numbers on the nGO surface
as well as ensure stability under physiological conditions. KB cells
(HeLa subline) which overexpress folate and integrin αvβ3
receptors were used to evaluate the in vitro tumor
targeting abilities of single- and dual-ligand coated nGOs and exhibited
a double increase in the uptake of dual-ligand nGO compared to single
targeted nRGD-nGO or FA-nGO. Subsequent in vivo biodistribution
experiments in mouse xenograft models showed a significantly higher
tumor accumulation of iRGD-FA-nGO compared to single targeting, leading
to the total ablation of the tumor tissue when combined with NIR laser
irradiation for photothermal therapy. In an earlier study, Xu et al.( ) designed organic hyperbranched amphiphilic polymeric peptides
(HPAE-co-PLA/DPPE) surface-functionalized with iRGD
and Tf and loaded with paclitaxel. The presence of iRGD and Tf improved
the cytotoxic efficiency of the NMs by 10-fold and 2-fold in ανβ3-overxpressed human umbilical vein
endothelial cells and Tf receptor-overexpressed human cervical carcinoma
cells, respectively, in vitro.( )

4.2.4

## Multiple Ligands
Metastasis consists
of a heterogeneous, continuously evolving cell population, and because
of the change in expression of the targetable biomarkers on these
cancer cells, single-ligand NMs are not effective in this context
and instead require multiple ligands to be incorporated into the formulation.
Peiris et al.( ) used
multiligand liposomal NMs that target metastatic disease biomarkers
including EGFR, fibronectin, P-selectin, and αvβ3 integrin
on the endothelium. In vivo and terminal imaging
studies were performed to detect the targeting performance of single-
and dual-ligand NMs compared to these multiligand NMs in breast cancer
tumor mouse models. Dual-ligand NMs showed 2-fold higher deposition
into the lung metastases compared to single-ligand NMs, while the
multiligand NMs achieved about 7% deposition of the injected NMs to
lung metastases ( ). 
 Many of the drug target
sites are located within intracellular
organelles or in the cytosol, and only after reaching their target
site of action, these drugs can exert their pharmacological effect.
Maximum therapeutic efficacy and minimum side effects can be achieved
when the drug is delivered specific to these organelles. As such,
Chen et al. designed mitochondrial-targeted multifunctional
NMs (MNMs) based on chitosan derivatives possessing different functions
such as hepatocyte targeting, stealth, multistage pH-response, mitochondrial
targeting, and lysosomal escape. These
formulations were loaded with brucine (natural anticancer drug) and
surface-modified with glycyrrhetinic acid (GA) to boost cellular internalization.
Once inside the cell, these NMs are able to escape the endosomes due
to a proton influx facilitated by the imidogen on the MNM surface.
Lastly, the highly positive charge of these MNMs causes them to aggregate
at the mitochondria via electrostatic interactions.
As such, the shedding of each of these factors results in targeted
drug release, efficient intracellular delivery and mitochondrial localization,
inhibition of tumor growth, enhancement of antitumor efficacy, and
reduction of anticancer drug toxicity. 

4.2.5

## Conclusion
Given the improvement
in NM delivery observed in the various studies wherein NMs are conjugated
with ligands that target different elements along the NM journey to
the tumor, this targeting strategy has proven to be promising in the
advancement of cancer therapy and nanomedicine. The physicochemical
characteristics and effect of surface distribution of dual ligands
on the cellular uptake of (in)organic NMs has also been investigated
using dissipative particle dynamics simulations, and the results suggest
that cellular uptake of the NMs is improved by the spontaneous rearrangement
(from a random pattern to an organized pattern) of the dual-ligand
on the surface of the NMs. Interestingly, study analyses show that
the ligand rearrangements are restricted by their short length and
that NMs coated with short dual ligands are not able to wrap the cell
membranes fully, except if these ligands are separated from the beginning
on the NM surface. At the same time, the enhancement of the uptake
efficiency by dual-ligand targeting is not possible if there is a
nonspecific interaction or a length mismatch between the dual ligands. 
Colombo and colleagues further demonstrated
the significance of controlling the amount of antibodies attached
to the NM surface, as these can significantly interfere with NM surface
properties and size. In other words,
increasing the number of surface-functionalized ligands does not necessarily
entail improved targeting and therapeutic efficacy. In their study,
inorganic gold NMs conjugated with two trastuzumab antibodies (antineoplastic
agent) exhibited improved targeting in vitro, whereas
NMs with a single ligand showed better targeting in a subcutaneous
MCF-7 breast cancer mouse model. As
such, dual-ligand targeting is somehow controversial because of the
complex interplay among multiple factors such as the densities of
the dual ligands, ratios, length matching, type of ligands, among
others, all of which significantly affect NM behavior. 

5

## Magnetic
Guidance of Magnetic Particles
Targeted NM delivery can also
be performed by magnetically guiding
magnetic NMs to specific tissues within the human body while still
exploiting the EPR effect and thereby the passive accumulation of
NMs in solid tumors. As previously explained, this passive NM accumulation
varies according to different tumor vascularization and tissues, which
could influence magnetic targeting.
In 2016, a series of studies
were performed by Bai et al., wherein they developed
oil-cored polymeric nanocapsules (m-NCs)
encapsulating inorganic SPIONs and NIR dye ICG for negative magnetic
resonance (MR) contrast and fluorescence imaging, respectively. The oil core allowed for the high hydrophobic
SPION loading. These NMs were then radiolabeled with indium-111 for
nuclear imaging, resulting in a triple-modal in vivo imaging system. To test the efficiency of their NMs, the authors
administered them intravenously in colon carcinoma-bearing mice and
found a 3- and 2-fold increase in tumor uptake after 1 and 24 h, respectively,
compared to passively targeted NMs. In
a follow-up study, the authors aimed at determining the key parameters
affecting the efficacy of magnetic targeting using mathematical modeling
and computation of the magnetic, viscoelastic, convective, and diffusive
forces influencing m-NC behavior and extrapolating this murine data
to human contexts. In similar colon carcinoma-bearing mice, they found
that magnetic targeting efficiency was directly correlated with SPION
loading and strength of the magnetic field, although extremely high
SPION loading resulted in lowered blood circulation and static targeting
efficiency. On the basis of their calculations, they concluded that
the parameters applied to these murine models is sufficient for efficient
targeting in humans. An in vivo murine tumor growth
delay study was also performed with docetaxel (DTX)-encapsulated m-NCs,
which showed enhanced therapeutic efficacy and improved mouse survival
due to magnetic targeting ( ). In a parallel study,
the behavior of these m-NCs inside blood vessels and tumor tissues
were investigated and visualized using fibered confocal fluorescence
microscopy (FCFM) before, during, and after magnetic field exposure.
Their results show that the m-NC distribution within the tumor vasculature
significantly differed in the presence and absence of the magnetic
field. Specifically, when the tumors were exposed to the magnetic
field, the m-NCs concentrated as clusters near the blood vessel walls
without causing any vascular disruptions. By using the FCFM imaging
technique, it was possible to detect the real-time, in vivo
in situ microvascular behavior of m-NCs during magnetic targeting
using high spatial resolution in a minimally invasive manner. Lastly, the authors investigated whether tumor
and thereby vascular heterogeneity affects the magnetic guiding and
targeting of m-NCs by administering these NMs in different murine
tumor models, including breast, lung, colon, and melanoma. Gamma counting
was used to assess the passively and magnetically driven tumor accumulation
of these radiolabeled m-NCs. They showed that tumor permeability and
microvessel density and diameter significantly affected passive and
magnetic tumor targeting and accumulation. However, these vascular
parameters played different roles when the m-NCs were targeted to
the tumor with different strategies. While tumor permeability was
seen to be rate-limiting in both methods, microvessel diameter mainly
influenced passive targeting, and its density mainly influenced magnetic
targeting. 
 Many other research groups have also exploited
the magnetic properties
of iron oxide-based NMs to improve NM delivery to solid tumors. Nigam et al. used DOX-loaded inorganic dendritic Fe3O4 NMs to study their magnetically guided delivery to
tumor sites and potential to cause an impairment of melanoma growth in vivo. They detected in the tumor-bearing mice higher
NM localization in the tumor due to magnetic guidance compared to
passive localization. High concentrations of iron and DOX were detected
in the tumor, which caused significant tumor regression and tumor
growth arrest. Furthermore, 20 days post-treatment, the tumor was
fully eradicated and about 100% survival rate was detected. The group of Yang synthesized inorganic magnetic-fluorescent
Fe3O4/SiO2 NMs with a radioisotope
rhenium-188-labeled graphene oxide (GO)-modified core–shell
as nanocarriers for gambogic acid (GA), a potent anticancer agent. Their results show a pH-dependent GA release
from the NMs, with higher release rates in acidic environments, as
well as varying in vivo biodistributions between
peanut-shaped and spherical NMs, where peanut-like NMs tended to accumulate
in the spleen, lung, and liver. Compared to nontargeted therapy, targeted
therapy showed higher efficacy in the inhibition of tumor cell growth. 
Alev and colleagues investigated in vitro whether
encapsulating mitoxantrone (MTO) within SPIONs diminishes its antitumor
activity as an immunogenic cell-death (ICD) inducer, which, when systemically
administered in vivo, impairs the immune system of
the patient. The results showed that
these MTO-loaded SPIONs indeed caused ICD and the maturation of dendritic
cells to the same extent as the free drug. The magnetic targeting
efficiency of these constructs was confirmed in dynamic flow systems
that mimic blood circulation. They conclude that magnetically targeting
MTO to the tumor site can lead to the successful modulation of the
TME by locally activating the immune response and minimizing off-target
cytotoxicity. These results confirm
earlier reports of unaffected MTO antitumor activity as a result of
their encapsulation within SPIONs. These earlier studies also showed
reduced MTO uptake in circulating leukocytes in vivo, improved accumulation to the tumor
by more than 50% of the injected dose as well as animal survival, and significant tumor size reduction due to the improved tumor targeting resulting
from the application of an external magnetic field.
Alternating
magnetic fields have also been used to produce heat
for hyperthermia or to release thermosensitive-bound drugs, but this
method has mainly been applicable to treat superficial tumors. Accordingly,
Roeth and colleagues aimed at translating this strategy to an endoscopic
setting and reach tumors deep within the body. They built a biophysical model to find the ideal endoscopic
magnetic field trap that accumulates the most SPION. By simulation,
they were able to enhance the efficiency of the magnetic field traps
by 38-fold in prostate and 8-fold in esophageal cancer models. Their
method was able to reach tumors inside the body in a minimal-invasive
way. In another study, the group of
Zhang developed a novel real-time imaging-based
guidance system with the aim of improving SPION transport across the
BBB and into brain tumor regions. They
used an electromagnetic actuator and low-amplitude-excitation-field
magnetic particle imaging (MPI) for the simultaneous noninvasive NM
guiding and tracking inside a tube. Both
of these proposed systems are yet to be applied to in vivo tumor models for confirmed efficiency.
Finally, it is important
to consider that for magnetic targeting,
the magnetic properties and external field strength must be sufficiently
strong to achieve the desired effects. The exact numbers will depend
on the size of the region to be targeted and entire individuum, as
well as the chemical composition of the materials themselves. Other
important factors are also the shape, surface coating, and size of
the NMs, which all affect the saturation magnetization, magnetic anisotropy,
magnetic structure, and magnetic behavior of the NMs. At the same
time, these parameters also influence general biodsitribution and
blood clearance rates, and more detailed studies are required that
look into the delicate fine-tuning of optimal NM parameters for enhanced
tumor delivery by magnetic guidance.

6

## Biological
Methods to Improve NM Delivery to
Tumors
Although the previously discussed methods such as
the EPR effect
and the use of active targeting ligands and polymeric NMs have been
shown to exhibit some improvement in NM delivery, a large proportion
of these particles are still cleared by the reticuloendothelial system
(RES), while only a small subset of NPs are able to reach the TME,
limiting the clinical translation of these materials. Thus, the ability
to evade the RES is a key element in designing a delivery system that
is capable of remaining in blood circulation for a long period of
time to allow the proper application of the EPR effect and the efficient
NP accumulation within solid tumors. One transpiring approach is to
exploit the natural ability of circulatory cells to evade the immune
system and transport themselves to specific, vascular, or systemic
locations around the body and cross biological barriers that are otherwise
nearly impermeable. Besides their stealth
properties, these circulatory cells possess unique structures and
surface ligands that provide them with tumoritropic properties, further
improving the reach of cell-associated NPs to tumors. They also have
the capacity to hold a large number of NPs and any associated drugs,
thereby increasing the concentration of therapeutic agents at the
target sites. In this section, we provide an overview of the various
biological methods that use cell-based therapy for improved NP delivery,
including hitchhiking of NPs on a wide variety of cell types, coating
the NPs with cell membranes, loading NPs into extracellular vesicles,
and the use of attenuated nonimmunogenic bacteria.
6.1

## Cell-Mediated
Delivery
One method
of improving NP homing to tumors is through a cellular “hitchhiking”
process, in which NPs are conjugated onto the surfaces of circulatory
cells or encapsulated within them, a mechanism also knows as “Trojan
Horse” as a result of the triggered NP release from the intracellular
environment at the tumor site. There exists advantages and disadvantages
to both forms of NP delivery, which will be discussed in this section.
Understanding the structure, surface properties, and the resulting
distinct cellular functions associated with each circulatory cell
type is key in designing an effective tumoritropic “supercarrier”-NP
formulation.
6.1.1

## Red Blood Cells
RBCs are produced
in the bone marrow and function as natural transporters of nutrients
and oxygen throughout the body via hemoglobin. They
are one of the most researched biological drug delivery systems due
to their clinical safety of transfusion, abundancy in the blood (∼20 trillion), lengthy circulation
time (∼3 months), biconcave shape
that provides a large surface area for the carriage of various compounds,
and flexibility that allows them to reversibly deform while navigating
through smaller blood vessels. Their surface self-marker CD47 allows
them to remain cloaked from the immune system, providing them with
their stealth properties. , Additionally, RBC
membranes are slightly negatively charged and host a wide variety
of proteins that allow easy surface modifications and functionalizations
to be made. As such, conjugating NPs
onto the surface of RBCs or encapsulating them within the cells results
in the circumvention of several issues inherent to NPs, such as their
short circulation time and rapid clearance by the RES. In fact, polystyrene NPs attached to the surface
of RBCs have been shown to remain in blood circulation for over 10
h in rats compared to the 5 min circulation exhibited by the free
NPs and to avoid homing to the liver
and spleen in a follow-up study in mice. At the same time, Brenner et al. reported the significantly
increased accumulation of RBC-hitchhiked NMs (particularly liposomes
and nanogels) in different organs compared to freely administered
NMs ( ) and
showed that an intracarotid artery injection of an RBC-hitchhiking
regimen delivers a 10-fold higher number of polymeric NPs to the brain
compared to affinity moieties such as transferrin. 
 The ability of RBCs to modify the pharmacokinetic properties of
hitchhiking NPs and improve their distribution in the blood and tissues
has led to the development of a wide variety of RBC engineering strategies
to improve tumor homing of various NMs. For instance, functionalizing
PEGylated and Ce6-grafted (photodynamic agent) poly(allylamine hydrochloride)
(PAH)-coated magnetic iron oxide NPs (IONPs) onto the surface of RBCs
has shown to improve not only the circulation time of the NPs in vivo but also their tumor-homing abilities under a certain
magnetic field, significantly improving their efficacy as theranostic
agents. The resulting synergistic effect
of the photodynamic and chemotherapy of the 4T1 murine tumor model
led to a significant inhibition in tumor growth compared to either
therapy alone. Magnetic IONPs have also been encapsulated within RBCs,
where the resulting magnetization due to the asymmetric distribution
of the NPs within the cells has been exploited to magnetically guide
the cells throughout the body using acoustic propulsion. The ability of the RBCs to shield the IONPs
from the etching ions in the blood and from being uptaken by macrophages
renders them a promising hitchhiking tool for delivery to tumors.
Besides IONPs, other inorganic NPs that have been used in the context
of RBC-based therapy include upconversion NPs (UCNPs), which are being
widely explored for their potential use in in vivo fluorescence imaging due to their ability to convert NIR light to
the visible range. For instance, lanthanide-doped UCNPs that have
been conjugated onto the surface of RBCs were able to significantly
inhibit tumor volumes by 90% over 3 weeks compared to other control
groups. RBCs harboring magnetic NPs
and tumor-targeting folic acid on their surfaces were able to capture
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) with high efficiency (∼93%)
and purity (>75%) compared to MACS beads (80% and 20%, respectively),
with the resulting CTC-RBC complexes being isolated using a magnetic
field. 
Various studies have also
used organic NPs as RBC hitchhikers.
Sun et al. developed a smart RBC system containing
doxorubicin and bovine serum albumin nanocomplexes for the chemo-
and photothermal therapy of glioblastoma cells, respectively. These RBCs were further functionalized with
the active ligand RGD to target the integrins of the tumor angiogenic
endothelium. Although this system was only tested in an in
vitro setting as a proof-of-concept for the light-controlled
release of NPs from the RBCs, a synergistic effect of the combination
therapy could be observed, highlighting its potential anticancer efficacy in vivo. In another study, the surfaces of RBCs were functionalized
with doxorubicin-loaded PLGA NPs, and the resulting RBC-NP complexes
not only exhibited a 10-fold increase in circulation time compared
to free NPs in mice bearing melanoma lung metastasis, but they also
led to the significant inhibition of tumor growth and improved animal
survival. Interestingly, in another
metastatic model of melanoma, Zelepukin et al. revealed
that the improved lifetime circulation that is usually observed in
the RBC-hitchhiking of large submicrometer agents is not seen for
anionic sub-200 nm polymeric particles with various coatings. However, they also show that even for such
NPs with no extended circulation time, RBC-hitchhiking significantly
improves their distribution throughout the body, with reduced accumulation
in the liver and an increased homing to the lungs reaching a record
high of 120-fold and resulting in a decrease of tumor nodes and slowed
tumor growth. While the incorporation of RBCs into the therapeutic
regimen provides the NPs with improved behaviors in biological systems,
it is also important to understand the effects of NPs on the RBCs
themselves to obtain a holistic overview of the bidirectional relationship
between carrier and hiker and optimize the parameters accordingly.
For instance, at similar loading concentrations of polystyrene NPs
(PSNPs) and lysozyme-dextran nanogels (LDNGs) on the surfaces of mouse
and human RBCs, PSNP-RBCs exhibited agglutination, stiffening, increased
sensitivity toward osmotic, mechanical and oxidative stress, as well
as increased surface exposure of phosphatidylserine (which enhances
RBC clearance in vivo), whereas LDNG-RBCs did not
exhibit any of the aforementioned behaviors. Therefore, it is imperative to select the optimal RBC-NM combination
for the successful translation of such constructs to the clinic.

6.1.2

## Monocytes and Macrophages
Similar
to RBCs, leukocytes are found in abundancy in the blood (4–10
billion) and have long circulation times (20 days). They comprise
the body’s adaptive and innate immunity and are also being
widely investigated as NP carriers due to their natural ability to
overcome endothelial barriers and home specifically to the sites of
disease and into hypoxic TMEs. , 
Monocytes are
produced in the bone marrow, circulate in the bloodstream, and penetrate
deep within each organ in the body in the process of differentiating
into tissue-resident phagocytic macrophages. In these tissues, macrophages
detect and phagocytose apoptotic/necrotic cells, pathogens, and other
foreign particles via specialized membrane receptors,
and upon stimulation, are able to travel through inflammatory and
hypoxic regions , as well as across the blood–brain
barrier via diapedesis and chemotaxis. As free NPs are mostly unable to reach these
areas and TAMs may comprise up to 70% of tumor masses, the natural ability of monocytes to be recruited
to solid tumors can be exploited for NP delivery. One method that
does not require any membrane modifications and prevents nonspecific
interaction of NPs with nontarget tissue is the natural phagocytosis
of NPs by monocytes, which, upon homing to the tumor site and differentiating
into macrophages, are able to serve as “Trojan Horses”
and release their cargoes deep within the hypoxic tumor regions in
a controlled manner.
Various types of organic and inorganic
NMs have been loaded into
monocytes/macrophages for their improved delivery to tumors. For instance,
incorporating doxorubicin-containing PLGA NPs into monocytes significantly
improved the biodistribution and reach of NPs to the tumor site in
tumor-bearing mice, and the resulting complex was able to efficiently
induce cocultured cancer-cell destruction. In a similar study by Choi et al., doxorubicin-containing
liposomes were internalized within macrophages while preserving host
activity and doxorubicin toxicity against tumor cells, and their subsequent
administration in mice bearing lung metastasis xenograft tumors resulted
in significant tumor growth inhibition. Recently, intravenously injected chitosan-based micelles were shown
to be selectively taken up by circulating monocytes in tumor-bearing
mice and, upon the differentiation of these monocytes into macrophages,
the micelles were exocytosed and subsequently internalized by the
cancer cells. In the context of inorganic
NPs, doxorubicin-encapsulated graphene-oxide NPs were loaded in mouse
macrophage-like cells, and the resulting construct exhibited improved
homing toward a mouse prostate cancer model. Upon irradiation with NIR light, doxorubicin was rapidly released
into the TME, significantly inhibiting tumor growth. In separate studies,
gold nanoshell-loaded monocytes/macrophages were able to penetrate
deep into the hypoxic centers of human breast tumor and glioma cancer cell spheroids
and were further ablated by photothermal therapy upon irradiation
with NIR light, exhibiting significant antitumor efficacy compared
to the free nanoshells. Quantum dot hitchhiking onto macrophages is
also being explored to label brain tumors preoperatively. 
Because internalization of NPs may lead
to their endosomal degradation, efforts
have been made to avoid phagocytosis
by monocytes and to attach particles to their cellular surface instead,
although such a task has proven to be quite challenging due to the
cells’ phagocytic competence. One method that has shown promise
is the use of anisotropic polymeric particles or “cellular
backpacks (BPs)”, which are fabricated via layer-by-layer assembly and are able to circumvent phagocytosis
due to their size, disk-like shape, and flexibility. , Polak et al. were able to embed doxorubicin-containing
echogenic liposomes into such BPs, which were then loaded to the surfaces
of monocytes. Although follow-up experiments
showed no cytotoxic effects of the NP-BP construct on the monocytes,
no additional in vitro or in vivo tests were performed to investigate the antitumor efficacy of this
system. In a separate study, BPs containing IONPs were conjugated
onto the surfaces of monocytes without impairing cellular function,
and the resulting construct exhibited effective targeting of skin
and lung inflammation models in vivo.( )

6.1.3

## Lymphocytes
Besides monocytes and
macrophages, the central role of lymphocytes, particularly T-cells,
in adaptive immunity has been widely exploited to target and destroy
cancer cells in the form of immunotherapy. , While their function to destroy infected cells (cytotoxic T-cells)
or activate other immune cells (helper T-cells) renders them promising
anticancer therapeutic tools, their attractiveness for cell-mediated
drug delivery is mainly due to their natural ability to migrate toward
either inflammation regions or lymphoid organs, and consequently for the targeting of primary tumors or
loose cancer cells that have reached the lymph nodes, respectively.
The subsequent coupling of NPs to these lymphocytes serves to (1)
improve the circulation and reach of the NPs to tumors and lymph nodes,
and (2) enhance the proliferation and cytotoxicity of the reintroduced
“adoptive” T-cells that are otherwise suppressed by
the TME. 
As was performed with
macrophages, photolithographic-patterning techniques have been used
to design cellular BPs containing superparamagnetic IONPs (SPIONs)
as well as a hyaluronic acid cell-adhesive component that binds to
the surfaces of T-cells via the CD44 receptor. The migration capacity of the resulting modified
T-cells was then confirmed by their ability to migrate on substrates
coated with ICAM-1, an adhesion ligand present on endothelial cells
that binds to T-cell integrin LFA-1, for over 6 h until the BP detached.
Efforts aimed at using B-cells for NP delivery have also used hyaluronic
acid-mediated adhesion of the particles to the cell surface via polyelectrolyte multilayer (PEM) patches. − Besides surface adhesion with BPs, liposomes have been attached
to T-cell surfaces reversibly via simple incubation
without compromising the integrity of T-cell proliferation and cytotoxicity
and with their in vitro release being triggered by
the presence of glutathione. In a separate
study, lipid NPs loaded with topoisomerase I poison SN-38 and functionalized
on T-cell surfaces were able to accumulate in the lymph nodes at levels
90-fold greater than a 10-fold higher dose of free SN-38 in a murine
model of disseminated lymphoma, significantly reducing tumor burden
and improving animal survival compared to SN-38-loaded NPs alone. 
In studies of adoptive T-cell therapy,
T-cell surfaces have been
functionalized with adjuvant-containing liposomes (interleukin-15
and -21) with the aim of circumventing TME immunosuppression and providing
the cells with sustained pseudoautocrine stimulation in lung- and
bone-metastasis models over a period of 7 days. These modified T-cells retained 83% of their NP load as
they transmigrated across endothelial layers and improved the efficacy
of T-cells in eliminating metastases. In a follow-up study, T-cells
were similarly modified to contain liposomes loaded with an inhibitor
of Shp1 and Shp2, which downregulate lymphocyte receptor activation
at the T-cell/cancer cell synapse during adoptive therapy. These constructs were shown to increase T-cell
proliferation in mice bearing advanced prostate cancer as well as
improve survival by 14 days compared to animals treated with T-cells
alone. Protein nanogels carrying an IL-15 superagonist complex were
also hitchhiked onto T-cell surfaces and were shown to selectively
release their cargoes upon T-cell receptor activation ( ). These constructs improved the proliferation of T-cells at the tumor
site by 16-fold as well as increased the maximum tolerated dose of
cytokine without toxicity by 8-fold, compared to the administration
of free cytokines. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-targeting
chimeric-antigen receptor (CAR)-T cells coupled with these backpacked
nanogels significantly enhanced tumor clearance in mouse models of
glioblastoma.
 
6.1.4

## Neutrophils
Neutrophils function
as the body’s first line of defense by phagocytosing foreign
agents. They are produced in the bone marrow and compose 50–70%
of all leukocytes. Despite their short
circulation time, their abundancy in the bloodstream and their large
surface area that accommodates high quantities of NPs and drugs to
be loaded onto their surface or cytosol render them promising delivery
systems to tumors, particularly due to their added ability to migrate
across endothelial barriers. In the
first of a series of studies, Chu et al. demonstrated
this potential in a mouse model of acute lung inflammation, where
they used intravital microscopy to show that intravenously injected
albumin NPs are internalized by activated neutrophils, which in turn
cross endothelial barriers to reach the inflammation site. The enhanced neutrophil-mediated delivery of
the NPs was further confirmed by their lower accumulation at the target
site upon neutrophil depletion with anti-Gr-1. The prior inoculation
of TA99, a monoclonal antibody that has been shown to enhance neutrophil
recruitment to the tumor site in mice bearing melanoma was able to
further increase NP accumulation in the tumor. The subsequent photodynamic therapy by pyropheophorbide-a
(Ppa)-loaded albumin NPs led to significant tumor growth inhibition
and improved mouse survival compared to treatment with NP or TA99
alone. In a third follow-up study, gold nanorods were used instead
of albumin NPs and were coated with anti-CD11 antibodies to further
target activated neutrophils. In fact,
coating with anti-CD11 showed a 35-fold increase in tumor accumulation
of the nanorods compared to those coated with PEG. Photosensitization
and the subsequent photothermal therapy of the tumors by the neutrophil-mediated
accumulation of the nanorods significantly inhibited tumor growth
and enhanced mouse survival. Similar studies have also used magnetic
NPs to show the ability of neutrophils to improve delivery to the
tumor site. Furthermore, the natural
ability of neutrophils to cross the blood–brain barrier renders
them promising delivery tools in the treatment of glioblastoma. For
instance, in a mouse model of postoperative malignant glioma, the
highly concentrated inflammatory signals in the brain that result
from tumor resection drive the migration of neutrophils containing
paclitaxel-loaded cationic liposomes to the inflammation site and
trigger the release of the NPs from the cells via extracellular traps into the TME. This
neutrophil-mediated delivery was able to significantly hinder the
recurrent growth of tumors and improve animal survival, although complete
inhibition of tumor regrowth was not achieved.

6.1.5

## Stem Cells
One remainder type of
circulatory cell that has been heavily explored as a delivery vehicle
for NPs is stem cells, namely adult stem cells. Unlike their embryonic
counterparts that are derived from the blastocyst inner cell mass,
adult stem cells are not as pluripotent but are rather tissue-specific
cells that are only capable of differentiating into limited types
of specialized cells. However, these stem cells have been shown to
be less likely to promote tumor growth following transplantation. More importantly, as is the case with the aforementioned
circulatory cells, they possess certain surface markers that provide
them with tumoritropic properties, which render them attractive delivery
tools in cancer therapy.
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) are derived
from the bone marrow and are easily isolated and cultivated, although
their translation to the clinic is limited as they have been associated
with immunosuppressive properties that may promote tumor growth. , Some of the earlier studies that have exploited the tumoritropic
ability of MSCs showed significant improvement in the delivery of
organic NMs, including polylactic acid NPs and lipid nanocapsules
loaded with coumarin-6 as well as doxorubicin-loaded
silica nanorattles, to glioma mouse
models without compromising the integrity and functionality of the
MSCs nor the NMs. Paclitaxel- and docetaxel- containing PLGA NPs were also shown to significantly
accumulate in mouse lung tumor models when hitchhiked onto MSCs compared
to free NPs that exhibited nonspecific biodistribution. In a recent
study by Wang et al., they show that intravenously
injected MSCs are trapped in the lung tissue after 12 h in rabbits
and after 24 h in mice and monkeys and that loading these MSCs with
docetaxel-containing PLGA NPs significantly inhibits tumor growth
in mouse models of lung cancer. Throughout
their study, they also demonstrate the dynamic transportation of the
NPs from their carrier MSCs to the cancer cells via the imaging of cocultured 3D spheroids in vitro and lung tissue sections in vivo.
While the
use of MSCs in cancer therapy has shown to improve the
therapeutic index of drug-loaded organic NMs by enhancing their exposure
to tumor cells, the incorporation of inorganic NMs into these cell-based
regimens provides opportunities for combinatorial treatment with photothermal
therapy. For instance, MSCs loaded with superparamagnetic iron oxide
(SPION)-coated gold NPs that had homed toward hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) tumors in vivo were irradiated with NIR light,
generating local hyperthermia and successfully ablating surrounding
cancer cells. In a separate study, pH-sensitive
gold NPs that tend to aggregate in the acidic environment of endosomes,
thereby exhibiting higher photothermal effects upon irradiation with
NIR light, were loaded onto MSCs and intravenously injected in mice. These gold NP-laden MSCs revealed a 37-fold
greater tumor-targeting efficiency and an 8.3 °C increase in
hyperthermia generation compared to free NMs. Interestingly, metallic
organic NPs have also been incorporated into MSCs for the photothermal
and photodynamic therapy of cancers. In a recent study by Ouyang et al., Ce6-grafted polydopamine NMs were internalized into
MSCs, and within 72h of in vitro cocultures, 60%
of the NMs were shown to be exocytosed from the MSCs and subsequently
endocytosed by the cancer cells. When
injected in mice bearing pulmonary melanoma, the NM-labeled MSCs in
combination with low-dose photothermal and photodynamic therapy induced
significant synergistic inhibition of tumor growth, confirmed by the
lower number of nodules and lung weight as well as increased survival
compared to either therapy alone or free NMs ( ).
 Neural stem cells (NSCs),
on the other hand, are obtained from
neurogenic areas in the brain and have been shown to also be tumoritropic
and, unlike MSCs, nontumorigenic and marginally immunogenic, although a recent study revealed the NSCs may
promote glioblastoma formation. Despite
the complications associated with accessing NSCs for autologous transfer
in the brain which has limited their use in the clinic in the past,
some reports have shown that neural stem-like cells can be obtained
from the bone marrow instead and can thus be used for delivery purposes. A series of experiments by Mooney et
al. in 2014 have been conducted that harness the tumoritropic
properties of NSCs to deliver a variety of NMs to different tumor
types. − In their first study, they functionalized
large polystyrene NPs to the surface of NSCs and confirmed their ability
to home toward glioma cells in the brain. The use of large NPs, which when administered freely, are unable
to cross the blood–brain barrier and migrate to tumor tissue,
served as a control to ensure that any NP accumulation in the brain
is due to mediation by NSCs. In a follow study, polymeric NPs were
loaded with docetaxel and conjugated onto the surfaces of NSCs to
improve NP delivery by intratumoral administration to mice bearing
triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) and induce antitumor activity
without compromising the integrity of the NSCs. Finally, in the same tumor models of TNBC, NSCs loaded
with gold nanorods were intratumorally injected in mice and irradiated
with NIR light to induce local hyperthermia and improve the photothermal
therapy of the tumors compared to free nanorods, significantly lowering
tumor recurrence rates. 

6.1.6

## Cell-Surface-Binding vs Encapsulation of
NPs
In designing a hitchhiking system, the diversity in surface
properties that arises from the various types of biomolecules present
on the surfaces of different cellular carriers, such as proteins,
lipids, and polysaccharides, can be exploited to functionalize NPs
on the outer cell membranes using a variety of methods that can be
subdivided into two categories, noncovalent and covalent. While covalent
methods tend to result in sturdier bonds that render the construct
highly stable, they are often less desirable as their associated high
degree of molecular modification may cause significant alterations
in cell properties, particularly at off-target sites. The simplest
method of noncovalent attachment that requires the least modification
of both the cell and NM is the adsorption of cationic or hydrophobic
NPs to the cell surface. Functional groups found on biomolecules such
as carboxylate, sialic acid, and phosphate render cellular membranes
negatively charged, allowing cationic NPs to be passively and electrostatically
adsorbed onto the surface. At the same
time, conclusions from studies evaluating the extent of protein adsorption
onto the surface of NPs suggest that NP adsorption may also involve
van der Waals and hydrogen bonds in cases where NPs are sufficiently
hydrophobic. , Despite its simplicity and ability
to maintain cellular and NP integrity, the strength of NP adsorption
is difficult to establish, leading to the uncontrollable detachment
of NPs in biological systems that is often based on shear stress.
Another method that requires minimal modification and has potential
for successful in vivo translation exploits the presence
of specific receptors on cellular surfaces onto which NP-bound ligands
can be attached via ligand–receptor interactions.
In such cases, however, ligand–receptors must be carefully
selected to be sufficiently specific to the cell of choice, given
that many receptors are often present on a variety of cell types and
thus may be triggered by nonspecific binding and result in undesired
biological responses, particularly upon early NP detachment in constructs
containing low binding affinities. Examples of such an attachment
are the aforementioned binding of hyaluronic acid on cellular BPs
to CD44 receptors that are overexpressed on macrophages as well as
T- and B-cells − and the formation of strong biotin–avidin
bridges that have been shown to be resilient against denaturants such
as fluctuations in pH, temperature, and buffer salts. Lastly, in contrast to adsorption and ligand-induced
conjugation, covalent coupling results in more stable constructs that
circumvent the issue of off-target NP release, although additional
release strategies are often required to be incorporated into the
construct design to ensure the ability of the NPs to exert their intended
effects. In this approach, NP surfaces can be modified with reactive
compounds that covalently bind to the amine and thiol groups found
abundantly on cellular surfaces. , Alternatively,
cell surfaces can be functionalized with non-natural functional groups
onto which the NPs can be covalently bound. 
Despite the efficacy and ease of functionalizing NPs to cell
membranes, surface-bound NPs may uncontrollably detach from the cell
surface at off-target sites due to shear-stress, while the exposure
of the NPs to the extracellular environment may cause them to remain
susceptible to recognition by the immune system. At the same time,
the NPs may damage the intrinsic morphology and flexibility of the
cells, thereby affecting their navigation through narrow vessels to
reach tumor tissues. In attempt to circumvent these challenges in vivo, efforts have been made to internalize NPs into
cells in a mechanism known as “Trojan Horse” using a
variety of methods, including hypotonic dialysis, wherein hypotonic
swelling of the cells creates transient pores in their membranes through
which NPs are able to diffuse, and the subsequent isotonic resealing
of the pores entraps the NPs within the cells. Other methods involve the coupling of NPs to CPPs most
commonly through disulfide linkages which are easily broken by the
abundance of glutathione within the intracellular environment, as well as receptor-mediated internalization
as is the case with the coadministration or coupling of NPs with RGD
peptides. Additionally, the natural
internalization of NPs can be achieved through phagocytosis, although
this method is limited to cell types with natural phagocytic abilities
such as neutrophils, macrophages, and monocytes. Similarly to the cell surface binding of NPs, the encapsulation
of NPs within cells is also accompanied by its own set of drawbacks,
including the possible premature degradation of the NPs within the
host cell as well as the need to incorporate a NP release strategy
upon delivery to the target site.

6.2

## Biomimetic
Cell Membrane-Coated NPs (MCNPs)
As previously discussed,
the cell-mediated delivery of NPs is at
times associated with a few drawbacks, such as the potential lysosomal
degradation of internalized NPs and the uncontrolled release and immunomodulatory
stimulation of surface-bound NPs. Accordingly, progress made toward
the circumvention of these challenges has led to the design of NPs
coated with the membranes of the desired circulatory cells instead
of hitchhiking or loading them into the cells. The resulting construct
not only possesses the unique biomimetic qualities of these cells,
such as increased circulation time, evasion by the immune and reticuloendothelial
systems, and tumoritropic tendencies, but it also retains the unique
material properties of the NPs. Additionally, the nanosize of the
coated particles allows them to more easily diffuse across endothelial
barriers and reach deep within target tissues compared to the significantly
larger cells.
6.2.1

## Membranes from Normal Circulatory Cells
Various NP types have been coated with membranes of the aforementioned
circulatory cells and investigated for their improved blood circulation
times compared to their nonmembrane-coated counterparts, with RBC-coated
organic and inorganic NMs composing a large proportion of explored
MCNPs. For instance, in a study by Piao et al., coating
gold nanocages with RBC membranes not only enhanced the in
vivo blood retention of the NMs without affecting their structural
integrity but it also increased the uptake of the nanocages in the
tumors, thereby improving the efficacy of photothermal therapy and
achieving 100% animal survival within a period of 45 days. In a separate study, RBC membranes functionalized
with tumor-targeting epithelial cell-adhesion molecule antibodies
were coated onto paclitaxel-loaded gold nanocages, and the resulting
constructs were shown to be effective for the chemo- and photothermal
therapy of murine models of breast cancer in vitro.( ) Decreased phagocytic uptake of RBC-coated
gold NPs due to surface CD47 expression has also been observed. Besides gold NMs, upconversion NPs have been
coated with RBC membranes and were shown to completely reduce protein
corona adsorption upon exposure to human plasma, while the additional
functionalization of folic acid on the NP membranes significantly
improved the tumor-targeting abilities of the NPs. Organic NMs such as polymeric NPs have also been coated
with RBC membranes and controlled drug release strategies were further
incorporated into the nanoconstruct design. For instance, RBC-coated,
pH-sensitive, and paclitaxel-loaded poly(l-γglutamylcarbocistein)
NPs were developed to sustain NP blood circulation and release paclitaxel
upon their successful delivery to the acidic TME. Accordingly, these
constructs were able to circumvent uptake by macrophages and significantly
inhibit tumor growth in mice bearing nonsmall cell lung cancer compared
to their noncoated counterparts. In
a more recent study, Lin et al. were able to fine-tune
the release kinetics of paclitaxel from RBC-coated PLA nanocarriers
by altering the macromolecular stereochemistry of PLA, with increased
stereocomplexation resulting in slower rates of release. 
Similarly to RBC-cloaked particles, leukocyte-MCNPs
possess lengthy circulation times in vivo but also
have the added advantage of homing to solid tumors as a result of
the natural ability of leukocytes to migrate toward inflammatory regions.
Specifically, macrophage- and monocyte-MCNPs are one of the most commonly
explored leukocyte-coated constructs. Some of the first NPs of this
kind were developed with a silica core, with the integrity of membrane
surface functional groups such as CD45 and CD11a and glycans being
preserved to circumvent potential phagocytosis. In subsequent studies, enhanced cellular uptake in breast
cancer cell lines in vitro was achieved using doxorubicin-loaded
PLGA nanoghosts enclosed in monocyte membranes, while macrophage-coated emtansine liposomes were capable
of inhibiting lung metastasis in murine models of breast cancer in vivo.( ) Other tumor-targeting
macrophage-MCNPs consisting of lanthanide-doped (upconversion NPs), and gold cores
have been developed for the in vivo imaging and photothermal
therapy of cancers, respectively. Interestingly, Wang et al. used grapefruit-derived nanovectors to explore the tumor-homing
mechanism of leukocyte-MCNPs and found that blocking LFA1 or CXCR1
and CXCR2 inflammatory-related receptors on these membranes significantly
reduces the tumoritropic capabilities of these constructs. 
Besides RBC- and macrophage-MCNPs, there
currently exists formulations
with a wide variety of membrane–core combinations, resulting
in improved tumor-homing, including membranes isolated from neutrophils
and platelets. As in the case with monocytes, neutrophils and platelets have the intrinsic ability to bind circulating and premetastatic
niche tumor cells and contribute to cancer progression. In a study
by Kang et al., neutrophil-membrane-coated PLGA NPs
not only showed enhanced cellular uptake in vitro and circulating tumor cell (CTC) capturing efficiency in
vivo, but when loaded with proteasome inhibitor carfilzomib,
these particles were able to significantly reduce blood CTC count
and inhibit both the onset of new and growth of existing metastases
in breast cancer mouse models. A similar
effect was achieved using platelet-MCNPs loaded with tumor necrosis
factor-related apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL) and doxorubicin in
breast cancer tumor-bearing immunodeficient mice. Other platelet-MCNPs consisting of a magnetic iron oxide
core and coencapsulated with immunogenic
cell death (ICD)-inducing metformin and reactive oxygen species (ROS)-producing
IR780 have been developed for the photothermal
and photodynamic therapy of cancers, respectively. Some studies have
even coated NPs with hybrid membranes derived from different types
of circulating cells with the aim of controlling the degree of a certain
biological outcome. For instance, in designing strategies for the
optimized detection and selective separation of CTCs from circulation,
platelet-leukocyte hybrid-membrane coated immunomagnetic beads have
been developed to exhibit the improved CTC-binding properties intrinsic
to platelets while maintaining the purity of CTC isolation by reducing
CTC–leukocyte interaction as a result of the tendency of leukocytes
to evade homologous binding. , 

6.2.2

## Use of Cancer Cell Membranes
Finally,
scientists have recently begun to exploit the ability of cancer cells
to escape from the immune system and
bind homotypically to one another by
designing NPs encapsulated within cancer cell membranes. The resulting
NPs are not only capable of circumventing immune clearance and remaining
in circulation for longer periods of time, but they also exhibit homotypic
cancer cell-specific binding due to the expression of certain proteins
on the surface of their membranes. In a study by Zhu et al., doxorubicin-loaded magnetic iron oxide NPs were coated with cell
membranes derived from various cancer cell lines to confirm their
high selectivity to the homologous tumor in vivo,
even in the presence of a heterotypic tumor ( ). One of
the earliest cancer-MCNPs consisting of a PLGA core were functionalized
with toll-like receptor 4 (TLR-4) agonist monophosphoryl lipid A (MPLA)
as an immunological adjuvant to boost tumor-specific immune responses
during vaccine therapy. In a similar
tumor vaccination study, cancer-CMC PLGA NPs loaded with TLR-7 agonist
imiquimod were further modified with mannose for the improved uptake
by dendritic cells and associated antitumor response. In combination with anti-PD-1 blockade immunotherapy,
these NPs exhibited almost complete tumor progression inhibition in
a mouse model of human melanoma in vivo, whereas
treatment with immunotherapy alone led to rapid tumor progression
after a few days. Tumor-targeted cancer-MCNPs have also been developed
for the dual-modal imaging and photothermal therapy of cancers, as well as for photodynamic and cancer starvation
therapy, in which glucose oxidase and catalase are used to deplete
intratumoral glucose. 
 

6.3

## Use of
Extracellular Vesicles
Extracellular
vesicles (EV) are natural intercellular carriers of biomolecules that
are able to transport themselves over both short and long ranges due
to their lipid membrane protecting their cargoes from extracellular
influences and their internal nutrient richness that mirrors intracellular
environments. Accordingly, EVs are able to function as nanocarriers
themselves with improved stability and biocompatibility compared to
synthetic NMs and are similarly able to take advantage of the EPR
effect by extravasating across the leaky tumor vasculature to reach
deep within tumor tissue. They can also
be functionalized with similar ligands and coatings to NPs, such as
CD47 stealth ligands and PEG, to further improve their targeted delivery.
The most interesting aspect of using EVs as carriers, however, is
that they have been shown to inherit the tropic properties of their
parental cell due to the presence of certain surface integrins, and
thus loading the EVs of preferred tropism with drugs allows the delivery
of their cargo to target organs, rendering them promising delivery
tools for cancer therapy. For instance, EVs isolated from cancer cells
that have metastasized to specific organs have been shown to display
identical tropism to the cells from which they were secreted and to
also reprogram the tropic properties of cancer cells toward organs
that were not originally target sites of metastasis. , Similarly, EVs isolated from MSCs have been shown to naturally home
toward inflammatory sites and tumors. As such, EVs have been extensively investigated for the delivery
of a wide variety of cargoes for cancer therapy, particularly small
drugs and genetic material. , In a few cases, even
NMs such as SPIONs and curcumin-loaded
silk NPs have been internalized into
MSC-derived EVs for their improved delivery to tumors, and the loading
of EVs with SPIONs has shown to improve the ability of macrophages
to migrate and degrade the extracellular matrix, thereby enhancing
the immunoregulatory activity of EVs. As is the case with circulating
cells, NMs have not only been loaded into EVs for Trojan Horse-like
delivery, but they have also been coated with EV membranes to improve
their biodistribution and tumoritropic abilities. 
The process of EV formation also known as biogenesis
can take place in one of three ways: − (1) Multivesicular
bodies produced by endosomal invagination fuse with the cell membrane
to form 30–100 nm-sized exosomes that overexpress tetraspanins
(i.e., CD63, CD81, and CD9), (2) Microvesicles pinch
out from cell membranes in sizes of 50–1000 nm containing high
levels of Annexin A1, and (3) apoptotic bodies in the micrometer range
form from cellular residues during the process of apoptosis with high
expression of Annexin V. The heterogeneity within these types of EVs
implies that their physicochemical properties are determined by multiple
factors, including the parental cell, activation state, mechanism
of formation and intracellular cargo sorting, level of enrichment,
among others. Common methods used for
the isolation of EVs include ultracentrifugation, size exclusion chromatography,
ultrafiltration, and immunoaffinity capture, while NM loading into
the vesicles are often performed by incubation with cells prior to
EV secretion, or incubation, sonication, or electroporation with EVs
post isolation. , These isolation procedures are,
however, associated with low purity and yield, and when coupled with
the low loading capacities of the EVs, these inefficiencies have so
far limited the clinical translation of EVs as nanocarriers in cancer
therapy. 

6.4

## Use of
Attenuated (Nonimmunogenic) Bacteria
Nonimmunogenic bacteria
have also been heavily explored as delivery
vehicles for a wide range of drugs and NMs due to the diversity in
their tropism that allows them to migrate along or against concentration
gradients of a variety of signaling molecules. Specifically, oxygen
gradients can be exploited to guide the movement of anaerobic bacteria
toward hypoxic regions of the TME and can thus be utilized as carriers
of NMs for cancer therapy. For instance, Luo et al. used Bifidobacterium breve and Clostridium difficile as tumoritropic carriers of
upconversion and gold nanorods for the bioimaging and photothermal
therapy of lung adenocarcinoma xenografts and found that the administration
of antibody-functionalized nanorods that target spore germination
after the injection of bacterial spores into the mice actually led
to the complete destruction of tumors with no signs of relapse. A specific and diverse subgroup of nonimmunogenic
microorganisms are magnetotactic bacteria (MTB), most of which are
Gram-negative and are characterized by the presence of magnetosomes
within their intracellular organelles that create strong magnetic
dipole moments and provide them with the ability to navigate along
the lines of the Earth’s magnetic field in a mechanism known
as magnetotaxis. This taxis is in fact
assisted by the aerotactic preference of MTBs to migrate toward sites
of low oxygen concentrations, and thus refines the three-dimensional
aerotactic movement to a one-dimensional propulsion. In their natural environment, MTBs commonly reside at the
oxic–anoxic interface (OAI) of sediment water columns consisting
of vertical chemical concentration gradients that serve as sustainable
sources of energy and thus hotspots for adaptation including magneto-aerotaxis. It was hypothesized by Felfoul et al. that a similar OAI is present in the tumor interstitium between
the oxic angiogenic network and the anoxic sites of tumor necrosis
that can be exploited to specifically drive MTBs to hypoxic solid
tumors with the guided assistance of an externally applied magnetic
field, thus allowing MTBs to be used as targeted carriers of drugs
and NMs in cancer therapy ( ). Specifically in their
study, they functionalized SN-38-loaded liposomes onto the surface
of Magnetococcus marinus (MC-1) MTBs
and found that 55% of the peritumorally injected NP-bacterial constructs
were able to be magnetically guided through the complex angiogenic
networks and interstitial areas of the hypoxic regions of the tumor.
At the same time, the magnetosomes found in MTBs have been explored
as nanocarriers themselves as they range from 35 to 120 nm, consist
of a lipid bilayer membrane and magnetic iron mineral crystals in
the form of magnetite (Fe3O4) or greigite (Fe3S4) chains, and do not
exhibit any of the toxicities induced by their synthetic and magnetic
NP counterparts such as SPIONs. , Additionally,
the biosynthesis of magnetosomes from MTBs is highly controlled and
results in particles with uniform size, shape, dispersion, and even
magnetization, whereas magnetic NPs that are synthesized by chemical
precipitation are often superparamagnetic and nonuniform with respect
to the aforementioned parameters. 
 

7

## Translational
Value
7.1

## Difficulties Concerning Bionano Interaction
Studies
Assays that are frequently performed to evaluate
the effects of small prospective drugs such as their toxicity toward
certain cell lines in vitro are often not suitable
for NM testing and do not accurately reflect their potential behavior in vivo. For instance, in the case of cationic and large-sized
NPs, their charge and larger gravitational pull respectively may lead
to greater interaction with cell membranes in 2D cultures compared
to their opposite counterparts, thereby amplifying any associated
signals. Additionally, light-emitting inorganic NPs are capable of
interfering with signals from viability assays that are based on fluorescence,
absorbance, and luminescence, yielding false positives. As a result, in addition to the fact that even
the smallest differences in NM physicochemical properties such as
size, coatings, synthesis methods, structural defects, concentrations,
exposure times, etc. may significantly affect the
degree of cell–nano interactions and associated NM toxicity,
research groups are employing different methodologies in attempt to
evaluate NM toxicity in vitro, leading to discrepancies
in published data and irreproducible results. NMs have also been shown to induce toxicity to different
cell lines by a variety of mechanisms, either by ROS-mediated apoptosis
(via mitochondrial membrane potential disruption,
DNA damage, or activation of MAPK and p53 signaling pathways), endoplasmic
reticulum-mediated apoptosis, autophagy, or necrosis, rendering it
even more difficult to understand the critical factors involved in
their toxicity and to standardize assays, and calling for innovative
solutions in the field of nanotoxicology. 
Over the years, novel “safe-by-design” strategies
have been put forth to enhance the comparability and reproducibility
of NM experimental results in vitro, including physicochemical
characterization, high-throughput and -content screening, establishment
of quantitative structure–activity relationships (QSARs), and
determination of the nanoassociated molecular patterns (NAMPs), leading
to adverse outcome pathways (AOPs). Together,
these modalities encompass the majority of NM safety end points and
serve as checkpoints for NM progression to in vivo studies. With the growing importance of nanotoxicology, research
groups have recognized the increasing need to use various characterization
methods to determine parameters such as size, shape, charge, release
and dissolution kinetics, band gap, and crystallinity of the NMs prior
to conducting their experimental objectives, as each of these factors
may significantly impact their biological effects. For instance, with respect to NM size, transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) is frequently used to measure the core size of the
NM while dynamic light scattering (DLS) is commonly used to determine
their hydrodynamic size. However, there exists inherent shortcomings
with many popular techniques, and efforts are also being made to overcome
such drawbacks by developing alternative modalities that would thereby
allow a more accurate understanding of the mechanistic effects associated
with altering NM physicochemical properties. Accordingly, NP tracking
analysis (NTA) is an alternative technique to DLS that uses the Brownian
motion of the NPs instead of the intensity of scattered light to measure
their size and thus removes the bias toward large particles and concentrated
samples that is associated with DLS. Tunable resistive pulse sensing (TRPS) technology is another alternative
to DLS that is gaining popularity as it generates size measurements
of NPs and even NP aggregates with higher resolution and sensitivity
by recording alterations in their ionic current. In parallel to establishing particle characterization,
the safety of NMs and their cellular interactions can be studied in vitro using high-throughput screening (HTS) and high-content
imaging (HCI). The HTS approach developed by Nel and colleagues is
a powerful tool for the rapid kinetic analysis of cell–nano
interactions, although it requires limited numbers of cells and parameters
per analysis to sustain fast data acquisition. HCI, on the other hand, is able to conduct rapid multiparametric
acquisitions and automated analyses of images consisting of thousands
of cells per condition, generating large data sets that allow the
quantitative comparison of the effects of even the smallest differences
between NMs on their behavior in various cellular environments. , , Cellular parameters evaluated
using such techniques include viability, proliferation, oxidative
stress, damage to cell membrane, mitochondria, lysosomes and DNA,
autophagy, cell morphology and cytoskeletal rearrangements, endosomal
network changes, among others. These large generated data sets can
then be extensively analyzed using statistical tools such as in silico hazard ranking to understand their QSARs, based
on which computational paradigms can be developed to predict the toxicological
outcome of other NMs both in vitro and in
vivo.( , ) Lastly, AOP networks have been
generated on collaborative platforms such as the publicly accessible
AOP Knowledge Base to further understand the complex relationship
between NAMPs and key events taking place in the development of adverse
outcomes. 

7.2

## In Vivo Translation of in Vitro Results
In an interesting publication
by Dobrovolskaia and McNeil, the authors
conducted a meta-analysis of the available literature to identify
the gaps in the effective in vitro translation of
immunotoxicity testing of NMs to the in vivo stage.
In their analysis, they found a good correlation between the in vitro and in vivo testing of hemolysis,
coagulation, complement activation, opsonization, and phagocytosis,
as well as a fair correlation in immunosuppression and thrombogenicity. In a more recent study by Urbán et al., the authors reviewed 515 publications and found
that 30% of the NPs are blood-incompatible in vitro due to at least one of the aforementioned end points depending on
the composition of the NM ( a–c). For instance,
while 64% of the inorganic NPs were found to be blood-compatible,
the main adversity associated with these NPs was the combination of
alterations on coagulation and platelets, which translate to thrombosis in vivo. With respect to lipid-based NPs, 39% were associated
with complement activation, whereas polymer-based NPs showed low blood-incompatibility.
In addition to the evaluation of these end points, another important
test that should be conducted prior to in vivo testing
and even before the in vitro immunotoxicity assays
is endotoxin contamination, which is able to yield false assay results
and has been found to be assessed in only 12.7% of the analyzed literature. In fact, 30% of the NMs evaluated by the US
NP Characterization Laboratory (USNCL) have failed during their preclinical
assessments due to endotoxin contamination. Endotoxins are components of Gram-negative bacteria cell walls and
can easily bind to NPs due to their lipid and phosphate group constituents
which have high affinities toward both hydrophobic and cationic surfaces
of NPs. The exposure to even picogram concentrations of endotoxins
in the body has been shown to induce pro-inflammatory, pro-coagulant,
and hemolytic effects, as well as the activation of the complement
system, tissue damage, and septic shock, and thus may significantly
affect the results of immunotoxicity tests. Endotoxins have also been shown to be highly resistant against autoclaving
and other sterilization techniques and that their levels of contamination
can differ even between batches produced from the same laboratory,
suggesting the need to perform thorough endotoxin contamination assays
at the initial stages of NM development for their successful translation
in the future. Accordingly, in their
review throughout which they examine the various methods of detection
and elimination of NM-associated endotoxins, Li and Boraschi highlight
that the use of endotoxin-free reagents and the optimization of certain
synthesis procedures can significantly decrease the levels of endotoxins
compared to purging contaminations at later stages of testing. In addition to these safe-by-design strategies
and immunotoxicity assays, various efforts have been made to further
improve the translation of in vitro studies to the in vivo setting through the development of novel experimental
models, including the use of lab- and organ-on-a-chip methods, ex vivo systems, and dynamic organoids. The chick chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) model is another
accessible approach that aims to minimize the costly use of rodents.
It consists of intricate vascularization that represents the complex
environments within biological organs in which NMs tend to get trapped. 
 In the transition from
the in vitro to in vivo setting,
NM behavior tends to transform significantly
as the variety of biomolecules and environments within biological
systems are able to interfere with NM distribution, pharmacokinetics,
cargo release, and even physicochemical characteristics. Therefore,
conducting multiparametric evaluations of various NM behaviors in vivo is necessary for the advancement of nanomedicines
to the clinic. In fact, one of the events that take place upon NM
exposure to the nutrient-rich environments in the body is the adsorption
of biomolecules to the surfaces of the NMs, altering their size, shape,
charge, and surface chemistry. The resulting “protein coronas”
that form around the NPs are referred to as “hard” or
“soft”, depending on whether adsorbed proteins are firmly
bound to the NP surfaces or possess low binding affinities that result
in dynamic and competitive exchanges in surface proteins. The energetically favorable process of protein
corona formation is highly complex and significantly impacts the original
physicochemical properties of the particles, also known as their synthetic
identity, by providing them with a new biological identity that governs
their fate in vivo.( − ) For instance, the shielding
effect of the protein corona may interfere with the ability of active
surface ligands that are functionalized on the NP surface to recognize
certain receptors on cancer cells due to steric hindrance, thereby
affecting their tumor-homing properties. Instead, it may weaken the
EPR effect, guide the NPs to off-target sites, and promote clearance
by the uptake by the mononuclear phagocytic system (MPS). NMs phagocytosed
by macrophages tend to accumulate in MPS organs such as the liver
and spleen, a phenomenon exhibited by a wide variety of materials,
including quantum dots and polymeric and gold NPs. − In fact, high concentrations of adsorbed opsonins such as fibrinogens
and immunoglobulins have been shown to enhance NP recognition and
uptake by macrophages and reduce NP circulation time, requiring additional
doses for effective anticancer activity that induce further off-target
toxicity. Protein corona formation has
also been shown to stimulate the classical and lectin pathways leading
to complement system activation, which in turn further induces the
opsonization and modification of the NP surface. Complement system activation may trigger inflammation,
tumor growth, and in many cases, pseudoallergies involving complex
networks of leukocytes and platelets that have led to the withdrawal
of various NMs from the clinic, particularly IONPs. , In some instances, however, protein corona formation may enhance
the targeting efficiency of NMs and prevent immunotoxicity. , The constituents of the protein coronas and the resulting biological
identity of the NMs thus tend to vary between tumor types and even
among patients, rendering it challenging to develop a universal strategy
to control bionano interactions and suggesting the potential need
for patient-specific designs of nanomedicines in cases where in vivo modifications of NMs are significant enough to impact
safety and efficacy. , Accordingly, given the importance
of the transformation of NM behavior due to protein corona formation,
additional in vitro NM characterization should be
performed after their exposure to biofluids to more accurately understand
the bionano interactions. At the same time, the incorporation of dysopsonins
into the NM design, including apolipoproteins, albumin, and polymeric
coats such as PEG and PVP have proven to inhibit protein corona formation
by reducing the reactivity and surface charge of the NMs. 
Besides opsonization, the interaction
of NMs with circulating coagulation
factors may disrupt the associated homeostatic balance through mechanisms
such as platelet factor upregulation and damage to platelet membranes,
which may result in disseminated intravascular coagulation causing
abnormal hemorrhaging or intravascular thrombosis. , For instance, Oslakovic et al. found that cationic
NPs reduced thrombin formation by binding to factors VII and IX, whereas
anionic NPs stimulated the intrinsic coagulation pathway. Moreover, given that circulating tumor cells
possess procoagulant phenotypes, additional procoagulant effects due
to NM exposure may result in pro-tumoral activity. In fact, in the study by Urbán et al., the authors also analyzed the blood incompatibilities of NMs in vivo and found that 61% of the reported blood toxicities
involve thrombosis, while the remaining 28% and 11% include complement
activation and changes in hematology, respectively ( d–f). In many cases of NP-drug constructs, the active pharmaceutical
ingredient (API) may exhibit immunotoxic effects at levels greater
than the administration of the drug alone as the NP causes the drug
to accumulate in areas that are otherwise not exposed to such high
levels of the API, such as the lymphatic system or spleen. At the same time, the interaction of the nanocarrier
with various biomolecules including opsonization may affect the kinetics
of drug release and result in off-site targeting. For example, Abraxane
and Caelyx are associated with higher rates of neuropathy and hand
and foot syndrome, respectively, compared to free paclitaxel and doxorubicin. , As such, in addition to conducting in vivo immunotoxicity
assays, the spatiotemporal behaviors of the nanocarrier and drug should
be carefully studied both separately and jointly to obtain a holistic
understanding of the potential clinical impact of the nanomedicine.

7.3

## Clinical Translation
The clinical
translation of (in)organic NMs is slowly expanding, driven by the
vast number of outstanding preclinical results that have been obtained
over the past few years. Their main biomedical application lies in
cancer treatment, where, from an ideal point of view, NMs can be administered
intravenously and are transported via the blood circulation
to reach the tumor upon which they can be used for therapeutic and/or
diagnostic purposes. However, some major obstacles are still unresolved
and stand in the path of achieving their potential as therapeutic
agents. One of these hindrances lies in the efficient targeting of
the tumor tissue. A recent, extensive, meta-analysis of a wide array
of NMs categorized according to similarities or differences in their
physicochemical properties, performed by Wilhelm and colleagues, demonstrated that currently the efficiency of
NM delivery to solid tumors is very limited, reaching on average 0.7%
of the injected dose. They further observed little added value from
the use of classical active targeting strategies, such as conjugating
the NMs with ligands that can bind selective tumor-associated epitopes.
Another recent exhaustive study revealed that antibody or small molecule-coupled
NMs show very poor tumor targeting, and more importantly, that only
2% of the cancer cells interact with the NMs at the tumor site. This
was associated with the NMs being trapped in the ECM or being sequestered
by TAMs. 

8

## Conclusion
In conclusion,, all of these studies have shown possible improvements
for the delivery of (in)organic NMs to solid tumors. However, these
strategies have been developed as stand-alone methods and have not
been studied adequately in order to make comparative studies possible.
Furthermore, the potential impact of the methods used or even on the
use of NMs in general must be studied carefully as illustrated by
recent work. In particular, the finding that NM delivery to solid
tumors by EPR may not be as influential as has been assumed for the
past decade may shift the focus of this research domain into different
areas. Here, the biological methods using cellular strategies or methods
to enhance NM transcytosis across the endothelial barrier may be essential
to drive further progress. A proper combination of both strategies,
focusing on a characterization of individual tumors in view of their
perfusion and leakiness combined with the alternative targeting approaches
seems like an optimal way forward.

## Author Contributions
M.I. and C.M.
contributed equally to this work
The authors declare no
competing financial interest.
Mukaddes Izci is an FWO-SB awarded Ph.D. student, who in her work
is focusing on developing and optimizing new methods to deliver nanomaterials
to solid tumors in the most optimal way. She focuses on using high-throughput
preclinical imaging methods for personalized tumor characterization,
in combination with biological and pharmacological methods to enhance
nanomaterial delivery to solid tumors.
Christy Maksoudian obtained her B.Sc. in Biomedical
Sciences from
New York University and M.Sc. in Drug Discovery and Development from
Imperial College London, during which she worked extensively on the
use of cell-penetrating peptides and gold nanoparticles in cancer
therapy, respectively. She is currently pursuing her Ph.D. at KU Leuven,
with her work mainly focusing on the optimization of nanoparticle
delivery to solid tumors using a variety of biological methods, particularly
cell-based therapy.
Bella B.
Manshian is a group leader at the NanoHealth and Optical
imaging group and focuses on the use of nanotherapeutics for a wide
range of pathologies. Her current research interests lie in the development
and optimization of nanomaterial-mediated delivery of pharmaceutical
compounds across the blood–brain barrier or to specifically
target inflammatory regions (cancer, infectious diseases,...). Dr.
Manshian has over 60 publications and an h-index of 24.
Stefaan J. Soenen heads the NanoHealth and
Optical Imaging Group
at KU Leuven, Belgium, since January 2018. His main research interests
lie in the use of nanomaterials for therapeutic and diagnostic purposes
and on developing novel preclinical optical imaging methods. He has
published over 75 manuscript with an h-index of 34 and received an
ERC Starting Grant for his work on nanotherapeutics for cancer therapy.

## Acknowledgments
We acknowledge
financial support from the European
Commission Horizon 2020 Research Framework (ERC starting grant no.
757398), FWO research project (G0B2919N), and KU Leuven BOF funding
(C2 project 3M180306). I.M. is a recipient from an FWO-SB student
fellowship. Nora Dekoning is acknowledged for her help with designing
schematic illustrations.

## Abbreviations
AMFAlternating magnetic field: An alternating
magnetic field is a field in which the poles switch from one to the
other side repeatedly. The switching of the magnetic field causes
localized heating when magnetic NMs are present. This process is called
magnetic hyperthermia.
BBBBlood–brain barrier: A highly
specialized structure from a tight monolayer of endothelial cells
that only allows selective transport of compounds from the blood into
the central nervous system.
BPsBack packs: The “cargo”
molecules loaded on the surface of a cell in order to avoid premature
clearance and improve targeted delivery.
CPPCell penetrating peptide: Small
peptides that facilitate cellular uptake of a variety of agents, going
from small molecules to whole NMs.
CPTCamptothecin: A natural compound
isolated from specific trees (Camptotheca acuminata Decne) and potently inhibits DNA-topoisomerase-I. Because of its
low solubility, its clinical use has remained limited, but 4 CPT analogues
have been approved and are used in cancer chemotherapy today: topotecan,
irinotecan, belotecan, and trastuzumab deruxtecan.
CSCCancer stem cells: A small subpopulation
of tumor cells that possess many features typically associated with
stem cells, including self-renewal. These cells are often associated
with higher therapeutic resistance and tumor relapse.
DDSDrug delivery system:
Any type of
system (commonly a nanoparticle) that is used as a vessel to transport
drugs from the site of administration to its intended target site
and hereby prevents premature clearance or off-target effects.
DOXDoxorubicin: Commonly
used chemotherapeutic
agent, clinically used for breast metastases treatment.
DPDoxorubicin prodrug: An
alternative
form of doxorubicin which only becomes therapeutically active upon
biological or chemical processing.
DTXDocetaxel: Similar to PTX, a cytostatic
chemotherapeutic agent used in breast, colorectal, lung, ovarian,
prostate, liver, renal, gastric, and head and neck cancers and melanoma
ECEndothelial cells:
Cells that make
up the inner lining of the blood vessels. They normally form close
bounds (tight junctions) and control transport across blood vessel
walls. Immature vessels, such as sometimes present in tumors, can
have gaps between the ECs.
ECMExtracellular matrix: A dense fibrous
network that provides structure and support to cells. In tumors, the
ECM is often particularly dense and thick and can be seen as a barrier
for delivery.
EGFEpidermal growth factor: A protein
stimulating cell growth and differentiation by binding to its receptor
(EGFR). It is therefore used as a peptide for targeted NM delivery.
EGFREpidermal growth
factor receptor:
A receptor commonly overexpressed by tumor cells. It is often targeted
by NMs for targeted delivery. It is also therapeutically targeted
by clinically approved formulations (cetuximab and panitumumab).
EMTEpithelial–mesenchymal
transition:
The process by which cells go from a epithelial to a more mesenchymal
from. For cancer cells, this process is linked to going from an adherent
to less adherent cell type, and is commonly associated with metastasis.
EPREnhanced permeability
and retention:
The classical view of nanoparticle delivery to solid tumors, please
see .
EVExtracellular vesicle:
A lipid-coated
particle that is naturally shed by a cell and serves as a means of
intercellular communication.
FAFolic acid, folate: A naturally occurring
dietary compound (Vitamin B9 in US). Folic acid receptors are commonly
overexpressed on many tumor types and folic acid is therefore frequently
used as a peptide for targeted NM delivery.
FRFolate receptor: The receptor for
folic acid commonly overexpressed on many tumor types and therefore
frequently used for targeted NM delivery.
FUFluorouracil: A cytostatic chemotherapeutic
agent that inhibits tumor growth. It is clinically used in colon cancer,
esophageal cancer, stomach cancer, pancreatic cancer, breast cancer,
and cervical cancer.
GBMGlioblastoma multiforme: The most
common and highly malignant form of brain tumor.
HAHyaluronic acid: A glycosaminoglycan
that is often present in connective tissue and makes part of the ECM.
It naturally binds CD44, which is commonly overexpressed on cancer
cells. Therefore, it is frequently used for targeted NM delivery.
HCCHepatocellular
carcinoma: The most
common type of primary liver cancer.
HER2Human epidermal growth factor receptor
2 (synonym: ErbB2): Cell surface receptor expressed by some, not all,
breast or ovarian tumors. Can be targeted directly using Trastuzumab
(Herceptin), a clinically approved antibody.
HPMAN-(2-Hydroxypropyl)
methacrylamide: A monomer that can be used to make polymeric nanoparticles
for biomedical use
ICGIndocyanine green: A near-infrared
optical imaging agent with rapid renal clearance, can serve as contrast
agent for optical or photoacoustic imaging. Can be used as photosensitizer
in either photodynamic (ROS generation) or photothermal (temperature
increase) therapy upon excitation with NIR light.
IFPInterstitial fluid pressure: The
interstitial space is the intercellular and extravascular compartment
present in all tissues. Fluids from the blood can reach tumors led
by forces called interstitial fluid pressure. In tumors, the IFP is
really high due to a very dense cell mass, poor perfusion, permeable
vessels, and very poor lymphatic drainage (fluid outflow). This hardens
the extravasation of NMs from the bloodstream against the IFP into
the tumor tissue.
IONPIron oxide nanoparticle: Small
iron oxide nanoparticles, see SPION.
MBMicrobubbles: Gas filled bubbles
that are encapsulated by a polymeric or lipid layer and gives US contrast.
The gas can be tuned to enable 19F MRI, or the MB can be loaded with
therapeutic agents on the surface. Via sonoporation
(see ), they
release their cargo or transiently induce pores in blood vessels or
cell membranes.
MCNPsBiomimetic cell membrane-coated
NPs: Nanomaterials that are overcoated with biological membranes to
avoid immune recognition and clearance.
MDSCMyeloid-derived suppressor cells:
A myeloid derived cell that can be monocytic or granulocytic but which
has potent immunosuppressive properties and helps the tumor to avoid
immune clearance.
MDTMagnetic drug targeting (a, active;
p, passive): The process by which magnetic fields are used to promote
drug delivery to the tissue of interest.
MHCMajor histocompatibility complex:
A cluster of proteins involved in antigen presentation to T cells.
There are 2 main types: MHC I and MHC II. MHC I is present on nearly
all cells in the body, MHC II is present on specialized antigen-presenting
cells.
m-NCsMagnetic
nanocapsules. A NM that
serves as a vessel for transport of therapeutic molecules and also
contains magnetic NMs for follow-up by imaging or magnetic guidance.
MNMsMitochondrial-targeted
multifunctional
NMs: NMs that are specifically targeted toward mitochondria.
MPIMagnetic particle imaging:
A more
recent (pre)clinical noninvasive imaging method that enables sensitive,
quantitative and fast imaging of magnetic NMs to study functional
parameters (e.g., inflammation, blood flow, perfusion, cell homing,...).
MRIMagnetic resonance
imaging: A (pre)clinical
noninvasive imaging method.
MSCMesenchymal stem cell: An adult
multipotent stem cell that can be isolated from bone marrow, fat,
umbilical cord or amniotic fluid and that are important for making
and repairing skeletal tissues, such as cartilage, bone, and the fat
found in bone marrow.
MTBMagnetotactic bacteria: A group
of bacteria that naturally synthesize magnetic iron-containing minerals
that enable them to respond to magnetic fields.
MTOMitoxantrone: A cytostatic agent
used to limit tumor growth, it is primarily used in treating leukemia.
NCNanocarrier: A NM
that serves as
a vessel to transport therapeutically active molecules from the injection
site to the target tissue.
NIRNear-infrared: Light with wavelengths
just above the spectrum visible for the human eye, typically with
wavelengths ranging from 800 to 2500 nm.
NMNanomaterial: According to the EU
definition: “A natural, incidental or manufactured
material containing particles, in an unbound state or as an aggregate
or as an agglomerate and where, for 50 % or more of the particles
in the number size distribution, one or more external dimensions is
in the size range 1–100 nm.” In practice, this
definition is not followed very strictly in academic research where
polymeric or liposomal particles of around 200 nm diameter will still
be called a nanomaterial.
NONitric oxide: A type of ROS.
NPNanoparticle: Please see “nanomaterial
(NM)”.
NSCNeural stem cell: Multipotent cells
which are able to self-renew and proliferate without limit, to produce
progeny cells which terminally differentiate into neurons, astrocytes,
or oligodendrocytes.
NRP-1Neuropilin-1: Transmembrane proteins
involved in vascular development. Upon nutrient starvation, they enable
a specific endocytosis pathway, which for tumor cells can result in
direct transcytosis of components (including NMs) from the blood across
the endothelial cells toward the tumor cells.
PDTPhotodynamic therapy: The therapeutic
use of an agent (a photosensitizer) that upon activation by light
of a specific wavelength, directly kills cancer cells or renders them
more sensitive to other therapy. This often occurs by the light-induced
generation of ROS.
PEGPoly(ethylene glycol): A long, flexible
polymer frequently employed to cover NMs in a brush-like manner. PEGylation
of NMs increases their blood circulation times by reducing immune
recognition, opsonisation (see ) and clearance.
PETPositron emission tomography: A
(pre)clinical noninvasive imaging method based on the detection of
radionuclides and commonly used for functional imaging (e.g,, detection of tumors).
PLGAPoly(lactic acid/glycolic acid):
An FDA-approved polymer frequently employed for generating drug loaded
NMs. The ratio of lactic versus glycolic acid can differ, influencing
the solubility and drug release rates.
PTXPaclitaxel: A natural compound derived
from Taxus brevifolia. It exerts a
potent anticancer effect and is classified as a cytostatic agent,
inhibiting tumor growth, rather than inducing direct cell death. It
is clinically used in a wide range of tumors, including ovarian cancer,
breast cancer, lung cancer, Kaposi sarcoma, cervical cancer, and pancreatic
cancer. Because of its low solubility, it is now also available as
an albumin-bound nanoparticle (nAb-PTX).
RBCRed blood cells: Also known as erythrocyte,
transports oxygen in the blood.
rBVRelative blood volume: The volume
of blood in a particular tissue (tumor) or over a period of time,
expressed as relative values (nonabsolute, but a % of a predefined
starting point) and often measured using noninvasive methods.
RESReticulo-endothelial
system: A cell
system derived from phagocytic monocytes that enable the recognition
and clearance of immune complexes (including immune factor-bound nanoparticles)
from the blood. These cells are mainly located in the liver and spleen
and are typically the major system where NMs end up after intravenous
administration.
ROSReactive oxygen species: Highly
reactive chemicals produced by electron acceptance by oxygen (O2). Various forms exists and they are key components in cellular
signaling. Exaggerated levels of ROS, induced by NMs, can result in
oxidative stress with wide ranging effects (DNA damage, cell death,...).
SORSorafenib: A targeted
anticancer
therapeutic. It acts as a kinase inhibitor and is approved for clinical
use against advanced renal cell carcinoma, advanced primary liver
cancer and thyroid cancer.
SPECTSingle photon emission computed
tomography: A (pre)clinical noninvasive imaging method using specific
radioactive tracers and detect single emitted photons.
SPIONsSuperparamagnetic
iron oxide
NMs: Small iron oxide NMs commonly used as MRI contrast agents. Because
of their small size, they are no longer ferromagnetic, but become
superparamagnetic, meaning that upon removal of an external magnetic
field (e.g., MR scanner) they do not hold any remnant magnetism.
SPRSurface plasmon
resonance: The oscillation
of conduction band electrons in resonance with the oscillating electric
field of incident light. This typically occurs at the surface of metals
and can be used to sensitively detect biomolecules binding to NMs
(biosensors).
TAFTumor associated fibroblast: Fibroblasts
that make up part of the TME. They mainly contribute to making a dense
ECM and secrete factors that drive angiogenesis.
TAMTumor associated macrophage: Macrophage
specifically linked to a tumor. From a classical perspectives, there
are two main types, M1 (pro-inflammatory), and M2, anti-inflammatory,
but this distinction is not fully covering the wide range of subtle
differences in macrophage types.
TfTransferrin: A natural compound involved
in transport on iron in the blood. As transferrin receptors are commonly
overexpressed on many tumor types, Tf is often used as a ligand for
targeted NM delivery.
TNFαTumor necrosis factor-alpha:
A cell signaling protein (cytokine) involved in a broad range of signaling
pathways, commonly associated with pro-inflammatory signaling.
TMETumor microenvironment:
The complete
environment of a tumor, which apart from tumor cells, consists of
a wide range of cell types, being immune cells (T cells, macrophage,...),
fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and extracellular matrix components.
TPZTirapazamine: An
experimental anticancer
drug that is only toxic in conditions of hypoxia (low oxygen).
USUltrasound: Sound of which
the frequency
is higher than the upper limit of human hearing. It is commonly employed
as a noninvasive imaging method, where specific contrast can be generated
using MBs.
VCAM-1Vascular cell adhesion molecule-1
(= CD106): A cytokine-inducible molecule predominantly expressed on
endothelial cells. It links endothelial adhesion to signal transduction.
VEGFVascular endothelial
growth factor:
A potent angiogenic factor secreted by cells to promote the formation
of new blood vessels (= angiogenesis). It is a crucial process in
tumor formation and VEGF is therefore an actively studied therapeutic
agent.