822acssdACS Infectious DiseasesACS Infect DisPMC8922280892228089222803509918210.1021/acsinfecdis.1c00296Exotoxin-Targeted Drug Modalities as Antibiotic Alternatives
SakariMoona LaisiArttu PulliainenArto T †Institute
of Biomedicine, Research Unit for Infection and Immunity, University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 10, FI-20520 Turku, Finland*Email: arto.pulliainen@utu.fi, Phone: +358-40-1586044
311202283433433–4561632022© 2022 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Abstract
 The paradigm of antivirulence
therapy dictates that bacterial pathogens
are specifically disarmed but not killed by neutralizing their virulence
factors. Clearance of the invading pathogen by the immune system is
promoted. As compared to antibiotics, the pathogen-selective antivirulence
drugs hold promise to minimize collateral damage to the beneficial
microbiome. Also, selective pressure for resistance is expected to
be lower because bacterial viability is not directly affected. Antivirulence
drugs are being developed for stand-alone prophylactic and therapeutic
treatments but also for combinatorial use with antibiotics. This Review
focuses on drug modalities that target bacterial exotoxins after the
secretion or release-upon-lysis. Exotoxins have a significant and
sometimes the primary role as the disease-causing virulence factor,
and thereby they are attractive targets for drug development. We describe
the key pre-clinical and clinical trial data that have led to the
approval of currently used exotoxin-targeted drugs, namely the monoclonal
antibodies bezlotoxumab (toxin B/TcdB, Clostridioides difficile), raxibacumab (anthrax toxin, Bacillus anthracis), and obiltoxaximab (anthrax toxin, Bacillus anthracis), but also to challenges with some of the promising leads. We also
highlight the recent developments in pre-clinical research sector
to develop exotoxin-targeted drug modalities, i.e., monoclonal antibodies,
antibody fragments, antibody mimetics, receptor analogs, neutralizing
scaffolds, dominant-negative mutants, and small molecules. We describe
how these exotoxin-targeted drug modalities work with high-resolution
structural knowledge and highlight their advantages and disadvantages
as antibiotic alternatives.
Keywords: exotoxin, bacteria, antivirulence therapy, antibiotics, antibiotic
resistance

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2021 Jun 1; Issue date 2022 Mar 11.

The paradigm
of antivirulence
therapy dictates that bacterial pathogens are specifically disarmed
but not killed by neutralizing their virulence factors. Historically, antivirulence therapy precedes
the use of antibiotics. The first Nobel Prize in Medicine in 1901
was awarded to Emil von Behring for his work on serum therapy, especially
on its application against diphtheria with diphtheria toxin-neutralizing
horse antiserum. To some extent, these virulence factor-neutralizing
polyvalent antiserum-based drugs are still being used today, e.g.,,
diphtheria antitoxin (DAT), botulism antitoxin
heptavalent [A,B,C,D,E,F,G]-[EQUINE] (BAT), and botulism immune globulin intravenous (BIG-IV/BabyBIG). In addition, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG)
preparations that are composed of polyvalent immunoglobulins from
pooled plasma samples of thousands of individuals are being developed
and used to treat severe diseases, such as necrotizing soft tissue
infections, e.g., ref ( ) (NCT01790698 and NCT02111161). Decades of basic research using various in vitro assays, cell and tissue culture models, and animal
experimentation have created an in-depth view on bacterial virulence
factors. It is this molecular and physiological
knowledge that is driving the development of next-generation targeted
antivirulence therapies involving different modalities.
Exotoxins,
a ubiquitous group of secreted or release-upon-lysis
bacterial proteins ( and ), have a significant and sometimes
the primary role as the disease-causing virulence factor, e.g., in
whooping cough, cholera, diphtheria, tetanus, botulism, anthrax, and
toxic shock syndrome. Antivirulence drugs are being developed to prevent
all the main steps in the functional pathway of exotoxins—expression,
secretion, cell surface binding, intracellular maturation, and cytosolic
effector functions. One attractive strategy has been to develop small
molecules that prevent binding of transcription factors to the promoters
of exotoxin-encoding genes and thereby block transcription, as exemplified
by the work on staphylococcal transcription factor AgrA. Inhibitors targeting the Sec-pathway that is
responsible for the secretion of the majority of bacterial proteins
are alternative antivirulence drug leads, e.g., ref ( ). One additional line of
research is focused on targeting host cell components, in particular
host cell proteins, that are important in the functional pathway of
exotoxins. For instance, small molecules have been identified which
affect the endosomal maturation, retrograde
trafficking, intracellular activatory
proteolytic processing, and intracellular
chaperone-assisted activatory folding of exotoxins. 
 This Review is focused on drug modalities, i.e.,
monoclonal antibodies,
antibody fragments, antibody mimetics, receptor analogs, neutralizing
scaffolds, dominant-negative mutants, and small molecules, that target
bacterial exotoxins after secretion or release-upon-lysis. We describe
how these modalities work and highlight their advantages and disadvantages
as antibiotic alternatives. Each modality is described with schematic
examples where the mode of action is known at atomic resolution ( – ).
 

## Bacterial Exotoxins
Bacterial exotoxins
can be classified into three types based on
their mode of action: Type I, superantigens; Type II, membrane-disrupting
toxins; and Type III, intracellular-targeting toxins. Superantigens,
such as toxic shock syndrome toxin-1 (TSST-1) of Staphylococcus
aureus ( A), bind simultaneously
to major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II and T-cell receptor
(TCR) molecules on host antigen-presenting cells and T-lymphocytes,
respectively. Docking of TSST-1 to MHCII and TCR hyperactivates T-cells,
leading to systemic release of inflammatory cytokines and development
of potentially fatal toxic shock syndrome. 
Membrane-disrupting toxins
come in three different flavors. The
pore-forming toxins, such as the α-toxin (also known as hemolysin-α
or Hla) of S. aureus ( B), comprise
by far the largest group. When the α-toxin of S. aureus binds on the host cell surface, it oligomerizes and attacks the
cell membrane by extrusion of a β-barrel through the lipid bilayer
to form a hydrophilic transmembrane channel and causes cell death
via osmotic lysis. Membrane-disrupting
toxins can also act by directly modifying the membrane lipids or by
displaying detergent-like functions. The β-toxin (also known
as β-hemolysin) of S. aureus, for instance, cleaves sphingomyelin, the abundant eukaryotic
membrane sphingolipid. The amphipathic peptides known as phenol-soluble
modulins, such as the δ-toxin of S. aureus, integrate into the host cell plasma membrane
to cause membrane instability.
Intracellular-targeting toxins
are a diverse group of virulence
factors formed of either covalently or non-covalently bound A and
B subunits. The A subunit possesses the enzymatic activity, and the
B subunits mediate the cell entry. Pertussis toxin (PTX), as an example,
is the major virulence factor of Bordetella pertussis ( C), composed of five non-covalently bound subunits
(PtxS1–S5), which are arranged in an AB5 topology. , The B5-oligomer is formed by the PtxS2–S5 (PtxS2, PtxS3,
PtxS5, and two copies of PtxS4) , and mediates binding
of the AB5 holotoxin on the host cell surface in a carbohydrate-dependent
manner. Endocytosis-mediated cell entry
is followed by retrograde trafficking into the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER), dissociation of the B5-assembly
from the PtxS1-subunit, and ER-associated
degradation (ERAD) pathway-dependent transport of PtxS1 into the cytosol. In the cytosol, PtxS1 ADP-ribosylates a single
C-terminal cysteine residue in inhibitory α-subunits of most
heterotrimeric (αβγ) G protein superfamily members,
such as Gαi, Gαo, and Gαt. The resulting bulky ADP-ribose modification disrupts inhibitory
α-subunit interaction with G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs),
preventing formation of the Gαβγ-GPCR complex and
thereby perturbing GPCR agonist-induced signaling. Other intracellular-targeting toxins follow more or less
the same principles as PTX in how they interact with the host cell,
i.e., docking into the cell surface receptor, endocytosis, intracellular
maturation, and execution of the cytosolic effector function, mostly
involving modification of a specific host protein. However, topologies
of the AB-assembly vary, e.g., AB (diphtheria toxin), AB5 (pertussis
toxin), and A2B5 (typhoid toxin), some toxins such as diphtheria toxin
gain access into the cytosol from the endosome, and an array of cytosolic
effector functions in addition to protein ADP-ribosylation are executed
in the cytosol ( ).

## Interfering
with Cell Surface Binding
Binding to the host cell surface,
involving recognition of specific
receptors, is a necessary functional step for exotoxins ( ). Many exotoxins,
such as superantigens and membrane-disrupting toxins, also execute
their effector functions at that particular cellular localization.
A multitude of different exotoxin-targeted drug modalities, including
all of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved drugs
and most of the clinical trial drug candidates ( ), target this step of the functional pathway
of exotoxins.
 

## Monoclonal Antibodies—Cell
Surface Binding
The
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) have several advantages in exotoxin targeting,
such as high specificity, long half-life in circulation, and good
tolerability ( ). In addition, mAbs do not merely act as passive exotoxin-neutralizing
binders, but they also may execute beneficial fragment crystallizable
(Fc)-mediated functions, such as complementary interactions and phagocytosis
of exotoxin-mAb complexes. Antibody engineering technologies help
in the design of enhanced versions, e.g., in affinity and immunogenicity,
also involving the possibility to combine two targeting specificities
into a single product, i.e., the so-called bispecific antibodies.
Low tissue and cell penetration is a drawback of these relatively
large molecules (human IgG, ∼150 kDa). The schematic modality example of mAbs is bezlotoxumab that neutralizes
the toxin B (TcdB) of Clostridioides difficile ( C).
 

## Bezlotoxumab (Zinplava)
C. difficile infection (CDI) is the most common cause of infectious diarrhea
among hospitalized patients. It is caused by an anaerobic, Gram-positive,
spore-forming bacterium, and the disease usually follows antibiotic
treatment due to dysbiosis of gut microbiota. C. difficile-induced colitis is commonly treated
with enteral vancomycin, fidaxomicin, and metronidazole, but after
the primary treatment approximately 30% of patients have recurrent
disease episodes. The major disease-causing
virulence factors of C. difficile are the two homologous
clostridial exotoxins, toxin A (TcdA) and toxin B (TcdB). The host cell intoxication mechanism of TcdB
is schematically described in B.
Bezlotoxumab is a TcdB-binding human mAb,
which was identified via screening of hybridomas of TcdB-vaccinated
HuMAb mice. Bezlotoxumab binds to the
combined repetitive oligopeptides (CROPS) domain and prevents TcdB
from binding to its receptor , ( C). During the development of bezlotoxumab,
also an anti-TcdA human mAb (actoxumab) with a mode of action similar
to that of bezlotoxumab was identified, , but it was
later shown to lack efficacy in CDI. In
pre-clinical cell culture-based studies, bezlotoxumab, and also actoxumab,
neutralized toxin activities of several C. difficile strains. In multiple murine models
of CDI, an intraperitoneally administered prophylactic actoxumab–bezlotoxumab
mixture reduced tissue damage and inflammatory response in the gut
wall. 
The pharmacokinetics and
safety of bezlotoxumab in humans were
evaluated in two large multicenter trials. The safety profile of bezlotoxumab was similar to that of placebo. In Phase II study, the combination of actoxumab
and bezlotoxumab lowered the risk of recurrent CDI among patients
who also received standard-of-care when compared to placebo. Phase III trials for actoxumab and bezlotoxumab
included two international, multicenter, double-blind, randomized,
and placebo-controlled studies (MODIFY I and MODIFY II), in which
the effects of actoxumab and bezlotoxumab were studied on patients
with primary or recurrent CDI. The primary
end point in these studies was recurrent infection, i.e., new episode
after initial clinical cure, within 12 weeks after infusion. In both
trials the risk of recurrent CDI was significantly lower in the bezlotoxumab
group than in the placebo group (MODIFY I, 17% vs 28%; MODIFY II,
16% vs 26%). Subgroup analyses revealed that, in the subpopulations
at high risk for recurrent infection (age >65, history of CDI,
compromised
immunity, severe CDI) or for an adverse outcome, groups that received
bezlotoxumab had a lower rate of recurrent infection than the placebos.
Among high-risk patients, who were hospitalized at the time of infusion,
bezlotoxumab decreased the rate of hospital re-admission within 30
days. However, bezlotoxumab or actoxumab did not increase the probability
on initial clinical cure. It was also shown that the patients who
had no risk factors for recurrent CDI did not benefit from additional
treatment with bezlotoxumab. Recently, more analysis of the MODIFY
I,II data has been published, e.g., refs ( and ), that together with the real-world
efficacy analysis in clinical practice, such as in Finland, supports the clinical use of bezlotoxumab in
CDI. Even though the cost of bezlotoxumab treatment is not negligible,
cost-effectiveness analyses favor treatment of CDI with bezlotoxumab. 
Bezlotoxumab was FDA-approved in 2016
for use in clinical practice
to reduce the recurrence of CDI in adult patients (18 years or older)
who are treated with standard-of-care antibiotics for CDI and are
at high risk for CDI. Bezlotoxumab is administered via intravenous
infusion [package insert - Zinplava (bezlotoxumab), Merck & Co,
Inc., Whitehouse Station, NJ, 2016]. According to ClinicalsTrial.gov,
there are five Phase IV (NCT04626947, NCT03880539, NCT03937999, NCT03756454,
NCT04415918), one Phase III (NCT03182907), one Phase II (NCT03829475),
and two case-control studies (NCT04317963, NCT04075422) ongoing with
connection to bezlotoxumab. All trials are currently in the recruiting
phase.

## Raxibacumab (Abthrax) and Obiltoxaximab (Anthim)
Anthrax
is a rare but potentially lethal disease caused by the rod-shaped,
Gram-positive, spore-forming bacterium Bacillus anthracis. Inhalational anthrax drew global attention after the 2001 bioterrorist
attacks in the U.S., which resulted in 11 confirmed cases and five
fatalities. The pathogenesis of inhalational anthrax is driven by
the tripartite anthrax toxin complex. The host cell intoxication mechanism of anthrax toxin is schematically
described in B.
 Obiltoxaximab is a chimeric protective antigen (PA)-recognizing
mAb, which has been engineered for higher affinity and for lower immunogenicity, building on the early work on mouse anthrax
toxin-neutralizing antibodies and mAb–PA
interaction affinity-enhancing mutations. It is known, in particular based on the work on its parental murine
forms, that obiltoxaximab recognizes the receptor-binding region of
PA and thereby blocks PA–host
cell receptor interactions. Raxibacumab is a fully human mAb binding
to the PA and acts in analogy to obiltoxaximab. 
Obiltoxaximab was well-tolerated among healthy volunteers
in Phase
I trials, and the most common adverse events included upper respiratory
tract infections and hypersensitivity reactions. The safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics of raxibacumab
in humans were evaluated with healthy volunteers in four sub-studies
performed by Human Genome Sciences. , These studies
concluded that raxibacumab is safe, well-tolerated, and bioavailable
after single intramuscular or intravenous dose. , Most adverse events were mild to moderate in severity and did not
significantly differ from placebo. , 
The
FDA Animal Rule allows drug approval in the well-justified
cases where human efficacy studies are unethical, such as with anthrax.
The efficacies of raxibacumab and obiltoxaximab were evaluated with
animal experimentation utilizing rats, rabbits, dogs, and macaques
under the FDA Animal Rule. Rats that received a prophylactic dosage
of raxibacumab 24 h prior to toxin infusion had a survival rate of
100%, whereas all rats in the placebo group died. In a study conducted with rabbits, animals receiving intravenous
infusion of obiltoxaximab prior to exposure to anthrax spores had
a survival rate of 100%, whereas all saline-treated animals in control
group died. Initial therapeutic studies
conducted in rats showed that raxibacumab increased survival when
administered within 6 h after the toxin infusion. The survival rate was lower in rats that received raxibacumab
at 9 or 12 h after the toxin infusion, and the survival rate also
decreased with lower doses of raxibacumab. Rabbits that received obiltoxaximab 24 h after the toxin exposure
had a survival rate of 80%, but when obiltoxaximab was given at 36
h the survival rate decreased to 50%. In the macaque mode, both raxibacumab and obiltoxaximab, given either
prophylactically or therapeutically, increased survival rates, and
the increase was dose-dependent. , 
Combinatorial
use of anthrax-toxin-neutralizing mAbs with antibiotics,
supportive care, and anthrax toxin vaccination has been studied by
animal experimentation and clinical trials. The data in rabbits indicates
that combining raxibacumab to levofloxacin improves survival compared
to levofloxacin therapy alone. Rabbit
studies also support the use of an obiltoxaximab–doxycycline
combination. In studies with a canine
model of anthrax toxin-associated shock, it was shown that combination
of hemodynamic support, i.e., titrated normal saline and norepinephrine
infusions, and raxibacumab significantly improved survival compared
to hemodynamic support alone. The FDA-approved
anthrax vaccine, anthrax vaccine absorbed (AVA), is mainly composed
of adsorbed PA. In a recent open-label, randomized, multicenter study,
it was concluded that co-administering raxibacumab with AVA does not
reduce immunogenicity of AVA. 
Raxibacumab
and obiltoxaximab got their FDA approvals in December
2012 and March 2016, respectively. Both drugs are now indicated in
adult and pediatric patients for the treatment of inhalational anthrax
in combination with appropriate antibiotics, e.g., levofloxacin or
doxycyclin, and for prophylaxis of inhalational anthrax when alternative
options are not available or are not appropriate. The recommended
method of administration is intravenous infusion, and patients should
be pre-medicated with oral or intravenous diphenhydramine to reduce
the risk of infusion reactions [package inserts - Abthrax (raxibacumab),
Human Genome Sciences, Inc., Rockville, MD, 2012; Anthim (obiltoxaximab),
Elusys Therapeutics, Inc., Pine Brook, NJ, 2016]. According to ClinicalsTrial.gov,
there are currently two Phase IV clinical trials with an objective
to evaluate clinical benefit, safety, and pharmacokinetics in patients
treated with raxibacumab (NCT02177721) or obiltoxaximab (NCT03088111).

## ASN100
S. aureus is a Gram-positive
common bacterial commensal of humans. It is also a major opportunistic
pathogen, and the global disease burden of S. aureus infections is remarkable. Despite the appropriate antibiotic treatment,
the mortality in severe infections remain high. The appearance of
methicillin- and vancomycin-resistant S. aureus strains
is concerning, as infections are becoming more demanding to treat. S. aureus produces tens of
different exotoxins, which can be divided into three major groups:
exfoliative toxins, superantigens, and membrane-disrupting toxins
such as the α-toxin and leukocidins. Perhaps the most renowned S. aureus toxin is the
pore-forming α-toxin, also known as α-hemolysin or Hla
( B). It is
secreted as a monomer by a majority of clinical S. aureus strains. After binding to a receptor
on the target cell surface, it oligomerizes and forms a transmembrane
β-barrel pore, leading to profound cellular effects and eventually
cell lysis. There are five leukocidins
in S. aureus strains associated with human infections:
Panton–Valentine leukocidin (PVL), LukAB, LukED, and two γ-hemolysins,
HlgAB and HlgCB. Leukocidins are composed
of two protein subunits, designated as S- and F-subunits. The S-subunits bind to the host cell surface
receptor, leading to recruitment of and dimerization with the F-subunits. Oligomerization of the S/F-subunit dimers results
in the transmembrane leukocidin pore formation. 
The α-toxin- and leukocidin-neutralizing ASN100
was developed based on screening of a high-diversity yeast surface
displayed in human IgG1 libraries. , ASN100 is
composed of two fully human IgG1 mAbs, ASN-1 and ASN-2. ASN-1 neutralizes α-toxin
and the leukocidins PLV, LukED, HlgAB, and HlgCB via a common conformational
epitope shared between α-toxin and leukocidin F-subunits. The apparent mode of action is masking of the
phosphocholine-binding pockets of α-toxin and leukocidin F-subunits
and thereby prevention of membrane interactions. ASN-2 neutralizes the fifth leukocidin, LukAB. Interestingly, ASN-2 recognizes the S- and F-subunit
dimeric structure yet leads to the same mode of action as ASN-1, preventing
leukocidin interactions with the target cells.
In the first
pre-clinical in vitro studies, ASN-1
inhibited α-toxin-mediated lysis of epithelial cells and leukocidin-mediated
destruction of phagocytes and human erythrocytes. ASN-2 protected polymorphonuclear phagocytes from LukAB-mediated
lysis. Both ASN-1 and ASN-2 were needed
to protect human leukocytes from cytotoxicity after exposure of culture
supernatants of S. aureus strains. ASN100, but also ASN-1 alone, was able to protect the morphology
of 3D human tracheal/bronchial mucociliary epithelial tissue culture
infected with S. aureus. In murine models, administration of ASN-1 before intranasal or intravenous
challenge with S. aureus prevented lethal pneumonia
and sepsis. Also a therapeutic effect
was observed when ASN-1 was administered 2 h after intranasal challenge
in combination with the linezolid antibiotic. In another study, ASN100 increased survival in a dose-dependent
manner when given intravenously prior to intratracheal exposure of S. aureus in a rabbit S. aureus pneumonia
model. Also reduced macroscopic and microscopic
lung pathology and bacterial burden were observed. Pharmacokinetic analysis of bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL)
fluid showed penetration of ASN100 to lung epithelial lining fluid
at 24 h after administration with peak levels at 48 h. 
The safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics
of ASN100 were evaluated
in a randomized, double-blind, Phase I study with healthy volunteers. No dose-limiting toxicities were observed during
the study. All adverse events were mild or moderate in severity and
resolved without medical interventions. ASN-1 and ASN-2 seemed to
have linear pharmacokinetics, with a half-life of 20–36 days
after intravenous administration. Both components were detectable
in BAL fluid already at 24 or 48 h and remained detectable at least
up to day 30. Also, the toxin neutralization activity of ASN-1 and
ASN-2 was preserved in human sera. 
The effect of ASN100 for prevention of S. aureus pneumonia in mechanically ventilated patients was studied in a multicenter,
double-blind, single-dose, placebo-controlled trial (NCT02940626,
study duration 2016–2018). In this study, participants (n = 155) were selected by culturing an endotracheal aspirate
to identify those who are heavily colonized with S. aureus. Subjects were randomized to receive either ASN100 or placebo. The
primary end point was to determine the proportion of patients who
had or had not developed S. aureus pneumonia after
a single intravenous dose of ASN100. After pre-planned interim analysis
of 118 subjects, the data review committee was informed that the study
was unlikely to meet its primary end point, and the trial was terminated.
However, patients were followed for adverse effects after the trial
termination. The results of the Phase III trial have not been published,
nor it is known how the AS100 development pipeline is being continued.
There are also other S. aureus exotoxin-targeted
mAbs in clinical trials ( ). MEDI4893 (suvratoxumab) is a human mAb that binds to S. aureus α-toxin, sterically preventing host cell
surface receptor binding and thereby subsequent α-toxin oligomerization. In a mouse model of S. aureus pneumonia, prophylactic MEDI4893 decreased mortality and bacterial
burden in the lungs. In a Phase I trial,
MEDI4893 was well-tolerated among subjects, and no serious adverse
effects were reported. A Phase II trial
of MEDI4893 (NCT02296320, study duration 2014–2018) has been
conducted. No publications on this study have been released. AR-301,
also known as Salvecin, is another mAb that binds and neutralizes
α-toxin. No pre-clinical data has been published, but it is
known that AR-301 was discovered by screening the B cell repertoire
of S. aureus pneumonia patients for mAbs with α-toxin-neutralizing
activity. Treatment of S. aureus-challenged mice with AR-301 either prophylactically or therapeutically
was effective. In a Phase I/II trial,
the safety and efficacy of AR-301 were evaluated with intensive care
unit patients with severe microbiologically confirmed S. aureus pneumonia. The results showed that AR-301 was well-tolerated, and
no serious adverse effects were reported. In a subgroup analysis of
patients with ventilator-associated bacterial pneumonia, the ventilation
duration was shorter among patients who received AR-301 as compared
to placebo. The Phase III trial of AR-301
is currently in the recruiting phase (NCT03816956).

## Shigamabs
Some strains of Escherichia coli, such as Shiga
toxin-producing E. coli (STEC),
can cause a severe foodborne disease. Clinical manifestations of STEC
infections vary from asymptomatic carriage to severe hemorrhagic colitis.
The most severe complication of STEC infection is hemolytic uremic
syndrome (HUS), which is a thrombotic disorder, characterized by microvascular
thrombi, microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and
acute renal failure. A significant portion of patients suffering from
HUS need renal dialysis, and particularly children and the elderly
are more susceptible to complications and death. Administration of antibiotics in these STEC infections
has long been controversially associated with increased risk of HUS.
In a recent review article, it was concluded
that the risk of HUS seems to be associated with the particular STEC
strain causing the infection and the antibiotic class used in the
treatment. Because of the potential negative effect of antibiotics,
other alternative therapeutic agents against STEC have been under
development, and the first Shiga toxin-neutralizing mAbs were introduced
in the 1980s, e.g., ref ( ). E. coli Shiga toxins 1 and 2 (Stx1,2)
and the Shigella dysenteriae Shiga toxin (Stx) are
AB5 topology exotoxins with extremely potent cytotoxicity. The host cell intoxication mechanism of Shiga
toxins is schematically described in B.
 Shigamabs is a combination of two
chimeric mAbs, cαStx1 and cαStx2, which recognize and
neutralize Stx1 and Stx2, respectively. The development pipeline is based on mouse mAbs, namely the Stx1
B-subunit recognizing 13C4 and the Stx2
A-subunit recognizing 11E10. The 13C4
mAb neutralizes Stx1 via blockage of Stx1–host cell receptor
interaction, whereas 11E10 appears to
alter the sub-cellular trafficking of Stx2. Thorough efficacy studies of Shigamabs in mice have been published. During the study, mice were either orally infected
with a lethal dose of Stx2-producing STEC strain B2F1 or intraperitoneally
injected with purified Stx1 and/or Stx2 with median lethal dose (LD50). Intravenously administered cαStx1 and cαStx2
protected the mice when given either before or after Stx1 and Stx2
injections, respectively. In mice infected with B2F1, intravenous
cαStx2 protected the mice when given at 24 or 48 h after the
infection. The cαStx2 was also proven to be effective when administered
intramuscularly. In mice that were injected simultaneously with Stx1
and Stx2, both cαStx1 and cαStx2 were required to protect
the mice. Mice that received a combination of cαStx1 and cαStx2
1 h prior to intoxication had a survival rate of 70%. 
The tolerability and pharmacokinetics of cαStx2
were evaluated
in a Phase I trial. In this open-label,
non-randomized study, 17 healthy volunteers were divided in four groups
to receive escalating doses of cαStx2 by intravenous infusion.
Among the subjects, the most common adverse effect was headache, which
was reported by nine volunteers. Anti-chimeric antibodies were detected
in four volunteers on day 56. The tolerability and pharmacokinetics
of cαStx1 were evaluated in two single-center, open-label, non-randomized,
dose-escalation Phase I studies. Also,
the safety of combined infusion of cαStx1 and cαStx2 was
evaluated. Subjects (n = 26) were healthy adult volunteers
who received an intravenous infusion of cαStx1, cαStx2,
or both. The most common adverse effects, reported by 18 volunteers,
were headache and mild somnolence, symptoms of upper respiratory tract
infections, and gastrointestinal inconveniences. The pharmacokinetic
profiles of both cαStx1 and cαStx2 were similar, and simultaneous
infusion of both antibodies did not have an effect on the pharmacokinetics.
Anti-chimeric antibodies were only detected on day 57 in one volunteer,
who had received cαStx2.
The safety, tolerability, and
efficacy of Shigamab were evaluated
in a randomized, placebo-controlled, multicenter Phase II trial (SHIGATEC,
NCT01252199). The subjects (n = 45) were children
aged between 6 months and 18 years, diagnosed with Shiga toxin-producing
bacterial infection and bloody diarrhea. The results have not been
released, but Shigamabs was mentioned in one review article to be
well-tolerated and safe. Shigamabs was
developed by Thallion Pharmaceuticals Inc. in collaboration with LFB
Biotechnologies. In 2013, it was announced that the collaboration
between Thallion and LFB ended, and all the rights of the Shigamabs
program reverted to Thallion. However, in 2017, Sun Pharmaceutical
Industries Ltd. acquired Thallion, and the transaction is believed
to assist the development of Shigamabs. At the time of the acquisition,
Sun Pharma estimated that the commercialization of Shigamabs would
take around 7–8 years. There is a possibility that the financial
circumstances between Thallion, LFB, and Sun Pharma have an impact
on the developmental pipeline of Shigamabs as well as to the release
of data on the clinical trials.
Several other mAbs against Shiga
toxins have also been developed.
Most notably, the Stx2-binding TMA-15, also known as urtoxazumab,
proceeded to Phase I trial and was safe and well-tolerated in humans. This developmental pipeline is based on humanized
mouse mAb, VTm1.1, which binds to the
pentameric B-subunit of Stx2. In pre-clinical studies, treatment with
TMA-15 up to 24 h after infection ameliorated the lethal Stx2-producing
STEC strain B2F1 challenge in mice. However,
the urtoxazumab dosage needed to protect the STEC-infected mice appears
to be significantly higher as compared to that of cαStx2. The efficacy of urtoxazumab has also been evaluated
in a gnotobiotic piglet model, and the results indicate that urtoxazumab
reduces post-infection neurological sequelae. The developmental future of urtoxazumab remains unclear.

## hu1B7/hu11E6
In addition to the FDA-approved and the
clinical trial mAbs ( ), there are a number of exotoxin-targeted mAbs in pre-clinical
development (Table S1). Many of these are
in an early state. A notable difference is the developmental pipeline
focused on pertussis toxin, which is the major virulence factor of B. pertussis. The Gram-negative
bacterium B. pertussis is the etiological agent of
the whooping cough, i.e., pertussis. Whooping cough is a globally
distributed acute respiratory disease, affecting all age groups. However, infants and young children comprise
the highest risk cohort, where the disease may lead to death despite
hospital intensive care and use of antibiotics. Especially young children who still lack the vaccine-induced
protection against whooping cough could benefit from pertussis toxin-neutralizing
mAbs. The young whooping cough patients, in contrast to adults, are
typically diagnosed very early and thereby could possess a therapeutic
window to interfere with the pertussis toxin-induced pathology. Exposed
family members of the whooping cough patients could be an additional
patient group subjected to a prophylactic administration of pertussis
toxin mAbs, possibly in combination with antibiotics.
Humanized
pertussis toxin-neutralizing monoclonal antibodies hu1B7 and hu11E6
were developed − and also combined into a single bispecific mAb, building on the early mouse anti-pertussis toxin
antibody studies, e.g., ref ( ). Both hu1B7 and hu11E6 antibodies, either individually
or as a cocktail, form multivalent complexes with soluble pertussis
toxin that bind the IgG receptor more tightly than antibodies alone. This indicates that the antibodies could accelerate
pertussis toxin clearance via immune complex formation. However, hu11E6,
and to some extent hu1B7, also prevents pertussis toxin binding to
its cell surface receptor. In addition, hu1B7 appears to trap pertussis
toxin at or near the cell surface by interfering either with endocytosis
or with the early steps in retrograde trafficking of pertussis toxin. It is very encouraging that a hu1B7/hu11E6 cocktail
has a prophylactic and therapeutic effect in mouse (intraperitoneal
route) and adult baboon (intravenous route) pertussis models, respectively. Moreover, the most recent experimentation with
hu1B7 intravenous monotherapy in an infant baboon pertussis model
demonstrates a potent prophylactic effect. 

## Antibody Fragments—Cell Surface Binding
Antibody
fragments include the mono- and bivalent fragment antigen-binding
(Fab) and F(ab′)2, respectively, single-chain fragment
variable (scFv), and single-domain antibodies, i.e., variable heavy
homodimer (VHH) nanobodies derived from the heavy-chain-only camelid
immunoglobulins ( A). The VHHs, Fabs, and scFvs are often used in phage display
selections and for initial characterization but were eventually engineered
to various Ig-like fusions, as exemplified by the work done on staphylococcal
superantigenic exotoxin B, clostridial
TcdB, and botulinum neurotoxin type A
(BoNT/A). Antibody fragments can offer
several advantages over the use of conventional mAbs ( ). They can be produced more
easily, generally using microbial expression systems, which results
in faster cultivation, higher yields, and lower production costs.
Their small size also allows better tissue penetration. A major drawback
is a short serum half-life, which, however, can be engineered. The
schematic modality example of antibody fragments is the bifunctional
JLI-G10 VHH that neutralizes the botulinum neurotoxin B (BoNT/B) of Clostridium botulinum ( C). Botulinum neurotoxins (BoNTs), produced
by the anaerobic bacterium C. botulinum and related
species, are among the most potent exotoxins classified into seven
serotypes (BoNT/A–G). The host
cell intoxication mechanism of BoNTs is schematically described in B.
 In a recent work, high-resolution
structures and neutralizing mechanisms of unique VHHs against BoNT/A1
and BoNT/B1 of C. botulinum were investigated. The
BoNT/B-targeting VHHs bound to the C-terminal subdomain of BoNT/B,
e.g., JLI-G10 VHH ( C), in particular in such a way that the BoNT/B–host
cell receptor interactions were prevented. In contrast, BoNT/A-targeting
VHHs either blocked the membrane insertion of the translocation domain
or interfered with the unfolding of the protease domain. By connecting
two VHHs of complementary neutralizing mechanism with flexible spacers,
bifunctional VHH heterodimers (VHH-based neutralizing agents, VNAs)
were created. These VNAs, with a dual epitope binding mode, showed
superior potency in mouse BoNT/A or BoNT/B co-intoxication assay,
i.e., toxins and VHHs mixed prior to intraperitoneal injection, as
compared to the same monomeric VHHs. Moreover, the VNAs also protected
mice against BoNT/A1 and BoNT/B1 when administered 30 or 60 min prior
to toxins.

## Antibody Mimetics—Cell Surface Binding
Antibody
mimetics are a heterogeneous group of scaffold molecules such as the
designed ankyrin repeat proteins (DARPins) and the fibronectin type
III domain-based Centyrins. Antibody mimetics are able to overcome
some of the limitations of mAbs while still possessing many of their
benefits, e.g., high target binding affinity and specificity ( ). Antibody mimetics are small (<20 kDa), single-domain
scaffolds that are thermostable and highly engineerable and can be
produced in microorganisms or even be synthesized chemically. As many
of these scaffolds are derived from human proteins, they possess low
immunogenicity. Owing to their small size, they have relatively good
tissue penetration. Their serum half-life is short. However, this
can be extended, e.g., with polyethylene glycosylation (PEGylation)
or conjugation with serum albumin. The
schematic modality example of antibody mimetics is the bispecific
DLD-4 DARPin that neutralizes the TcdB of C. difficile ( C).
 DARPins are derived from natural ankyrin repeat
proteins, which
are among the most abundant binding proteins found in the human genome. DARPins are small, single-domain proteins (∼15
kDa) consisting of three repeat modules: an N-terminal capping repeat
(N-cap), a varying number of internal ankyrin repeats, and a C-terminal
capping repeat (C-cap) ( A,B). A series of monomeric and dimeric DARPins with potent
neutralization activity for C. difficile TcdB was
developed , ( C). The monomeric DARPins against TcdB, e.g., U3 and
1.4E DARPins, interfered with the interaction between TcdB and its
receptors, chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan 4 (CSPG4) and Frizzled
receptor 2 (FZD2), respectively, by binding to the delivery domain
of TcdB. The dimeric DLD-4, composed of U3 and 1.4E DARPins, had superior
TcdB-neutralization potencies as compared to the FDA-approved mAb
bezlotoxumab (see C). The in vivo efficacy of the dimeric DLD-4
was also studied against TcdB challenge in intraperitoneal injection
and cecum injection mouse models. A significant increase in survival
was monitored with intraperitoneal injection upon pre-incubation of
TcdB with DLD-4. However, only a minor survival advantage was observed
with the cecum injection model in mice receiving a combination of
TcdB and DLD-4 compared to TcdB alone. This was apparently due to
the poor resistance of DLD-4 against the gut protease activity. This
shortcoming might be overcome by engineering protease-stable DAPRin
variants. It remains unclear whether the DARPins would attenuate TcdB-induced
symptoms after a systemic TcdB exposure.
Centyrins are small
(∼10 kDa) globular proteins derived
from a consensus sequence of the 15 fibronectin type III (FN3)-binding
domains of the human tenascin-C protein. One study has recently been published on Centyrins that neutralize
the bicomponent leukocidins of S. aureus. These Centyrins blocked binding of the bicomponent
leukocidins to their host cell surface receptors and thereby also
protected human phagocytes from leukocidin-mediated killing. In murine
models of leukocidin intoxication, Centyrins and Centyrin–serum
albumin fusion constructs pre-mixed with leukocidins before intravenous
administration or Centyrins given prophylactically before leukocidin
administration protected the mice. Centyrin–serum albumin fusion
constructs also markedly improved survival and reduction of bacterial
burdens when given 4 h after intravenous infection with highly virulent
methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA). With further
engineering, these biologic agents with toxin-neutralizing activity
could have potential in the treatment and prevention of serious staphylococcal
infections.

## Receptor Analogs and Neutralizing Scaffolds—Cell
Surface
Binding
Receptor analogs and neutralizing scaffolds is a
highly heterogeneous group of exotoxin-targeted drug leads ( , Table S1). They prevent the interaction of exotoxins with
their host cell receptor structures, i.e., lipids, carbohydrates,
or proteins, via molecular mimicry, or they reduce the bioavailability
of the soluble forms of exotoxins via sequestration. Key benefits
include generally good tolerability, as many of these are based on
natural host cell surface structures ( ). These modalities include some of the earliest
attempts to develop exotoxin-neutralizing strategies. However, recent
interesting developments have emerged, e.g., combinations of multiple
modes of action into a single product (Table S1). Three development pipelines have entered clinical trials: Tolevamer,
SYNSORB-Pk, and CAL-02 ( ). The schematic modality example of receptor analogs and
neutralizing scaffolds is the carbohydrate receptor mimicking STARFISH
that neutralizes Shiga toxins ( ).
The STARFISH, Daisy, and Super Twig concepts are
polyvalent Shiga toxin carbohydrate receptor analogs which have been
efficient in pre-clinical in vitro and in
vivo experimentation. However, clinical trial data has not
been published on these early drug candidates. An interesting variant
concept of receptor analogs, which also acts as an efficient neutralizing
scaffold, relies on the use of a recombinant bacterium that expresses
a mimic of the Shiga toxin receptor globotriaose (Gb3) on its surface. This engineered bacterium was also effective in vivo, protecting mice from fatal STEC infection. This concept was recently upgraded via the development
of Gb3 receptor mimic bacterial ghosts. Bacterial ghosts are empty, non-living bacterial envelopes of Gram-negative
bacteria that are not classified as genetically modified organisms
and thereby could remove barriers in the development of bacterium-displayed
Gb3 toward clinical use. 
SYNSORB-Pk
is a polymer with the Shiga toxin host cell surface
receptor globotriaose (Gb3, also known as the Pk-antigen) trisaccharide
moiety covalently linked to silicon dioxide particles. Orally administrated SYNSORB-Pk was safely tolerated
by healthy adult volunteers in a Phase I study without any evidence
of toxicity. In the same study, SYNSORB-Pk
remained active upon passage through the gastrointestinal tract; i.e.,
it neutralized Shiga toxin in STEC-positive stool samples from patients
with HUS or hemorrhagic colitis. However,
a multicenter, double-blind Phase III clinical trial demonstrated
that SYNSORB-Pk was ineffective at reducing the severity of diarrhea-associated
HUS in pediatric patients. There are
a number of possibilities to explain the negative outcome, one being
simply the lack of efficacy. However, only a third of the enrolled
diarrhea-associated HUS patients had viable STEC or free Shiga toxins
in their stool. The authors proposed
that the SYNSORB-Pk intervention might have started too late to have
a therapeutic effect; i.e., Shiga toxin had already entered the circulation.
The SYNSORB-Pk development pipeline has apparently been on hold since
the discouraging Phase III trial.
Tolevamer, formerly known
as GT160-246 and GT267-004, is a high-molecular-weight
(≥400 kDa), soluble linear polymer of styrenesulfonate that
binds and neutralizes C. difficile toxins TcdA and
TcdB in vitro and in vivo. , The exact binding mode is not known. The GT160-246 version was found
to be non-inferior to, i.e., not worse than, vancomycin in mild to
moderate CDI in a Phase II clinical trial. The GT160-246 version was well-tolerated in this Phase II trial,
but a common side effect was hypokalemia. Therefore, a new oral solution formulation with a mixed potassium
sodium salt of Tolevamer (GT267-004) was developed. The GT267-004 version demonstrated lower hypokalemia side
effects and was well-tolerated in a Phase I trial. However, the GT267-004 version was found to be inferior
to, i.e., worse than, standard antibiotic therapy for CDI conducted
with either vancomycin or metronidazole in two multinational Phase
III trials. This discouraging result
could, in part, be explained by the fact that Tolevamer interacts
less tightly with TcdB as compared to TcdA in vitro. Animal experimentation and the prevalence
of TcdA- and TcdB-encoding genes in clinical C. difficile isolates also indicate the dominance of TcdB in disease pathology. The Tolevamer development pipeline has apparently
been on hold since the discouraging Phase III clinical trials.
Recently, nanoparticles functionalized with lipids, receptors,
receptor fragments, or peptides have been developed as one type of
neutralizing scaffolds (Table S1). For
example, calcium phosphate nanoparticles loaded with peptides derived
from the host cell receptor, which interacts with the conserved cholesterol-binding
loop of cholesterol-dependent cytolysins, , improved survival and bacterial clearance in in vivo models of pneumococcal infection. Alternatively,
by using membrane-mimicking scaffolds, such as nanoparticles coated
with lipids, liposomes containing cholesterol at higher than physiological
levels, exosomes, or so-called biomimetic nanosponges composed of a red blood
cell membrane (RBCM) fused to a polymer nanoparticle core, it is possible
to inhibit a wide variety of exotoxins from binding to the host cell
membrane. , One application of the nanosponges
is to include an antibiotic or other
bacterium-targeting molecule into the
nanoparticle core. When the exotoxins bind and destroy the RBCM coating,
the antibacterial compound trapped inside the nanoparticle is released.
Whole red blood cells can also be used as scaffolds to prolong the
circulatory half-life of exotoxin-neutralizing molecules. Genetically
engineered red blood cells expressing chimeric proteins of camelid
VHHs conferred long-term protection against BoNT/A when transfused
to mice exposed to lethal doses of BoNT/A. One of the exciting new approaches relies on the use of liposomes.
CAL-02 consists of a mixture of liposomes that create artificially
large and stable liquid-ordered lipid microdomains and function as
docking sites for a large range of bacterial toxins. CAL-02 recently entered Phase I trial in severe pneumococcal
pneumonia, and it possessed a promising safety profile and tolerability
when administered by infusion. 

## Dominant-Negative
Mutants—Cell Surface Binding
Several exotoxins, in
particular membrane-disrupting toxins such
as α-toxin of S. aureus( ) require assembly and oligomerization in order to execute
their cytotoxic effector activities. While deciphering the mechanisms
by which leukocidin LukED, the pore-forming exotoxin of S.
aureus, targets and kills host cells, short glycine-rich
motifs within the stem domains of LukE and LukeD were identified as
necessary structural elements. Remarkably,
mutant leukocidin subunits lacking these motifs behaved as dominant-negative
toxins and neutralized the cytolytic activity of wild-type leukocidins in vitro in cell cultures. The mutant leukocidin subunits appeared to bind on the host cell
surface receptors and also were able to interact with the wild-type
leucocidin subunits. The data implies
that mechanistically the dominant-negative mutant subunits and wild-type
subunits of leukocidins oligomerize but assemble into a defective
pore complex, thereby inhibiting toxicity. It is interesting that
intravenous administration of dominant-negative mutants had a prophylactic
and therapeutic effect in mouse models of intravenous leukocidin challenge
and S. aureus infection, respectively. 
The above study on S. aureus leukocidins was preceded by other similar studies proposing the
use of dominant-negative mutants to prevent the functions of membrane-disrupting
toxins ( A), e.g., on Clostridium perfringens ε-toxin, Helicobacter
pylori VacA, and B.
anthracis anthrax toxin. , The schematic
modality example of dominant-negative mutants is the D425 amino acid-centered
dominant-negative forms of protective antigen (PA) that neutralize
the anthrax toxin ( C). These examples imply that the use of dominant-negative
mutants is a feasible strategy to neutralize multimeric membrane-disrupting
toxins ( ). However,
efficient and broad development of this drug modality would require
an in-depth high-resolution structural knowledge, allowing rational
mutant design. Also, the number of mutations that inactivate the toxins
is expected to be substantially greater than the number of mutations
that lead to a dominant-negative phenotype. In the end, this means
more screening work and slower progress. One additional potential
problem, based on the recent S. aureus leukocidin
work, appears to be the short half-lives.
Intravenously administrated dominant-negative mutants were protective
if they were given no more than 5 h before the wild-type leukocidin
challenge. For now, it appears that
the dominant-negative mutants of exotoxins remain as very useful basic
research tools rather than efficient templates for drug development.
However, one variant of the dominant-negative approach is the use
of exotoxin-derived peptides, which destabilize the exotoxin structure,
as exemplified with TcdB of C. difficile. These kinds of peptides are expected to have
better pharmacokinetic properties as compared to full-length protein
subunits.

## Small Molecules—Cell Surface Binding
Small molecules
have been the traditional basis for drug development, and almost two-thirds
of approved medicines are either naturally derived or synthetic small
molecules. Small-molecule drugs typically
have no more than 100 atoms, and they are no bigger than 1000 g/mol
or 1 kDa in size. Small molecules have distinct advantages as exotoxin-targeted
drugs ( ). Due
to their small size, small molecules penetrate tissues efficiently
and may also enter the cell, allowing effective targeting of cytosolic
processes. Most can be formulated and optimized for oral administration,
allowing absorption into the bloodstream and thereby access to the
whole body. Due to the possibility to produce small molecules via
chemical synthesis, the production costs are typically lower as compared
to other modalities, e.g., mAbs. Small molecules can be designed to
engage biological targets, mostly proteins, by various modes of action
with high-resolution structure-based rational drug design approaches.
These include binding to and inhibition of enzyme active sites, binding
to allosteric sites influencing enzyme activities and structural transitions,
and binding to regions of proteins mediating interactions with other
proteins, i.e., protein–protein interaction inhibitors. In
addition, high-throughput screening with small-molecule compounds
or fragment libraries using cell-based or in vitro biochemical assays allows efficient identification of bioactive
hit compounds.
Small molecules that prevent the cell binding
of exotoxins have been identified using both unbiased high-content
screening exercises and high-resolution structure-based rational drug
design. One notable study utilized an imaging-based phenotypic screen
to identify small molecules that protected the cells from C. difficile TcdB-induced morphological alterations. The screen led to identification of methyl
cholate, a bile acid derivative. At the cellular level, methyl cholate
lowered the amounts of cell-associated TcdB. In an in vitro biochemical assay, methyl cholate
suppressed the IP6-induced auto-processing activity of TcdB. The data
indicates that methyl cholate binds to TcdB and induces a conformational
change affecting receptor binding and auto-processing activity.
The cytolytic process of the pore-forming toxins of S.
aureus, α-toxin and bicomponent leukotoxins, begins
with the binding of soluble toxin monomers to a cell surface receptor,
where they associate to form a non-lytic, oligomeric pre-pore structure. Finally, the translocation of the pre-stem regions
across the membrane results in the bilayer-spanning β-barrel
pore structure and consequent membrane permeabilization and cell lysis. In a recent study, crystal structures revealed
evolutionarily conserved phosphatidylcholine-binding mechanisms
for LukED, PVL, and α-toxin. A
phosphatidylcholine mimetic compound, n-tetradecylphosphocholine
(C14PC), significantly reduced the lytic activity of these toxins in vitro. In addition to broad-spectrum inhibitory action
toward LukED, PVL, and α-toxin, C14PC also has low production
costs, and thus it might serve as a starting point in the development
of agents that reduce the virulence of S. aureus infection
prophylactically and therapeutically. The C14PC compound is also expected
to be well-tolerated by humans, as the similarly structured drug miltefosine
(hexadecylphosphocline, also known as Impavido) is FDA-approved
as an oral antiparasitic for the treatment of leishmaniasis. 

## Interfering with Intracellular Maturation
Intracellular-targeting toxins such as TcdB of C. difficile, BoNTs, and Shiga toxins ( B) undergo complex maturation processes, often involving
complete retrograde trafficking from the endosome to Golgi and ER
followed by effector subunit release into the cytosol. Exotoxins may
rely on their auto-processing properties, e.g., TcdB of C.
difficile, or be dependent on oligomerization in order to
deliver their enzymatic cargo into the cytosol, e.g., anthrax toxin
( B). Monoclonal
antibodies, antibody fragments, and small molecules have been identified
that interfere with these processes.

## Monoclonal Antibodies—Intracellular
Maturation
Numerous exotoxin-neutralizing mAbs have been
identified ( , Table S1). Depending on the binding
epitope, these mAbs may
not necessarily prevent exotoxin binding to the host cell surface
receptor but act more downstream in the functional pathway of exotoxins.
The downstream effect is exemplified in the case of the developmental
pipeline with humanized mAbs PA-50 and PA-41 targeting C.
difficile TcdA and TcdB, respectively. The humanized mAbs PA-50 and PA-41 efficiently neutralized
TcdA/TcdB in cell culture experiments and demonstrated efficacy in
a hamster model for CDI. The PA50 mAb
binds to multiple sites on the TcdA C-terminal CROPS domain. Binding of TcdA to the host cell surface was
prevented by PA50 mAb, indicating that receptor blockade is the mode
of action by which PA50 neutralizes TcdA. This is the same mode of action by which the clinically used anti-TcdB
mAb bezlotoxumab works − ( C). In contrast,
an entirely different neutralization mechanism was found for PA41,
the TcdB-specific mAb. The PA41 mAb
recognizes a single, highly conserved epitope on the TcdB glucosyltransferase
domain. The PA41 mAb does not block
TcdB from binding or entering the host cell via endocytosis. The PA41 mAb rather prevents the translocation
of the glucosyltransferase enzymatic cargo from the endosome into
the host cell cytosol ( B).
Alternative modes
of action have also been reported for anthrax toxin-neutralizing mAbs.
Following endocytosis of the pre-pore-EF/LF complex, an acid-driven
pre-pore-to-pore conversion occurs, thus promoting the entry of EF/LF
into the cytosol, where they exert their toxic effects ( B). The cAb29, an anti-PA antibody, appeared to prevent the
PA-formed pre-pore from undergoing conformational changes into the
mature pore structure in the acidic endosomal compartment. This mode of action is in contrast to those
of the FDA-approved obiltoxaximab and raxibacumab, which recognize
the receptor-binding region of PA , and thereby
block PA–host cell surface interactions. Moreover, intracellular
maturation-blocking mAbs have been identified in the Shiga toxin-focused
drug development efforts, e.g., also in the Shigamabs developmental
pipeline. For example, human mAb 5C12, which binds to the catalytic
A-subunit, did not interfere with the cell surface binding of Stx-2. In contrast, 5C12 blocked the retrograde transport
of Stx-2 into the Golgi and ER, preventing the entry of the A-subunit
into the cytosol. The 5C12 study demonstrates
an important point with respect of the use of exotoxin-neutralizing
mAbs. The 5C12 was able to bind to the already cell-bound Stx-2. This potentially extends the therapeutic window
as compared to mAbs, which merely prevent the binding of exotoxins
to their respective host cell surface receptors.

## Small Molecules—Intracellular
Maturation
Interesting
development pipelines have been focused on small molecules that interfere
with the intracellular maturation of exotoxins, in particular their
auto-processing activity. Ebselen (2-phenyl-1,2-benzoselenazol-3-one)
is a lipid-soluble membrane-penetrating organoselenium compound. Ebselen has generic antioxidant properties;
e.g., it catalyzes the reduction of reactive oxygen species in a manner
similar to glutathione peroxidase. Ebselen
also covalently modifies cysteine residues. Ebselen was identified as an inhibitor of the auto-processing cysteine
protease domain (CPD) of TcdB in an in vitro fluorescence
polarization high-throughput screen. Follow-up studies demonstrated that Ebselen also inhibited auto-processing
of TcdA. Mechanistically, Ebselen covalently
modified the CPD domain of TcdA/TdB at cysteine residues, leading
to suppression of cysteine protease activity. Ebselen was also identified independently as a TcdB inhibitor
in a high-throughput cell phenotypic screen. These authors proposed that Ebselen acts on the glycosyltransferase
activity of TcdB, preventing glycosylation of the small GTPase Rac1. The inhibitory action on TcdB appeared to be
indirect, acting via Ebselen-mediated modification of cysteine residues
on Rac1. The initial screening studies
showed that Ebselen protected cells and mice against TcdA/TcdB-mediated
killing and improved histopathology in a murine CDI model. , Recently, animal experimentation was extended to show that Ebselen,
as a monotherapy, reduces recurrence rates and decreases the severity
of colitis in animal models of CDI. Moreover,
Ebselen has already advanced to Phase III clinical trials in diseases
unrelated to CDI, e.g., diabetes (NCT00762671). As for now, it remains
unknown to what extent Ebselen functions via its generic anti-inflammatory
properties and to what extent via its anti-TcdA/TcdB functions. Pan-reactivity
with cysteine residues is a concerning fact, but the exotoxin neutralization
potency itself, not the detailed mechanism of action, is perhaps of
more practical interest.
The multifunctional auto-processing
repeats-in-toxins (MARTX) toxin, e.g., in V. cholerae, also relies on proteolytic auto-processing for cellular activity. Similar to the CPD domains of clostridial TcdA
and TcdB, the MARTX toxin of V. cholerae is activated
by IP6. Covalent cysteine protease inhibitors
were identified which interfered with the MARTX toxin auto-processing. Notably, a high-resolution structure of CPD
in complex with the aza-leucine epoxide inhibitor JCP598 was determined. The overall structure is nearly identical to
the activated CPD, with the inhibitor docking into the active-site
cleft created upon binding of IP6 to the CPD. A similar kind of a study has been published on covalent C. difficile CPD inhibitors, building in part on the work on V. cholerae MARTX
toxin. High-resolution structural information
was obtained of the inhibitor–CPD complex, and some of the
analyzed small molecules were potent in living cells to inhibit TcdB
functions. It remains to be determined
if the specificity of these particular covalent protease inhibitors
for MARTX and TcdA/TcdB toxins is high enough at the cellular and
whole-body levels to allow their further development as drug leads.
The schematic modality example of small molecules is the Ac-GSL-AOMK
compound neutralizing the TcdB of C. difficile ( ).
A novel therapeutic paradigm explored
the possibility to target
the auto-proteolysis activity of TcdB by triggering its IP6-induced
auto-proteolysis in the gut lumen. To
reach this goal, gain-of-function small molecules, IP6 analogues,
were synthesized by progressively replacing the IP6 phosphate groups
with sulfate groups. This was done in order to reduce the susceptibility
of IP6 to complexation at physiological calcium concentrations at
the colon lumen while maintaining the uniquely high charge density
that mediates its interaction with TcdB. Partial replacement of phosphates
by sulfates and thiophosphates resulted in analogs (IP2S4, IT2S4)
capable of inducing TcdB cleavage at micromolar concentrations in
the presence of calcium. In a mouse
model of colitis, oral administration of IP2S4 attenuated the symptoms.
Furthermore, treatment with the thiophosphate analog IT2S4, which
has improved stability toward inositol phosphatase enzymes that may
be present in the gut lumen, rescued mice in the acute CDI model. 

## Interfering with Cytosolic Effector Functions
This step in the functional pathway of exotoxins refers to the
point where the exotoxin, in particular its effector domain, has been
released from the endosome or the Golgi/ER compartment into the cytosol
( , B, B, B, and B). Some exotoxins also gain access
into the cytosol straight from the plasma membrane. For instance,
NAD+ glycohydrolase (SPN) of Streptococcus pyogenes utilizes the multimeric pore structure created by another exotoxin
of S. pyogenes, streptolysin S (SLO), at the host
cell membrane. Also, the bifunctional
hemolysin/adenylyl cyclase (CyaA) of B. pertussis first binds to the surface and subsequently inserts its cyclic AMP
(cAMP)-generating catalytic domain into the cytosolic side of the
plasma membrane. For now, the developmental
pipelines have focused exclusively on small molecules to interfere
with the cytosolic effector functions.

## Small Molecules—Cytosolic
Effector Functions
There have been a number of attempts to
develop small molecules inhibiting
the cytosolic effector functions of exotoxins. The major advantage
with these compounds would be that they are capable of preventing
exotoxin functions after the exotoxin has been internalized. This
mode of action should open up wider practical possibilities, in particular
in therapeutic use. One notable high-content screening exercise was
undertaken to identify inhibitors of the glucosyltransferase activity
of C. difficile TcdB (see B).
The compounds were screened utilizing a 1536-well fluorescence polarization
assay for UDP-glucose hydrolysis activity by the C-terminal glucosyltransferase
domain of TcdB. Multiple hits were identified
from a diverse six-million-member compound collection. Hit-to-lead optimization efforts centered around
a novel series of benzodiazepinedione-based inhibitors. , Optimized compounds demonstrated good pharmacokinetic profiles in
mouse and hamster and were efficacious in multiple cell culture and
animal models of CDI upon oral dosing. , We have recently
identified small molecules inhibiting the ADP-ribosyltransferase activity
of pertussis toxin. We developed an in vitro high-throughput-compatible assay to quantify NAD+ consumption during PtxS1-catalyzed ADP-ribosylation of Gαi in vitro. Two inhibitory compounds, NSC228155 and NSC29193,
with low micromolar IC50 values were identified in the in vitro NAD+ consumption assay via screening
of a focused compound library. These compounds were also potent in
an independent in vitro assay monitoring conjugation
of ADP-ribose to Gαi. Moreover, the membrane-permeable NSC228155
inhibited the pertussis AB5 holotoxin-catalyzed ADP-ribosylation of
Gαi in living human cells with a low micromolar IC50 value (2.4 μM). We currently employ medicinal chemistry efforts,
including molecular modeling and protein crystallography, in an attempt
to design NCS228155 analogs with additionally increased potency and
specificity.
In addition to B. pertussis, ADP-ribosyltransferases
are key virulence factors of several pathogens such as C.
diphtheria (diphtheria toxin), V. cholera (cholera toxin), and E. coli (heat-labile enterotoxin). Selective targeting and inhibition of the ADP-ribosyltransferase
activity holds promise to interfere with disease pathology. Compounds
inhibiting P. aeruginosa ExoA-induced cytotoxicity
in yeast and mammalian cell-based assays in vitro have been identified. Virtual screening
on the crystal structure of a closely related cholic toxin of V. cholera was primarily used to design the screened compound
library. Hit compounds for ADP-ribosyltransferases
of B. sphaericus, C. difficile,
and C. botulinum were found via in vitro screening of kinase inhibitors, which are typically adenosine mimics
and thereby chemically related to NAD+. Bisubstrate analogs mimicking the nicotinamide portion
of NAD+ and arginine residue of the target host cell protein
have also been developed to inhibit cholera toxin. In addition, structures of NAD+- or hit compound-bound
ADP-ribosyltransferases have allowed computational analyses to understand
the binding modes and to provide rational ideas for further improvements,
as in the case of cholix toxin of V. cholera. , 
Small molecules that prevent the cytosolic effector functions
have
also been identified by cell-based screening exercises. The naturally
occurring flavonoid phloretin was identified as a compound protecting
cells from both C. difficile TcdA- and TcdB-induced
cell rounding. Subsequent validation
experiments demonstrated that phloretin was a direct inhibitor of
the toxin GTD domains of both TcdA and TcdB. The authors conducted a secondary focused library screening with
flavonoid compounds and identified two potent analogs of phloretin. Phloretin appears to act as a non-competitive
inhibitor and thereby with a probable allosteric action. The authors
argued that this mode of action may offer high selectivity and specificity
over other enzymes that utilize the same substrate, in this case UDP-glucose. This highlights the drawback, for example,
in our own ADP-ribosyltransferase studies where we aimed to identify
competitive small molecules binding to the NAD+-binding
active site of pertussis toxin. These
compounds may also interact with the plethora of other NAD+-binding proteins in the cell, such as members of the poly(ADP-ribose)-polymerase
(PARP) protein family. It remains to
be studied whether these off-target effects are a concern.

## Conclusions
and Future Perspectives
What constitutes a good exotoxin
target for drug development efforts?
First of all, a good exotoxin target has a significant or preferably
primary role as the disease-causing virulence factor. This is indeed
the case in many globally significant infectious diseases, e.g., whooping
cough, cholera, diphtheria, tetanus, botulism, anthrax, and toxic
shock syndrome. In the case of exotoxin redundancy in virulence, cocktails
of different exotoxin-targeting drugs could be developed, although
this would increase the developmental costs and the lengths of the
developmental pipelines. Second, a good exotoxin target should provide
a broad enough therapeutic window for interference. Typically, upon
clinical suspicion of a bacterial infection, patients receive empirical
antibiotic therapy, in many cases broad-spectrum, before the diagnostic
data becomes available. The exotoxin-targeted drugs are pathogen-specific
and thereby require a diagnostic finding to be effective. When such
data becomes available, can we still interfere with the disease pathology
with or without antibiotics? The answer to this question appears to
be “no” in some acute and severe infectious diseases,
such as toxic shock syndrome, where superantigens play a dominant
role. However, more slowly progressing and/or relapsing infectious
diseases, such as the C. difficile infection, allow
interference with disease pathology via exotoxin neutralization. Also,
a broad enough therapeutic window is expected in cases where exotoxins
stay active well after the invading bacterium has been killed by antibiotics
or the immune system, e.g., in the case of anthrax toxin. In addition,
some infectious diseases are linked to more severe outcomes if treated
with antibiotics, such as the Shiga toxin-producing E. coli infection. Treatment of these diseases would benefit from replacement
of antibiotics with alternative therapeutics upon confirmed diagnosis.
Third, a good exotoxin target should allow the development of various
exotoxin-targeted drug modalities, which each have their specific
advantages and disadvantages ( ).
The pre-clinical, clinical trial, and real-world
clinical use data
demonstrate that exotoxin-targeted drugs can be effective, notably
exemplified by the toxin B (TcdB)-neutralizing bezlotoxumab to prophylactically
reduce recurrence of C. difficile infections. Exotoxin-targeted
drugs also have pre-clinically proven efficacy as therapeutic pharmaceuticals.
Exotoxin-targeted drugs may complement the use of antibiotics, e.g.,
to allow lowering of the dosage of antibiotics, or they may be used
as stand-alone pharmaceuticals. Three main reasons are driving the
rapid expansion of research on exotoxin-targeted drugs. First of all,
widespread antibiotic resistance calls for the development of new,
alternative ways to treat bacterial infections. Second, awareness
of the physiological importance of microbiota forces us to consider
treatment of bacterial infections with more focused pathogen-specific
pharmaceuticals. Third, decades of basic research using various in vitro assays, cell and tissue culture models, and animal
experimentation have provided an in-depth view on the functions of
bacterial exotoxins in bacterial virulence, allowing rational drug
design approaches. Taken together, although important progress has
been made in the development of exotoxin-targeted drug modalities,
and antivirulence therapy in general, significant work is still required
to realize the potential of these pharmaceuticals.

## Acknowledgments
The authors apologize to those colleagues whose
work and original publications could not be described in this Review
because of space limitations. The exotoxin research in the laboratory
of A.T.P. has received financial support from Academy of Finland (grants
no. 295296 and 329252 to A.T.P.), Sigrid Juselius Foundation (to A.T.P.),
Instruct ERIC (to A.T.P.), The Finnish Society of Sciences and Letters
(to A.T.P.), and University of Turku, Turku, Finland (to A.T.P.),
Turku Doctoral Programme of Molecular Medicine (TuDMM) (to Moona Sakari,
M.S.), The Finnish Cultural Foundation (to M.S.), and Turku University
Foundation (to M.S.).

## Glossary

## Abbreviations
28s rRNA28s ribosomal RNA
60Seukaryotic large ribosomal
subunit
ADPadenosine
diphosphate
ATPadenosine triphosphate
AVAanthrax vaccine absorbed
BALbronchoalveolar lavage
BoNT/A–Gbotulinum neurotoxin types A–G
C14PCtetradecylphosphocholine
cAMPcyclic adenosine
monophosphate
C-capC-terminal capping repeat
CDIClostridioides difficile infection
CDTcytolethal distending
toxin
CNF1cytotoxic
necrotizing factor 1
CPDcysteine protease domain
CROPScombined repetitive oligopeptides
C-terminalcarboxy-terminal
CyaAbifunctional hemolysin/adenylyl
cyclase
DARPindesigned
ankyrin repeat protein
EFedema factor
ERendoplasmic reticulum
ERADER-associated degradation
ETedema toxin
ETECenterotoxigenic Escherichia coli
ExoAexotoxin
A
F(ab′)2divalent fragment antigen-binding
Fabfragment antigen-binding
Fcfragment crystallizable
FDAU.S. Food and Drug Administration
FN3fibronectin type
III
Gb3globotriaose
GPCRG protein-coupled
receptors
GTDglucosyl
transferase domain
GTPaseguanosine triphosphatase
GαiG-protein alpha subunit, inhibitory
GαoG protein alpha
subunit, olfactory
GαtG-protein alpha subunit, transducin
Hlaalpha toxin
HlgAB/CBgamma hemolysins AB and CB
HUShemolytic uremic
syndrome
IC50half-maximal inhibitory concentration
IgGimmunoglobulin G
IP6hexakisphosphate
kDakilodalton
LFlethal factor
LTlethal toxin
LukED/ABleukotoxin ED/AB
mAbmonoclonal antibody
MAPKKmitogen-activated protein kinase-kinase
MARTXmultifunctional
auto-processing repeats in toxin
MHCmajor histocompatibility complex
MHCIImajor histocompatibility complex
class II
MRSAmethicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
NAD+nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
N-capN-terminal capping
repeat
N-terminalamino-terminal
PAprotective antigen
PA63proteolytically processed 63 kDa form of protective
antigen
PA83full-length 83 kDa form of protective antigen
Piinorganic phosphate
PTXpertussis toxin
PtxS1–S5pertussis
toxin subunits 1–5
PVLPanton–Valentine leukocidin
Rac1Ras-related C3 botulinum toxin
substrate 1
RBCMred blood cell membrane
RBDreceptor binding domain
scFvsingle-chain fragment variable
SLSstreptolysin S
SPNStreptococcus pyogenes NAD+ glycohydrolase
STECShiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli
StxShigella
dysenteriae Shiga toxin
Stx1,2Escherichia coli Shiga toxins
1 and 2
StxBShiga
toxin B-subunit
TcdAClostridioides difficile toxin A
TcdBClostridioides difficile toxin B
TCRT-cell
receptor
TDtranslocation
domain
TNTtuberculosis
necrotizing factor
TSST-1toxic shock syndrome toxin-1
TTtetanus toxin
UDPuridine diphosphate
VacAvacuolating cytotoxin A
VAMPvesicle-associated membrane
protein
VHHvariable
heavy homodimer
VNAVHH-based neutralizing agent

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsinfecdis.1c00296.
Table S1. Exotoxin-targeted
drug leads that are in pre-clinical
development. Information in this table is composed of primary research
articles published on exotoxin-targeted drug modalities in the past
5 years. The mode of action at the molecular level is not known for
some of the leads. Classification is based on the six exotoxin-targeted
drug modalities, as specified in the main text. Antibodies and antibody
fragments are combined in this table, because some leads are composed
of both of these modalities. Moreover, mAb engineering frequently
utilizes antibody fragment step, and subsequent linking of the most
efficient fragments with Fc-region to engage effector functions of
entire mAbs. (PDF)

## Special Issue
Published
as part
of the Antibiotic
Alternatives special issue.

The funders have had
no role in study designs, data collection and interpretations, or
the decisions to submit the results for publication.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

## Notes
The manuscript does not directly relate to sustainability.

## Supplementary Material
id1c00296_si_001.pdf

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
id1c00296_si_001.pdf